* 1660145
* SBIR Phase II:  Advancing Beyond the Photodiode - Deep Sub-micron Pixels for Next-generation Image Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Renee Carder, PixelEXX Systems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 917,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on developing
compact camera modules with lower noise and improved contrast using a submicron
pixel imaging sensor array. The commercial potential of this project centers on
developing compact cameras for endoscopes, navigational and robotic surgical
systems and more. Embedding these cameras in endoscope systems, and even the
surgical tools themselves, permits new treatments across a broad range of
medical specialties that otherwise are not possible. Switching to the minimally
invasive forms of some common surgeries could save an estimated $14 billion in
healthcare spending. Oncology, urology, gastroenterology, women's health and
pediatric medicine are just some of the specialties that will significantly
benefit from these ultra-compact cameras. A broader impact will ultimately come
from utilizing submicron pixels in unique ways in high density arrays. The
sensor?s small size and fast response times offer unique opportunities for
spatial and temporal oversampling. The resulting large numbers of pixels can be
employed in a compact multi-aperture arrangement to deliver significantly
enhanced color mapping over traditional semiconductor imaging arrays,
multispectral imaging, 3-dimensional image reconstruction, motion free auto-
focusing, or some combination of the above, providing unique applications in
medical imaging, defense, robotics, and consumer electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The miniaturization of camera systems calls for the
continuous shrinking of pixel sizes. At a certain point, however, the maximum
photo-electrons a pixel can hold becomes limited, yielding low signal-to-noise
ratios and poor dynamic range. This project develops a novel optical sensor that
maintains sensitivity down to hundreds of nanometers. As the size of this sensor
decreases, the maximum measurable light intensity can remain constant and the
signal-to-noise increases, bringing significant improvements to images? dynamic
range and color/feature rendition. This result stands in stark contrast to the
behavior of conventional pixels where maximum intensity threshold scales down
with pixel size and noise increases with decreasing pixel size. Reducing these
image sensors to practice requires transitioning from gallium arsenide based
devices to silicon. The work focuses on 1) finalizing design parameters,
fabrication, and characterization of the electrical properties and optical
response of the system and 2) fabrication and characterization of a linear
photodetector array for the creation of both linear images and 2-D images
assembled from linear images to characterize the noise, contrast and other image
quality parameters of the prototype.