* 1660493
* Metabolic Pathway Analysis 2017 Conference Proposal; Bozeman, Montana; June 24-28, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Ross Carlson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Carlson, Ross P. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1660493
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial support for the Metabolic Pathway Analysis
conference to be held at Montana State University is expected to bring together
leading researchers and developing research students that will facilitate
exchange of ideas on the very important topic of pathway analysis. The funding
will facilitate participation of at least 140
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Metabolic Pathway Analysis (MPA)
conference series is an international meeting for the topological study of
metabolic networks. MPA 2017 will be held July 24-28, 2017 at Montana State
University (MSU), Bozeman and will be the sixth meeting in the biennial
conference series. The focus will be on decoding biological principles of
metabolic network structure and function using quantitative approaches in
conjunction with experimental data. The funding will support the participation
of international experts in metabolic network analysis by creating 8 invited
speaker awards, facilitating graduate student participation by providing 32
awards covering the cost of meals at an MSU cafeteria, and broaden general
participation by partially covering MSU dormitory housing costs for all
attendees. The major goals of this conference proposal are to disseminate US-
based scientist?s research to an international audience through a combination of
oral and poster presentations, educate US-based scientists in the latest
metabolic systems analysis technologies and support career development for
scientists at all professional stages through face-to-face discussions with
international scientists. The NSF support will be leveraged with other research
funds including sponsorship by the MSU Center for Biofilm Engineering, MSU
Thermal Biology Institute and the MSU Society of Women Engineers.