* 1660065
* SBIR Phase II:  Learning From Nature: Marine Educational Games With Big IDEAS (Innovative Differentiated Educational Assessments in Science)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jessica Hendrix, Killer Snails, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2019
* USD 929,999.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop an easy to use real-time formative
assessment tool for educators that will be uniquely aligned to each student and
deployed via a virtual reality learning game that uses venomous marine snails as
a conduit for exploring scientific issues in nature. The USA is currently ranked
52nd in the world in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education. This is detrimental intellectually and economically to the future of
American society. Recent studies indicate it is not what is taught, but how it
is taught that enhances student-learning abilities, particularly as it pertains
to STEM. As a result, this project is driven by the research objectives to
understand how children learn specific science content and why certain game
elements are better suited to convey scientific material. The outcome of this
project is a proprietary multi-tiered formative assessment tool that can measure
real time student learning of novel STEM content obtained through a virtual
reality learning game experience. This project will enable teachers to nimbly
tailor future instruction with individualized student learning goals.
Commercialization of the products created in this project will transform
scientific learning and measurable engagement in educational games for social
and economic benefit to meet the NSF?s mission of supporting education
initiatives that improve the lives of U.S. Citizens, and generate income for tax
revenue and jobs via the employment of software designers, educators and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proprietary technology developed in this
SBIR Phase II will be a first-of-its-kind assessment dashboard that will link
virtual reality and web-based learning environments with formative assessment to
fuel instruction and deepen learning. This project will build proprietary
assessment tools into online and virtual reality games which continuously engage
users in the process of scientific inquiry and discovery using novel formative
assessments customized to each player. The proprietary assessment dashboard
allows teachers and players to measure their progress in real-time and identify
opportunities to enhance their STEM learning. Using Unity as the platform,
player actions and decisions will be met with tailored formative assessments and
ongoing feedback throughout game play. This feedback helps teachers delineate
where their students are along their learning progressions and fuels further
instruction. The novel approach of this assessment dashboard transforms
qualitative and quantitative learning and has the potential to significantly
enhance student engagement and commitment to scientific inquiry to support
emerging science changemakers. The research objective of the player/teacher
dashboard is to align feedback on student learning during game play with dynamic
quantitative and qualitative formative assessment that create a seamless
demonstration of knowledge acquisition while providing teachers with multiple
opportunities to engage learners in deeper and more meaningful levels of inquiry
before, during, and after gameplay. The products generated from this project are
aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and the International
Baccalaureate (IB) program to ensure the content is of the highest caliber and
distribution is to a large global customer base. The anticipated results from
exposing teachers and students to this project will be increased competencies in
STEM, which will transform players into lifelong learners and enhance engagement
in STEM fields and careers.