* 1660504
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Modeling of Mechanosensing by Cell Surface Receptors
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Cheng Zhu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This is a collaborative team between Georgia Tech and Rutgers, which consists of
two statisticians and one biomedical engineer. It can serve as a role model on
how rigorous statistical methods are used to tackle important problems in
biology. The proposed research will provide a better understanding of a complex
biological signaling process called cell adhesion, which can pave the way to
future clinical interventions. The proposed statistical approaches are readily
applicable to a variety of scientific disciplines and will have immediate impact
on accelerating discoveries in numerous fields involving complex experiments.
This research will facilitate a new mode of intellectual interaction between
statistics and cell biology. Some outreach programs are proposed for educating
the next generation of mathematical biologists and biometricians. The team is
committed to creating a diverse environment in their laboratories in terms of
race, gender and national origin. The research will also provide an excellent
opportunity to recruit students from underrepresented groups to participate in
projects at the interface between biology and statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells use their surface receptors to sense the environment
by engaging ligands on neighboring cells or in the extracellular matrix. This
research focuses on understanding how receptor-ligand engagement induces
cellular response, which is critical to unraveling many disease pathologies and
can provide the groundwork for clinical intervention. With a few exceptions, the
mechanisms behind signaling initiation remain elusive for most receptors. The
innovation of this project is in combining the single-molecule experiments with
statistical modeling to extract new readouts required for understanding the
complex signaling processes. New frameworks based on novel modifications to
Gaussian process (GP) models and new regime-switching models are proposed to
quantify the memory effect in receptor/ligand binding. To rigorously quantify
effects of different putative triggering parameters on cell signaling, a new
varying-coefficient Cox model is proposed. The proposed statistical models will
be validated with experimental data from the lab and modified if warranted. The
proposed studies are significant because the sophisticated statistical modeling
will greatly empower the understanding of the impact of mechanical forces on two
biologically important and clinically relevant receptors in the human body: the
platelet glycoprotein Ib and the T cell receptor. From the statistical point of
view, the proposed GP model for binary data provides an analogy to the standard
GP models with interpolation property, which can potentially lead to further
advances in spatial statistics. The new regime-switching models borrow strength
across different time series, which can have significant impacts on longitudinal
study. The new Cox model allows the effects of covariates to vary over time and
incorporates the between subject variation. It can open up new avenues for
studying problems in various fields involving survival or failure analysis, and
energize both theoretical and applied research.