* 1660217
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient Production of a High Performance and Eco-Friendly Superabsorbent Microbial Biopolymer for Hygiene Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Jeremy Minty, Ecovia Renewables Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,249,929.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project includes tremendous commercial potential, societal
benefits, and scientific advances. Conventional superabsorbent polymers (SAP)
are based on polyacrylates or polyacrylamides derived from petroleum feedstock.
They are widely used in the absorbent cores of hygiene products, with disposable
diapers representing approximately 85% of the global SAP market of $6B.
Increasing consumer and supply chain demand for more natural, sustainable
materials and products has driven the development of eco-friendly / natural
labeled absorbent hygiene products (AHP). Eco-friendly diaper products currently
make up about 3% of the global market and are experiencing strong growth at
10-15% compound annual growth rate (CAGR). This project will lead to the
commercialization of a low-cost high-performance biobased SAP, offering
significant environmental benefits as a more sustainable, eco-friendly
alternative to petrobased SAP. This project could also generate positive
economic impacts on domestic agriculture by creating new demand for bio-
feedstocks such as waste glycerol. Finally, this project advances the scientific
and technological state-of-the-art by developing a new bioprocess based on
microbial co-cultures that could be extended to render more efficient, cost-
effective routes for producing other biobased fuels and
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research project
are to develop a new biological route, based on microbial co-cultures, for cost-
effective production of gamma-polyglutamic acid (PGA) and to commercialize
cross-linked PGA SAP for AHP applications. In Phase I of this project, a
microbial co-culture process was developed for efficient production of PGA via
in-situ precursor production (ISPP) from low-cost bio-feedstocks. materials.
Building on promising results in Phase I, further R&amp;D will aim to reach
pilot-scale production by the end of Phase II. Three specific technical
objectives will be pursued: Objective 1: Strain engineering and bioprocess
optimization to develop an ISPP fermentation process with commercially viable
performance metrics. Objective 2: Optimization of downstream purification, SAP
cross-linking, and finishing to produce a high performance finished PGA SAP
product. Objective 3: Pilot-scale process demonstration to produce commercial
quantities of PGA SAP for large scale customer/partner trials. This R&amp;D plan
will lead to transformative technological outcomes. The proposed process based
on microbial co-cultures represents a distinct shift from the conventional
paradigm of utilizing single-species monocultures for bioprocessing and offers
substantial cost-savings. The engineering and process development strategies
developed during this project will be transferrable for a broad range of other
co-culture bioprocessing applications.