* 1660189
* I-Corps: Exploring Commercialization of Nanostructured Composite Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Erik Thostenson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
technology transfer of novel manufacturing approaches and new nanostructured
composite sensors to commercial applications. The manufacturing and sensing
approach is scalable for real-world applications and offers potential
reliability, flexibility, and cost viability. The industrial scalability of the
manufacturing process to produce a wide range of geometries, ranging from
complex structural components to miniaturized sensors, may lead to a broad range
of potential commercial applications. Nanostructured composite sensors enable
distributed sensing with high sensor sensitivity. For possible applications in
structural health monitoring the sensors have the potential to dramatically
improve the safety and reliability of civil infrastructure or vehicles,
resulting in protection against failure and reduced maintenance
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds upon prior research in
both scalable processing of carbon nanotube-based composites and the development
of novel sensing methodologies for the detection of deformation and damage in
structural materials. The nanotubes are integrated into fiber reinforced
composites to create nerve-like electrically conductive networks thereby
enabling distributed sensing capabilities arising from resistivity and impedance
changes of the network. Through coating carbon nanotubes onto fibers the
nanotubes form an electrically conductive sensor network that is sensitive to
deformation and damage in structural materials. The techniques offer spatial
coverage, distributed sensing capability and manufacturing customizability, and
are scalable for field applications with a high degree of flexibility.
Complementary analysis techniques are developed to interpret the data collected
from the sensors to reconstruct and report the location, extent, and growth of
structural damage. Better understanding the critical needs of manufacturers and
end-users will enable the team to identify potential future research and
commercial applications of these sensors in specific application areas.