* 1660225
* SBIR Phase II:  Anti-fouling surface modifications for purification membranes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Adam Paxson, DropWise Technologies Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2020
* USD 868,837.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address the
challenge of fouling on membranes used in biopharmaceutical processing. The
successful application of this coating would enable increase in the membrane
lifetime and product yield of various production streams as less of the valuable
compounds remain trapped in the membrane. This can increase production capacity
for life-saving medicines, reduce production costs and, in certain cases, enable
continuous biopharmaceutical manufacturing. Furthermore, functionalization of
membranes currently involve significant quantities of environmentally harmful
solvents, which may be leachable during usage of the membrane. This issue is
avoided in the current project by utilizing initiated chemical vapor deposition
(iCVD) process which does not require any solvent. This coating technology can
also be extended to other systems including wastewater purification, food &
beverage production, industrial separations, and medical devices that rely on a
similar functionalization.

The objective of Phase II will be to demonstrate a commercially viable
manufacturing process to produce surface modifications within porous membranes
using the iCVD process. Previous work in this subject has focused on top-coats
on the top surfaces of reverse osmosis membranes, but the chemistries utilized
have never before been demonstrated within interior structures of the membrane
filters. During the Phase II work, the performance of the coatings will be
optimized by using existing deposition equipment to tune the coating chemistry
and process conditions to maximize the flux and throughput by minimizing protein
fouling. The other main technical goal of the work will be to translate the
current batch process into a continuous roll-to-roll process that is amenable to
large-scale manufacturing. The outcome of this study will be a proven coating
chemistry that is effective and durable in the membrane application, and an
optimized manufacturing process capable of being implemented within current
standards of membrane manufacturing.