* 1660848
* Collaborative for Capacity Building-Preparing STEM Teachers for Alaska
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Virgil Fredenberg, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 03/31/2018
* USD 39,620.00

With Capacity Building funds from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program, partners from the University of Alaska Southeast School of Education
(UAS-SOE), the University of Alaska Fairbanks School of Education (UAF-SOE), the
University of Alaska Anchorage College of Education (UAA-COE), the University of
Alaska Fairbanks College of Natural Science & Mathematics (CNSM), in
collaboration with the Yukon Koyukuk School District (YKSD) and Nenana School
District (high- need local Education Agency) will establish the infrastructure
and collaborations that will lead to increasing the number and diversity of
highly-qualified mathematics and science teachers in high-need and rural schools
across Alaska. The State of Alaska has a particularly large number of very small
rural schools that often have only one teacher who is responsible for all STEM
subjects and across grade levels. In addition, Alaska has one of the lowest high
school graduation rates and one of the lowest college-going rates. This project
will serve as a catalyst and opening doors to new, sustainable partnerships and
ideas in the collaborative pursuit of increasing the number and diversity of
effective mathematics and science teachers who are prepared to teach in rural
villages and Alaska Native communities.

Project partners will develop a long-term plan for increasing the number of
mathematics and science teachers who are prepared to integrate crosscutting STEM
concepts in the curriculum to engage student learning. Specifically, project
partners will (1) develop relationships for a collaborative approach to
recruiting and preparing secondary STEM teacher candidates; (2) collect baseline
data to determine interest, need, and capacity, as well as study successful
practices from current Noyce projects; (3) explore effective program structures
and timelines for future pre-service teachers while utilizing mathematics and
science major university programs for the development of a modern, flexible, and
effective pathway toward math/science teacher licensure; (4) design a framework
for a multilayered, sustainable recruitment program focusing on diversity
participation (Alaska Natives) in teaching of STEM; and (5) establish
collaborative structures with Alaska high-need local educational agencies (LEAs)
to facilitate teaching experiences, employment, and mentor training. The project
will develop a model that can be adapted for other rural contexts, while
reflecting the needs of stakeholders in Alaska.