* 1660417
* Attosecond Electron Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 540,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Leone of the
University of California Berkeley is using innovative laser techniques to
investigate the behavior of molecules at the shortest possible time. The
experiments detect fast molecular changes on timescales down to hundreds of
attoseconds (1 attosecond is one billionth of a billionth of a second). Such
measurements have only become possible in the last 15 years due to new methods
for producing attosecond light pulses with lasers. Because electrons move so
rapidly, their motion (electron dynamics) becomes central to the molecular
processes under investigation. This research measures fast electron motion, such
as when charges redistribute or periodically change in molecules, or electrons
hop as the structure of the molecule transforms. To accomplish this, Professor
Leone produces two laser pulses, one to excite the molecules and one delayed in
time to measure the molecular response, analogous to a starting pistol and a
stopwatch in a race. These experiments use numerous optical technologies to
obtain the required short pulses and accurate time delays. The benefits to
society are anticipated from the development of measurement capabilities that
push the boundaries of time using tools that require precision stability. These
techniques are important as the dimensions of devices decrease and performance
speeds of storage media and computational tools increase. The students engaged
in this project are learning an array of techniques and principles relevant for
high technology professions, including laser technology, electronics, and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond time-resolved measurements represent
a new way to probe chemical dynamics on timescales short enough to separate
electron dynamics from nuclear motion. Electron dynamics such as electron
correlation and electronic superposition states play a central role in chemical
processes on these short timescales, as does the breakdown of the separability
of timescales between electrons and nuclei (Born Oppenheimer). To study these
phenomena, an experimental laboratory based on the production of isolated
attosecond pulses in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV) spectral range is employed.
The chemical systems involve measurements of few-femtosecond and subfemtosecond
(attosecond) time dynamics of electronic superpositions, dissociation processes,
and passage through curve crossings or conical intersections of electronically
excited molecules. The students involved in this attosecond measurement-based
project are gaining experience in a variety of areas that are emerging in high
tech industry. These include, for example, carrier-envelope-phase stabilized
lasers, interferometric control of light, core level spectroscopy principles,
x-ray optical programming, electron spectrometers, and rate equation approaches
to predict ionization, orbital occupancy, and alignment.