* 1660067
* SBIR Phase II:  High Resolution, Synthetic Satellite Imagery of the Earth
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Stephanie Hulina, Geospatial Data Analysis Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 893,320.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to address a strong commercial and
scientific need for operational synthesis of spatially consistent and temporally
relevant historical and current high resolution satellite imagery for analytical
purposes. The technology will contribute to the advancement of scientific
knowledge especially in the geospatial arena and to market spillovers. By
dramatically simplifying access to accurate imagery for any time and place, this
technology will provide companies, researchers, educators, students, and regular
citizens with a valuable tool for visualizing and exploring our changing planet
and will contribute to increasing public engagement with science and technology.
Further, the analytical capabilities offered by the imagery have great potential
in scientific applications thus contributing to partnerships between academia
and industry and improving datasets for research and education. Finally, this
technology will be valuable in operational settings at the large providers of
commercial satellite imagery, to individual users, and enable a wide variety of
new visualization, analysis, and data mining applications. The examples of
commercial applications for the technology are virtual earth, insurance and
reinsurance, agriculture, emergency, change detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will operationally
synthesize accurate regional-to-global, high spatial / high temporal satellite
imagery of the Earth. The technology will utilize advanced data fusion
algorithms to combine various sources of imagery while preserving the best
spatial and temporal attributes of the data sources. The complexity of
accessing, processing, and analyzing various sources of satellite imagery
creates a significant barrier to its use. Synthesis of regionally and globally
continuous high spatial / high temporal resolution imagery is a challenge as in
addition to inherent differences in spatial and temporal resolutions of the
source data, the new models need to account for enormous data volumes and sparse
coverage of high spatial resolution imagery. Existing techniques to handle these
challenges have severe limitations which curtail their use outside of the
research arena. The technology will overcome these limitations by implementing
algorithms that are robust, automated, scalable, deliver accurate data, and are
usable in operational settings. They will provide spatially consistent and
temporally relevant imagery which will empower businesses with regional and
global outreach to make better decisions with better data.