* 1660643
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Learning Progressions on the Development of Principle-based Reasoning in Undergraduate Physiology (LeaP UP)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Mark Urban-Lurain, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2022
* USD 485,955.00

The complex societal problems of increasing agricultural production to meet the
needs of 9 billion people by 2050, and caring for an aging population with
increasingly more complex neurological and cardiovascular health issues require
future scientists, physicians, and allied health professionals to develop
expertise in organismal physiology. In physiology, as in other disciplines,
becoming an expert in a field requires the abilities to recognize, understand
and effectively reason using the principles of the discipline. During their
college careers, science students often rely on rote memorization rather than
principle-based reasoning to solve problems, and this leads to context-bound
thinking that fails to build robust understandings. Such students can, for
example, list the steps involved in muscle contraction, but cannot predict what
will happen when a mutation is introduced in a muscle protein. This project will
develop a "learning progression" to document how college students can develop
more and more sophisticated principle-based reasoning over time to understand
the physiology of animals and plants in both introductory biology and anatomy
and physiology courses. Based on this learning progression, the project team
will also develop open-ended assessment questions that can be scored via
computer. Collectively, these tools will have the potential to transform how
college students learn physiology, and to significantly enhance the quality of
their resulting understanding and ability to solve related problems. The
project, entitled Learning Progressions on the Development of Principle-based
Reasoning in Undergraduate Physiology (LeaP UP), is supported by the Education
and Human Resources Core Research Program, which funds fundamental research in
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and
STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LeaP UP project will
develop a learning progression that describes how undergraduate students develop
principle-based reasoning in the use of flux (flow down gradients) and mass
balance (Conservation of Mass) in physiology. The learning progression will then
guide the creation of constructed response assessments and associated computer
scoring models that instructors can use to determine where their students are
along the spectrum of understanding. The project team will capitalize on cutting
edge advances in natural language processing and text analysis to create
computer programs to accurately predict how experts would score students'
responses to the conceptual constructed-response assessments. These automated
scoring methods will rapidly score responses from large numbers of college
students nationwide and allow the investigators to map national trends in
students levels of understanding of students as they move through their
undergraduate Biology and pre-Allied Health curricula at community colleges to
large research universities. Thus, the tools developed will provide an
organizing framework for the future redesign of undergraduate physiology
curricula.