* 1660615
* Educating STEM Majors to Teach in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Jaromy Kuhl, University of West Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,310,920.00

The University of West Florida, in collaboration with two Florida public
community colleges, Pensacola State College and Northwest Florida State College,
will address the need to recruit and retain highly qualified STEM teachers for
grades 6-12 with a commitment to serve in high-need school districts through
funding from Track 1 of the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program. The
project will recruit, train, and retain eighteen STEM majors to serve as grade
6-12 teachers in the disciplines of mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology,
and earth environmental science. Additionally, the project will support eighteen
eligible dual-enrolled, freshman, and sophomore STEM students in an early
teaching experience and a summer community-based service learning internship.
Each Noyce scholar will participate in activities to improve their cultural
competence with working in high-need schools and to enhance their professional
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals will include 1) recruiting highly
qualified STEM majors into a career in teaching, 2) increasing the number and
quality of certified STEM grades 6-12 teachers, and 3) supporting Noyce Scholar
graduates during their first few years of teaching. The project team will
research the following questions: 1) What factors encourage STEM majors to
pursue teaching careers in high-need local educational agencies (LEAs)? 2) What
factors contribute to retaining graduated STEM majors as grades 6-12 classroom
teachers in high-need LEAs? 3) How does the project's learning community support
Scholars' professional teacher development? Each Noyce scholar will work with an
average of 150 different students each year for a total of approximately 750
students every five years; therefore, 18 Noyce Scholars will impact an estimated
13,500 students in high-need school districts. Working with the districts,
graduates will receive additional support to ensure their success as a novice
teacher increasing the likelihood that Noyce scholars will remain in the
teaching profession beyond five years, impacting thousands of students in
Northwest Florida.