* 1660250
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a radiometric receiver for 183 GHz.
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Marian Klein, Boulder Environmental Sciences and Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2019
* USD 720,802.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the improvement of
atmospheric state observations from various platforms. This compact, integrated
and ?plug and play? receiver design will make the existing observations more
available, more economical, and will also enable previously unattainable
observations of water vapor distributions within the atmosphere. This
environmental sensor?s small size and low power requirements enables its
deployment on various airborne, spaceborne or ground-based platforms, such as
unmanned aerial aircraft, nanosatellites, ocean buoys, and remotely located
ground-based instruments. One promising commercial application is private
weather observing satellite constellations. It has been estimated that around
400 remote sensing nano/microsatellites will be launched worldwide between the
years of 2016-2018. Water vapor and cloud observations are among the most
important observations promising further understanding of weather events and to
better synoptic or mesoscale forecasts. Improved atmospheric observations are
directly related to increasingly accurate and useful weather forecasts. The
benefits are expected to extend widely across the economy. Meteorologists point
to more accurate and rapidly refreshed atmospheric observations as one of the
necessities for the continuous improvements in weather forecasting,
understanding of the atmospheric physics and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project will complete the
design and build a fully functional prototype of a very compact, direct
detection radiometer receiver, operating in the vicinity of the 183 GHz water
vapor absorption line. All the receiver components will be designed and
evaluated, including a noise source, detectors, filters, Monolithic Microwave
Integrated circuits and others, first as individual parts and then within the
assembly. A novel receiver architecture and integration of all components into
one assembly allow for a drastic reduction in the receiver size and reduction of
its power consumption, while improving its observational capabilities and
stability. There are several aspects of the proposed effort that are unique and
would provide profound advances in ultra-compact microwave radiometry. The
receiver is expected to consume less than 0.5 Watt of power and weigh around 100
grams, with a continuous two-point calibration capability at its input.