* 1660227
* SBIR Phase II:  Large Scale Cultivation of Phytoplankton via Novel Photo-Bioreactor Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Georgiy Vozhdayev, Pure Biomass Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,419,121.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a sustainable, low-cost, and
replicable method for large-scale production of micro-algal biomass. Microalgae
production is a form of aquaculture capable of producing valuable products
including: Nutraceuticals, specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, feed for
finfish, shellfish, and livestock, as well as food for human consumption.
Moreover, microalgae can be used as a feedstock for biofuels while
simultaneously removing CO2 from the environment. However, for the nascent algae
cultivation industry to achieve its full commercial potential, the technology
must be improved. While typical algal cultivation relies on high-density cell
growth, this project will focus on the science of low-density algal cultivation
to achieve high productivity, while minimizing process requirements for
supplemental energy and concentrated CO2. In addition, the development of a
closed-system photo-bioreactor with emphasis on low cost and modular design will
allow the process to be easily replicated on a variety of lands with otherwise
marginal value. As such, the system can become the basis for a robust
aquaculture and biofuels industry, leading to greater economic development in
marginal communities and a source of sustainable products for the growing world
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to further
optimize the design of the large-scale algal production system developed during
the Phase I project to address key challenges in algae cultivation including
frequent contamination, low productivity, and increased operating costs due to
inefficient use of water and energy. Research activities will focus on four main
objectives: 1) Finalize key design specifications for reactor geometry,
materials of construction, and system components in order to maximize
productivity and minimize capital costs; 2) optimize harvest apparatus design
and biomass concentration procedure to further reduce water consumption; 3)
develop a new media formulation to allow for stable pH control without the need
for concentrated CO2; and 4) refine manufacturing of the reactor bladder to
ensure sterility, durability, and product consistency. In addition to the basic
algae cultivation techniques employed in Phase I, Phase II will make greater use
of engineering /computational analyses to arrive at optimal designs. The target
outcome of the project is a 120,000-L closed photo-bioreactor capable of
sustaining H. pluvialis algae production rates of greater than 9 g/m2/d for a
minimum of 4 months without detrimental contamination. In addition, the system
will provide significant reductions in consumption of energy, water, and
concentrated CO2.