* 1660747
* Drexel Engineering Noyce
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2025
* Jason Silverman, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,078,085.00

Drexel Engineering Noyce (DEN) will undertake a Noyce Track 1 (Scholarships
&amp; Stipends) project to recruit undergraduate engineers to consider STEM
teaching careers, and aims to produce at least 26 certified, secondary STEM
teachers over the five-year grant period. DEN will support authentic
implementation of inquiry and engineering design in classrooms by drawing upon
individuals whose undergraduate education exists at the intersection of
engineering design and STEM content areas while simultaneously providing these
individuals with a program of study in education and inquiry-oriented pedagogy.
DEN graduates will both help ensure that the next generation of individuals are
qualified to participate and lead in a STEM-centered economy and able to help
address the shortage of qualified STEM teachers in the School District of
Philadelphia, the primary partner district of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEN will introduce engineering specific
recruitment, retention and community-building efforts, including (a)
engineering-specific recruitment efforts featuring high-profile faculty, staff
and student ambassadors from the College of Engineering; (b) explicitly valuing
engineering as a scientific discipline and embedding engineering applications
into STEM teacher certification programs; and (c) introducing DEN-specific
events, such as an engineering education speaker's series, providing academic
and social support and engagement opportunities for DEN participants. DEN
scholars will have the opportunity to participate and present at regional and
national education conferences. Alumni will participate in induction support
programs designed by Drexel's School of Education to ensure that they have the
tools and resources to succeed in the teaching profession. Ultimately, School
District of Philadelphia schools will benefit from 26 STEM teachers uniquely
positioned to effectively address the Next Generation Science Standards' call to
elevate engineering design to the same level as scientific inquiry in STEM
instruction.