* 1660587
* Radiative Transfer through the Black Carbon-Snow System: Fundamentals and Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

Black carbon (BC) has been identified as an important warming agent in the
atmosphere. However, its radiative forcing through reducing the snow/ice albedo
is currently associated with large uncertainty. The study seeks to address this
uncertainty by improving the understanding of the BC-snow-radiation interactions
and developing and implementing a parameterization for the spectral optical
properties of BC-snow system accounting for the non-spherical snow grain shapes,
and close-packed snow grains with BC-snow stochastic mixing. The
parameterization will be implemented in a land surface model to improve our
understanding of BC-snow-radiation and feedbacks on the surface temperature,
hydrological cycle, and surface water budget. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will conduct fundamental research on radiative transfer through atmospheric
black carbon (BC) and snow systems to understand snow albedo reduction and its
potential application to land surface models. This study will investigate the
impact of snow-grain packing on the conventional independent scattering
approximation, commonly employed for radiative transfer in planetary
atmospheres, critical to snow albedo reduction. The study will also develop a
physically-based parameterization for the spectral (0.2 - 5 micron) optical
properties involving the coupling of atmospheric BC particles, with sizes
ranging from 0.01 - 0.1 micron and core-shell structures, and snow grains, with
sizes spanning from 50 - 1000 micron and shapes from snowflakes, through
plates/columns, to spheroids. Geometric-optics and surface-wave (GOS) approach
will be used, verified with laboratory measurements and other numerical methods,
to derive necessary and sufficient databases to organize suitable lookup tables
and polynomial-exponential functions readily for incorporation into a land
surface model. The mixing state of the BC-snow system will also be investigated
following the approach developed under a previous EAGER award for external (dry
deposition) and internal (wet deposition) multiple mixtures of BC particles in
snow grains using single and core-shell spheres serving as building blocks. A
fourth objective includes the use of solar radiative transfer through the BC
atmosphere and penetrating snow layers, using the exact adding/doubling method,
but with the 2-stream approximation for consistence with the methodology
included in land surface models. Noah multi-parameterizations (Noah-MP) will be
used within the context of the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model.