* 1660233
* SBIR Phase II:  Multiplexed Smartphone-Based Handheld Sensor for Ion Contaminants Detection in Environmental Water
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Logan Liu, MOBOSENSE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2019
* USD 717,250.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the potential dollars
saved in healthcare costs to environmental protection. The greatest overall
savings cannot be judged only in dollars, but in helping to preserve human lives
and end diseases and illnesses caused by problems with water. The product will
provide unique opportunity to populations to test their water for safety and
health benefits, in locations where good water treatment facilities do not
exist. The water testing equipment market is divided into low-end, low-cost on-
field test equipment (such as nitrate strip) that gives qualitative information
about the analytes, and high-end testing devices used in labs (such as mass
spectrometer) providing accurate quantitative information. If successful, the
sensor technology will bridge the gap by providing low-cost, sensitive, accurate
tools for quantitative measurement of analytes. The portable, low-cost, plug and
play sensor product will cater to the needs of the water quality monitoring
market. The product will also mobilize ?citizen scientist? to partake in
environmental data collection and popularize sustainability
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project is expected to lead to the development of a multiplexed, low-
cost, portable instrument capable of making real time measurements of nitrate
and phosphate in water and soil samples. The sensor system for this instrument
will be based on the highly selective nitrate and phosphate reducing working
electrodes along with reagents contained in the microfluidics to perform real-
time sensing without sample preparation. As the concentrations of phosphate in
solution are usually small, and since the inorganic phosphate in a water sample
is changing due to biological processes, time is often a critical factor in
taking measurements of phosphate. Due to these factors, there is a need for
sensitive, inexpensive, and portable instruments in order to monitor the
eutrophication process effectively. Currently available instruments for making
phosphate measurements in the field do not adequately address these needs. Phase
I development showed that disposable electrode with microfluidic integration,
and smartphone app controlled sensor is capable of detecting nitrate with high
sensitivity and specificity. Phase II proposal is focused on commercialization
of the nitrate sensor and development of multiplexed sensor platform to detect
multiple ions such as nitrate, and phosphate for larger commercial market.