* 1660770
* Recruiting and Preparing Exemplary Science and Mathematics Teachers through a Student Teacher Residency Model
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Doris Kimbrough, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,198,183.00

This Noyce Track 1 project responds to a national need and a persistent need in
the Denver area to provide excellent teachers of science and mathematics to
high-need school districts. With funding support from the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, this University of Colorado Denver (CU Denver) project will
recruit thirty (30) science and mathematics majors, particularly those from
traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM, to pursue secondary teaching
licensure. Eligible students will receive up to $20,000 for one year of post-
baccalaureate graduate study leading to licensure and an M.A. in Education.
Among the project's recruitment strategies are paid internships for potential
Noyce Scholars to participate in activities that expose and enhance interest in
STEM educational activities in order to explore teaching as a possible career
choice. Examples of potential internship activities include (but are not limited
to): summer or academic year research experiences in a scientific laboratory or
in science education, K-12 outreach activities (tutoring, after school STEM
clubs, classroom helpers), tutoring in STEM bridge programs between high school
and college, and serving as counselors in summer STEM camps. CU-Denver Noyce
Scholars will obtain licensure through a student teacher residency program,
where, four days a week, they will be immersed in a classroom setting with an
exemplary teacher mentor from the partner high-need district, the Denver Public
Schools (DPS). This will occur from the outset of their post-baccalaureate
teacher licensure program. The course content that they would traditionally
complete in the CU-Denver School of Education and Human Development will occur
through a weekly seminar, occurring on the fifth day, coupled with online course
offerings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student teacher residency model represents
an evidence-based shift in the approach to teacher education. Results from this
program in elementary teacher preparation at CU-Denver have demonstrated that
classroom immersion, when it parallels coursework, enhances the contextual
aspects of that coursework leading to better integration of educational theory
and classroom practice. This project posits that this integration will be
particularly beneficial to STEM teacher candidates, as the pedagogical content
knowledge associated with mathematics and science is so deeply rooted in
context, background, and instructional strategies. In order to promote greater
efficacy in the classroom at the outset of their teaching careers, mentor
teachers will be carefully selected and matched with the Noyce Scholars in order
to create the best opportunities for learning. Teacher candidates in this
program will also receive support from the contributions of the Noyce Mentor. As
a master teacher with a STEM background, the Noyce Mentor will serve as a
consistent mentor to the Noyce Scholars, from the beginning of their selection
as Noyce Scholars and continuing through their induction year of actual
teaching. The Noyce Mentor has proven to be an extremely successful support role
for pre-service and novice teachers at CU-Denver at the elementary level. This
project will also provide additional post-licensure induction support in the
form of workshops. Research has shown that this type of support is critical in
providing new teachers with early professional development strategies they need
to be successful in the classroom. Research on induction support has also shown
that it improves the likelihood that new teachers will stay in the profession
beyond the five-year mark. Ultimately, this project's implementation of a STEM
cohort in partnership with DPS's Residency Program coupled with STEM-focused
induction support offers a strong model for other teacher preparation programs
and for STEM recruitment and retention efforts in high-need districts.