* 1660700
* Science and Mathematics Teachers Initiative Phase 2: Continuing to Improve Teacher Preparation &amp; Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Bert Ely, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,441,176.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the University of South Carolina Science and Mathematics
Teachers Initiative Phase 2 (USC-SMTI 2) will recruit undergraduate majors in
science (biology, physics, chemistry) and mathematics disciplines and prepare
them to become grade 9-12 science or mathematics teachers. The project will fund
18 scholarships and 13 stipends over five years. In this project, the University
of South Carolina will collaborate with Central Carolina Technical College
(CCTC) as well as the University's Project Lead the Way program. Through our
collaboration with CCTC, our Scholars will gain experience and training in basic
3-D printing and graphic design, and will use these skills to design project-
based units that they can implement in high-needs secondary classrooms. In
addition, our Scholars will have access to engineering and biomedical summer
training opportunities through our collaboration with Project Lead the
Way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USC-SMTI 2 project will recruit and retain high-
quality science and mathematics teachers through several successful data-proven
activities including: 1) a seminar class encouraging new STEM majors to consider
teaching science and mathematics; 2) monthly meetings to support Scholars
interning and teaching in high-needs districts; 3) a two-year induction program
for Scholars; 3) a focused research study of Noyce graduates to assess their
instruction, leadership, and retention, and 4) training in STEM skills through
collaborations with CCTC and Project Lead the Way. Using research-based
experience from its past USC-SMTI Phase 1 project, this program will leverage
established partnerships with high-needs districts to recruit, prepare, and
ensure success during induction years for high school science and mathematics
teachers. USC will also expand on the USC-SMTI Phase 1 project findings by
following and researching Noyce graduates who are now teaching in high-needs
districts. This study will further investigate the impact of the research-based
USC Noyce program on Scholars' development as teachers and leaders and
ultimately, on their decisions to remain in the teaching profession. The project
will also impact the national and international teacher education communities by
continued research and development of an innovative tiered-approach that
includes STEM underclassmen recruitment, preparation in accredited programs,
development of project-based, technology-rich instruction, and retention of
high-quality mathematics and science teachers who will teach in high-needs
districts. Empirical evidence, validated through the project evaluation, will
result in improved teacher education and retention for high school science and
mathematics teachers for diverse populations within challenging settings. This
knowledge will also address a deep and enduring need in South Carolina and the
greater United States for high quality mathematics and science teachers. The
leadership team and partners will disseminate results as part of USC's
participation in the Association of Public Land-grant Universities imperative as
well as through professional organizations and journal articles.