* 1660223
* SBIR Phase II:  Microfilm to enable enhanced mixing in low-resource diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jay Fisher, Redbud Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,323,749.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in its ability to improve healthcare in
fundamental ways, such as (1) low volume draws that will enable diagnostics in
low-resource settings like drug stores, at home, or in developing countries, (2)
higher quality small-volume samples to make Point-of-Care (POC) diagnostics more
competitive with lab tests, enabling faster results in critical care/outpatient
environments, and (3) low draw volumes, coupled with small volume diagnostic
tests, that will enable improved care for patients at risk for hospital-acquired
anemia, including neonates and patients with bone marrow damage caused by
cancers or suppressed bone marrow due to cancer drugs. Our technology will
enable medical testing from a small amount of blood, which could significantly
impact global neonatal and pediatric healthcare, particularly in developing
countries, and expand the market for blood
containers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design a
microliter-scale blood container that offers the same analytic stability and
consistency as blood samples obtained by larger volume tubes. Critical to
specimen stability is the ability to rapidly and uniformly distribute an
anticoagulant in a blood specimen. In larger containers, mixing is achieved by
shaking a collection tube, creating turbulent flow wherein eddies and vortices
mix the blood with the stabilizing reagent. In low volume containers, fluid flow
is laminar and shaking does not produce mixing. Typical low volume containers
rely on diffusion driven mixing. This process is slow, and frequently results in
the formation of micro-clots prior to complete specimen stabilization. We will
use our proprietary actuated, surface-attached posts (ASAP) to rapidly and
thoroughly distribute anticoagulant in blood, increasing the accuracy and the
reproducibility of results obtained from small volume draws. This project will
begin with an assessment of the biocompatibility of materials and specimen
processing procedures. We will test a number of ASAP configurations in order to
minimize the time required for specimen stabilization. The project will
culminate with the production of a fully functional prototype that will be
validated via comparison against blood stabilized in a larger volume specimen
tube.