* 1660301
* STTR Phase II:  A novel wound dressing for infection control and tissue regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Marsha Rolle, Histogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to overcome limitations that prevent
effective treatment of wound infections. There is a large potential market for
this product as the U.S. spends over $50 billion per year on wound care and
current wound care products have a high risk of rejection, scarring, and
antibiotic resistance. The proposed novel wound care product will reduce the
costs to treat infected wounds and limit the number of medical procedures
required to restore tissue function. The product consists of a patented human
extracellular matrix (hECM) coupled to a novel antimicrobial peptide (AMP). The
main innovation of the proposed product, compared to current treatments, is that
it is designed to be toxic to infective bacteria and other pathogens, without
harming human tissue. The hECM has regenerative and anti-inflammatory activity
to enhance wound healing and improve treatment outcomes. In addition to creating
a transformative product in a global market, achievement of AMP extracellular
matrix tethering will lead to a broader understanding of AMP activity and unlock
their commercial utility. The product can be used as a temporary wound dressing,
a tissue restoring implant, or an implant
coating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will utilize a
patented recombinant protein with an antimicrobial peptide, combined with a
human extracellular matrix (hECM) material. The patented antimicrobial protein
(AMP) is designed to bind collagen in the hECM. The combination of hECM and AMP
will result in an antimicrobial regenerative matrix that will reduce the
incidence of infection and improve wound healing. The objectives of the project
are to scale-up hECM and AMP manufacturing processes, establish methods for
assessing product characteristics and performance for manufacturing quality
assurance and release criteria, and evaluate the shelf-life and in vivo
performance of the scaled-up manufactured AMP-hECM product in a clinically
relevant infectious wound healing model. The AMP-hECM will be evaluated using
biochemical, antimicrobial, mechanical and cell growth performance assays.
Scale-up of the bioengineered AMP and hECM will be achieved by optimizing the in
vitro manufacturing bioreactor growth parameters and processing methods to
improve overall product yield. The anticipated outcome of the project is to have
defined the large-scale manufacturing protocols and release criteria for the
AMP-hECM product. This milestone will enable the execution of validation
production runs, and advance the regulatory and commercialization pathways for
the product.