* 1660914
* Connections Matter: The Impact of Social Ties and Social Capital for STEM College Students
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Julie Park, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2021
* USD 497,483.00

In the higher education settings for Science, Technology, Education and
Mathematics (STEM), social ties and social capital contain critical resources
that students need to understand through college and beyond. Deeper exploration
of social capital and its impact on differing populations and how it may hinder
equity in STEM education and workforce advancement is needed. The research
examines the effect of social ties and social capital on key outcomes such as
retention and job placement for STEM college students. Project activities are
addressing the question of how STEM students move from having social ties, to
gaining social capital, and how to utilize critical information and resources
exchanged within those social ties. Notably, the project is extending
theoretical and practical understanding of the impact of social ties not just on
academic outcomes, but also on how students transition to the workforce. This
project is supported by the Education and Human Resources Core Research Program,
which funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is identifying conditions that
facilitate or block the transformation of social ties into social capital,
deepening understanding of the mechanisms that support equity and achievement in
STEM and the processes that shape social capital formation and deployment. The
project is analyzing data from the National Longitudinal Study of Freshmen on
student peer groups, experiences with faculty, and information networks. The
project team is also conducting interviews with STEM college seniors and
individuals working in STEM fields on their social and professional networks to
track the formation of social ties and deployment of social capital. The project
is advancing NSF's goal of broadening participation in STEM. By identifying
inequities related to race/ethnicity, gender, and class, the project is
assisting educators in designing interventions to support success for students
of diverse backgrounds.