* 1660412
* Relationships Between Urban Population Densities and the Carbon Efficiency of Public Transit and Private Vehicles
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Bumsoo Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 09/30/2018
* USD 66,999.00

The project will investigate how urban spatial structure, including population
density, affects the relative carbon-efficiencies of public transit and private
vehicles. Although public transit is often promoted as a more sustainable
passenger travel mode than driving, transit's carbon efficiency largely depends
on how many passengers transit vehicles carry. In many parts of urban areas in
the U.S., population densities and transit ridership are so low that transit
emits more carbon dioxide per passenger mile than automobiles. This project will
provide new information and insights to address a range of fundamental questions
that have significant implications regarding the provision of urban
transportation and metropolitan form. Among the questions for which the project
will provide better answers are the following: At what density will mass transit
have enough transit riders to be less environmentally hazardous than private
cars? What other spatial characteristics and policies in urban areas influence
the carbon-efficiency of transit? Is there a range of population densities in
which positive impacts of compact urban form dramatically increase? This project
will enhance knowledge about desirable and sustainable form of human settlements
by proposing and estimating carbon-efficient density thresholds in light of
changing climatic and other environmental conditions. The project also will
result in the development of urban spatial form metrics that will effectively
measure urban area level spatial structure and inform integrated land use and
transportation policy. Project findings will yield new insights into the spatial
changes that are needed to significantly reduce transportation sector
greenhouse-gas emissions by promoting more sustainable transportation modes.
Tangible project outputs, such as a comprehensive set of spatial indices and
estimated carbon dioxide emissions by transportation mode for the 125 urbanized
areas will be available for a broad range of future basic and applied research
activities. By putting the role of sustainable urban form into perspective, this
project will provide important reference points to assist in the refinement of
smart zoning codes and design guidelines for transit-oriented developments.

Efforts by urban geographers and planners to define an ideal size or form of
human settlements have a long history. Economic efficiency has been dominant
motivation for optimal city size and density theories, with little attention
paid to environmental sustainability. Financial feasibility has also been a
single prevailing criterion in the literature of transit sustaining density
thresholds. The investigator will explore carbon-efficient thresholds of
urbanized area population density at two conceptual levels. He will determine
minimum population densities that are required to make public transit more
carbon-efficient than average occupancy vehicles as well as density levels at
which positive density impacts on relative carbon efficiency of public transit
dramatically increase. The investigator will estimate carbon emissions per
passenger mile by transit modes and private vehicles in the 125 largest
urbanized areas of the U.S. using 2009 National Transit Database and National
Household Travel Survey data. He will develop population density and centrality
metrics for the urbanized areas in the sample, and he will explore the non-
linear relationship between density and transit carbon-efficiency while testing
for the presence of carbon-efficient density thresholds.