* 1660948
* The STEM Teacher Pipeline in Washington State: A Comprehensive Analysis of Preservice Predictors of STEM Teacher Career Paths and Effectiveness
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Dan Goldhaber, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,252,933.00

There is a shortage of STEM teachers in middle and high schools and a concern
about improving the efficacy of STEM teachers. Despite a tremendous investment
in interventions targeted to the existing STEM teacher workforce, our nation has
made little progress in identifying specific interventions that can improve STEM
teacher effectiveness or increase the probability that individuals trained to be
STEM teachers actually enter the public teaching workforce. By focusing
exclusively on preservice indicators of STEM teacher quality, many of which are
policy manipulable (e.g., the curriculum required by TEPs or the assignment of
prospective teachers to student teaching positions), this project seeks to
provide meaningful evidence to teacher education programs and policymakers about
preservice interventions that could improve the quality of the STEM teacher
workforce. It will also provide evidence about the preservice experiences that
predict which prospective STEM teachers ultimately enter the teaching workforce
and the earnings of prospective STEM teachers who do not, and will inform
efforts to target and recruit the next generation of STEM teachers. This
research model can also be replicated in other states to help enhance our
understanding of teacher education and workforce nationwide. This project is
supported by the Education and Human Resources Core Research Program, which
funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first statewide analysis of the
STEM teacher pipeline in Washington State that will leverage a unique
longitudinal dataset. This dataset is unique in that it will connect detailed
information about preservice teacher education experiences - such as transcript
and student teaching data - to outcomes for all individuals trained to be
teachers within specific teacher education programs in Washington State. The
project will merge these data to longitudinal data from Washington State's new
P-20 data warehouse and survey data of teacher education faculty and school
district administrators to investigate three broad research questions: (1) What
aspects of preservice teacher education are predictive of the probability and
timing of public teaching workforce entry for prospective STEM teachers?; (2)
Where do prospective STEM teachers who never enter the public teaching workforce
end up employed, and what are their starting salaries in these positions
relative to starting teaching salaries in the state's single salary schedule?;
and (3) What preservice experiences and characteristics (including measures of
content-area preparation, pedagogical knowledge, clinical experiences, and the
alignment or "match" between a candidate's teacher education experiences,
student teaching experiences, and early-career teaching experiences) are
predictive of future STEM teacher effectiveness? The descriptive analyses use
split-population models and value-added models to investigate the first and
third research question. For the second research question, the analyses will
focus on descriptive statistics that compare outcomes for those teacher
candidates who do and do not enter teaching, attending to mediating
characteristics such as salaries and pay scales.