* 1660885
* Why questions? Investigating the social basis of questioning for learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Patrick Shafto, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 06/30/2021
* USD 517,834.00

Asking questions is a common way that families and teachers support children's
learning, and different types of questions influence children's exploration and
understanding. Yet we still know little about the role of questioning in STEM
learning. This project investigates how and why certain types of questions may
be better at fostering learning. In particular, in contrast to questions asked
by a person seeking to learn something new (information-seeking questions),
children may learn better from questions asked by someone who clearly knows the
answer and intends to teach (pedagogical questions). This project bridges what
we know about the development of children's thinking with research on how
specific types of questions work to support young children's learning of
science. To learn more about this, it examines the role of two types of
questions across a range of scientific methods including experiments in
laboratory settings, observation of children's conversations with parents and
teachers in museums and classrooms, and interventions to test how types of
questions work in the everyday activity of storybook reading. In addition to
their importance for families, project findings will be valuable to preschool
and elementary teachers and to educators who work in informal science settings
such as science museums, zoos, and play centers. The project is supported by the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which funds basic research that seeks to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest interventions (and innovations)
to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning, and
participation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon a long tradition of
educational and developmental research on children's learning from questions in
formal and informal STEM learning environments. Taking a new perspective, the
project takes into account the relations among questions, the questioner, and
learning goals. Specifically, it proposes that questions from knowledgeable
others who intend to teach (i.e., pedagogical questions) may facilitate learning
by eliciting children's inferences about the importance of the scientific
subject being questioned, and by encouraging their further exploration and
discovery learning. These assumptions will be tested across five empirical
studies, each with its own specific aim. Aim 1 is to identify pedagogical
questions and their effects on children's learning and exploration of scientific
information in a controlled laboratory environment. Aim 2 seeks to characterize
the use of pedagogical questions in math, physics, and biology classrooms using
archival videos and transcripts from the ClassBank database, and explores the
relation of pedagogical questions to student engagement. Aim 3 is to
characterize the use of pedagogical questions in naturalistic parent-child
conversations documented in the CHILDES (Child Language Data Exchange System)
database, and explore the influence of socio-cultural factors on parents'
tendencies to ask different types of questions. These factors include family
socioeconomic status, presence of mothers and fathers, children's age,
historical trend, and others. Aim 4 tests how natural variation in parents' use
of pedagogical questions relates to children's learning and exploration in a
science museum. Aim 5 tests an intervention that prompts parents to ask
pedagogical questions during storybook sharing and examines how this
intervention relates to children's learning of scientific knowledge. Across
these five studies pedagogical questions are expected to have a facilitative
role for children's learning and exploration, while socio-cultural factors are
expected to influence how pedagogical questions are asked by parents and
interpreted by children. Taken as a whole, this project has potential to deliver
empirical evidence and a more comprehensive theory about when and why questions
lead to learning. This research is important to society because it can lead to
evidence-based recommendations about how to effectively use questions to enhance
STEM teaching and children's learning.