* 1660333
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Collaborative Multi-Racial Post-Election Survey (CMPS)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Bridgett King, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 41,542.00

What are the broader political consequences of former felon disenfranchisement
in the communities where they reside? How does living near individuals who
cannot vote affect legally enfranchised individuals? feelings of political
efficacy and engagement? This RAPID investigates these questions, and associated
underlying mechanisms, by adding specific questions in a Collaborative
Multiracial Post-Election Survey and analyzing the results. Current research
proposes that legally enfranchised individuals who live in communities with
individuals who are disenfranchised as a result of felony convictions are less
likely to engage in politics and less likely to vote?through a combination of
social network effects and feelings of lower political efficacy. This
proposition is investigated as is the possibility that political campaigns might
work to counteract these tendencies in competitive election settings. The
research considers how social networks affect political participation and voting
behavior and how the participation of community members and friends in politics
affects feelings of political efficacy and inclinations to participate in
politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this RAPID project is to
test several key theoretical mechanisms related to the community-level
consequences of former felon disenfranchisement. Placing survey questions on the
Collaborative Multi-Racial Post-Election Survey (fielded in cooperation with the
Latino Decisions survey project at UCLA) and subsequent statistical analysis of
the collected survey data, researchers investigate key causal mechanisms
including: how social networks and feelings of political efficacy relate to
political participation and civic engagement, and the extent to which campaigns
might be able to counteract these effects. While most of the questions are
observational, there are also specifically designed experimental treatments
embedded in the survey, which will test the causal effects of electoral
competitiveness and living in communities where many individuals cannot vote on
feelings of political efficacy and inclinations to participate in politics.