* 1660520
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Pan-Arctic Options: Holistic Integration for Arctic Coastal-Marine Sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Olivia Lee, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 10/31/2019
* USD 53,922.00

This award supports U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by a 14-country initiative on global change research through the
Belmont Forum. This multilateral initiative is designed to support research
projects that utilize existing Arctic observing systems, datasets and models to
evaluate key sustainability challenges and opportunities in the Arctic region,
to innovate new sustainability science theory and approaches to these challenges
and opportunities, and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic
environment. The funds requested will be used to support U.S. participants to
cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and that bring together natural scientists, social
scientists and research users (e.g., policy makers, regulators, NGOs,
communities and industry). Participants from other countries are funded through
their national funding organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Ocean is
experiencing an environmental state-change with expanding human activities
ranging from commercial shipping and energy development to ship-based tourism.
Accordingly, with involvement of indigenous peoples, Arctic and non-Arctic
states have begun to develop national and international management regimes to
address emerging issues, impacts and resources in the Arctic Ocean. In every
case, there will be challenges to implement agreements in the face of political
and financial constraints. "Pan-Arctic Options - Holistic Integration for Arctic
Coastal-Marine Sustainability" is designed in an international,
interdisciplinary and inclusive manner, involving cost-effective collaboration
with currently funded projects to contribute to informed decision-making by
policy makers from government and industry. The core team includes natural and
social scientists from Canada, China, France, Norway, Russia and the United
States who will integrate document collections, geospatial data and stakeholder
perspectives. This integrated decision-support tool will involve users in the
co-design and co-production of options for both policy and built elements that
are needed together for sustainable infrastructure development in the Arctic
Ocean. A unique observational contribution from Pan-Arctic Options will be the
analysis of Automatic Identification System (AIS) data of ship traffic across
the Arctic Ocean collected from polar-orbiting satellites from 2009 forward.
Results will be disseminated via journals (e.g., Science, Nature) and books as
well as less-conventional methods involving facilitated dialogues in annual
venues (e.g., Arctic Frontiers, Arctic Circle) and in the 2016 Arctic Expedition
Summit involving the National Geographic Society and Google Ocean program.
Management of this holistic project will be in the hands of a Steering Committee
and an international Advisory Board involving global thought leaders and
organizations (e.g., Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme), contributing
to Arctic Ocean sustainability on a pan-Arctic scale.