* 1660632
* Noyce Scholars: Preparing STEM Teachers to Serve in High-Need, Rural School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Nathan Tintle, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,199,920.00

The Noyce Track 1 project at Dordt College will employ innovative methods to
recruit, prepare, and retain 31 highly-qualified STEM teachers to teach in high-
need rural school districts. STEM teachers are a key aspect in the preparation
of K-12 students for careers in STEM fields. The national shortage of STEM
teachers is no less of an issue in rural schools than in other parts of the
nation, with 23% - 36% unfilled STEM education positions in rural schools.
Teachers in small, rural districts are often the only STEM education experts in
the district and serve as teachers leading not only in their classrooms, but
also STEM education district-wide. A single Dordt College scholar may teach 180
students a year for as many as 40 years, impacting over 7,000 students in a
career. The potential number of students in rural communities educated by these
highly qualified STEM teachers over a five-year period could impact thousands of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dordt College and Northwest Iowa Community
College, along with Le Mars and West Sioux Community School Districts, plan to
partner together to address the acute shortage of STEM teachers through this
Noyce Scholars project which will encourage and support highly-talented STEM
majors to become teachers in high-need, rurally-located local educational
agencies. To accomplish these goals, the project will take a two-pronged
approach: (a) The project will provide scholarship and cohort experiences
targeted to 31 academically strong STEM students to recruit, develop, and
support expanded numbers of STEM education candidates prepared to teach in rural
settings. Cohort experiences will include 1) shared courses, 2) peer mentoring,
3) growth mindset training, and 4) networking and support during and after
degree completion. (b) The project will expand recruiting for students at the
K-12 and collegiate levels and enhance the college's professional learning
network. Outreach efforts to support this approach will include 1) activities
such as camps, visit days and STEM competitions for K-12 students providing
enrichment and vocational discernment opportunities, 2) collegiate student
outreach for both Dordt College students and local community college students,
and 3) teacher networking opportunities including workshops, teacher circles,
and professional learning communities. This project will provide valuable
insight into best practices for recruiting and preparing highly qualified STEM
teachers. The innovative use of personal learning networks and growth mindset
training will provide important insights into the metacognitive and social
aspects of potential and early-career STEM teachers.