* 1660432
* A Paleoclimatic Examination of Tropical Cyclone-Related Precipitation Variability and Atmospheric-Oceanic Controls Inferred from Longleaf Pine in the Coastal Carolinas
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Peter Soule, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,886.00

This project will analyze the variability of rainfall resulting from tropical
cyclones, such as tropical storms and hurricanes, that impacted the coastal
regions of North Carolina and South Carolina during the last 300 years. Because
an accurate instrumental record of precipitation from tropical cyclones along
the southeastern Atlantic Coast exists only from about 1950 to the present, the
new approach refined through the conduct of this project will expand the
understanding of the long-term variability of tropical cyclone precipitation and
tropical cyclone frequency. Preliminary research has indicated that longer
periods of minimal tropical cyclone precipitation exceeded previously identified
recurrence intervals, thereby indicating that the variability in tropical
cyclone precipitation is greater than has been experienced recently. Although
this project focuses on several sites in the coastal Carolinas, the proxy record
contained in tree-rings of longleaf pine trees that occur throughout the range
of land-falling tropical cyclones from Texas to North Carolina offers a viable
means to expand basic understanding of the long-term variability of tropical
cyclones and their precipitation along the far southeast Atlantic and Gulf
coasts. Project findings and methods will have value for linking paleoclimates
with current conditions with observed increases in both flooding and drought
events. Project findings will be shared with governmental agencies and other
groups. An enhanced understanding of variability in total precipitation volume
from tropical cyclones will assist planners and management personnel engaged in
flood- and drought-mitigation projects. In addition to providing education and
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, high school
seniors engaged in North Carolina's Summer Ventures in Science and Mathematics
program will have opportunities to learn about the project.

Tropical cyclone precipitation is critical to groundwater recharge. It can
abruptly end droughts, and it serves an important ecological role. Tropical
cyclone precipitation also causes inland flooding resulting in multiple
fatalities, widespread power outages, and billions of dollars in damages. The
investigators engaged in this project will develop a method to determine
variations in tropical cyclone precipitation for multiple centuries. The pattern
of longleaf pine tree growth will be determined using a method called cross-
dating, and the annual latewood ring width, which develops during tropical
cyclone season, will be measured and statistically matched with the instrumental
climate record of tropical cyclone precipitation. The investigators will extend
the record of tropical cyclone precipitation more than 200 years beyond that
available using the instrumental record. They will document long-term spatio-
temporal variability of tropical cyclone precipitation, and they will examine
the bivariate sensitivity of tropical cyclone precipitation to modes of climate
variability, such as the North Atlantic Oscillation and Atlantic Multidecadal
Oscillation. They also will determine the potential suite of interactive and
multivariate influences of these large-scale atmospheric modes on tropical
cyclone precipitation. Tree-ring data will be collected non-destructively from
live trees and from remnant stumps. Using statistical regression, mathematical
models will reconstruct the historical volume of tropical cyclone precipitation.
Multi-century patterns of tropical cyclone precipitation will be examined for
trends, periodicities, and regime shifts using regression-based and wavelet
analysis techniques.