* 1660287
* Core Support for the Geographical Sciences Committee at the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Kara Laney, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 12/31/2019
* USD 216,669.00

This award provides continued core support for the Geographical Sciences
Committee (GSC) of the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine.
Continued support for the GSC will enable this committee to bring academics,
private sector and government researchers, and policy makers together through
roundtables and studies to reach consensus on the most challenging and
significant issues in the geographical sciences. The GSC will continue to
provide a forum through which geographers and researchers in related fields may
conduct assessments of the current state of the science and explore future
research opportunities. The GSC will serve a critical intermediary role by
facilitating interactions between government agencies and researchers in
academic, nonprofit, and private sector settings, thereby facilitating
capabilities for a broad range of researchers and organizations to engage in
constructive dialogue at the interface of geographical science and policy at the
national level. The committee also will advance the role that geographers and
related scientists play internationally through its role as the U.S. national
committee for the International Geographical Union.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Academies established a Geographical Sciences Committee in 1997 to
bring the theories and perspectives of the geographical sciences to bear on
society's problems. The GSC has provided advice to the National Academies on all
matters pertaining to geography. The GSC has fostered international cooperation
by serving as a liaison to other national geographical organizations and by
initiating collaborative research programs among those organizations, and it has
served as the official U.S. liaison to the International Geographical Union
(IGU), promoting and facilitating participation of U.S. geographers in the IGU.
The GSC undertakes its work through the conduct of special studies and through
its meetings. The GSC will identify topics for further study that enable the
geographical sciences community to address problems of societal significance.
The GSC also will conduct an enhanced range of outreach activities, such as
webinars and workshops focusing on topics like the use of geographic information
systems to make urban mobility more sustainable and long-term approaches for
wildland fire management.