* 1660996
* Exploring Links between STEM Success and Spatial Skills: Undergraduate GIS Courses and a Spatial Turn of Mind
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Nora Newcombe, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,681,032.00

People with strong spatial skills are more likely to show interest and success
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Fortunately, spatial
skills are malleable, and improvements in them are durable and generalizable.
Increasing spatial skills during educational training may be one route towards
increasing the STEM workforce. However, there are two gaps in current knowledge.
First, existing research concentrates almost exclusively on small-scale spatial
skills such as mentally rotating objects. The relation between large-scale
spatial skills such as navigation and STEM has not been investigated. Scientific
disciplines, especially the "geo" disciplines, and any disciplines using map-
like distributions, may benefit from training in large-scale spatial skills.
This project tests this hypothesis. Second, there is a need for a long-term
spatial training plan that can be integrated into K-12 and university
classrooms. One such strategy may be teaching Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) skills. For example, GIS skills facilitate faster access to data, data
modeling, and data visualization. GIS tools are used by professionals in many
STEM fields including healthcare, geography and urban planning, environmental
studies, and finance. Effective use of GIS depends on understanding the
technology, its benefits and shortcomings, and its relation to specific spatial
skills. This project will evaluate the efficacy of GIS training and identify its
active components. Findings can be used to inform GIS instruction and GIS
interface customization. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program which funds basic research that seeks to understand, build theory to
explain, and suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent
challenges in STEM interest, education, learning, and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the importance of
large-scale spatial skills in the geography, geoscience, and other scientific
disciplines that reply on spatial distributions of information (e.g.,
epidemiology). Spatial skills relevant to navigation may be predictors of
success in these disciplines, and conversely, participation in these disciplines
may benefit large-scale spatial skills. This project concentrates on GIS as a
predictor of enrollment and success in fundamental and advanced GIS courses at
Temple University and University of Wyoming. Simultaneously, it examines GIS
technologies as a potential intervention to improve large-scale spatial skills
and to create what has been called 'as a spatial turn of mind.'The effective use
of GIS depends on our understanding of human spatial representations and its
limits. Students enrolled in fundamental and advanced GIS courses will be
compared to students enrolled in non-GIS low-spatial courses. Groups are
compared in terms of their navigation proficiency and associated cognitive
mechanisms (e.g., perspective-taking) at baseline and in terms of their growth
over the semester. A virtual environment navigation paradigm will be used to
objectively assess large-scale navigation skills. Successful learning in GIS
courses will be assessed in multiple ways including hands-on GIS lab exercises,
quizzes, exams and individual/group projects. GIS presents an opportunity to
integrate spatial training early in formal education and thus increase low- and
high- spatial students' interest in spatial concepts through creative and hands-
on activities. Findings can inform spatial interventions designed to motivate
more students to pursue careers in STEM fields involving spatial distributions.
Findings can also be used to direct attention to spatial skill-dependent
usability features in geovisualization tools and the importance of customization
to learners' level of competence.