* 1660849
* Educating the STEM Teacher: From Recruitment into Induction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Patty Horn, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,450,000.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
Northern Arizona University (NAU), partnering with Coconino Community College
(CCC) and the Flagstaff Unified School District, will recruit and prepare
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors for careers in
teaching secondary mathematics and science. The leadership team will include
faculty from NAU's College of Engineering, Forestry, and Natural Sciences
(CEFNS), including the CEFNS's Center for Science Teaching and Learning, as well
as faculty from NAU's College of Education and faculty from CCC. Building on
prior funding from the Noyce Program, the project will recruit and prepare 10
new Scholars per year, for a total of 50 new teachers. Each Scholar will receive
1 year of scholarship support either as an undergraduate senior in the NAUTeach
program or as a post-baccalaureate graduate student in the Master of Arts in
Teaching Science (MAT-S) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will disburse
scholarships for seniors completing a STEM baccalaureate degree with teacher
certification and post-baccalaureate mathematics and science majors who enroll
in the MAT-S program and will become certified to teach. The project team will
then support Scholars during the critical first two years of their teaching
careers through continuing professional development in cross-experiential Noyce
community of practitioners. To build and strengthen partnerships, the project
will provide ambassadorship opportunities with CCC, such as peer tutoring. In
addition, the project will offer two courses -- "Inquiry Approaches to Teaching
and "Inquiry-based Lesson Design" -- that will enable students at NAU and CCC to
explore teaching as a career path. Intellectual Merit rests in the use of
quantitative and qualitative data to address evaluation questions that include:
To what extent does the design and implementation of the induction program
promote educational experiences that support effective mathematics and science
instruction for all students? To what extent does the CCC Noyce Partnership
broaden participation in mathematics/science teaching careers? What are the
impacts of the partnership on the partners and their home institutions? What are
the effects of participation in professional learning communities on teachers'
mathematics and science instructional practice and professional growth?