* 1660584
* ABI Innovation: Empirical Dynamics: A Next-Generation Approach For Uncovering Hidden Causal Links in Gene Expression
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* George Sugihara, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 658,634.00

The full human genome of 3.3 billion base pairs was first sequenced nearly 15
years ago. Nonetheless, genetic science is still a long way off from
understanding how this exhaustive list of "parts" fits together. This project
heralds a transformative shift in the basic mathematical approach to
understanding how genes interact, by exploiting the fact that gene expression is
a temporal and context dependent process. For example, every person has the
genetic coding to produce melatonin; however, its expression varies through the
day (keying on genes in the circadian clock) and it is sensitive to
environmental factors like light exposure. Thus the temporal sequence and
context of expression are important. However, current approaches to
understanding variability in expression have relied on non-temporal statistical
frameworks based on correlation. They assume that if genes interact, they will
always either be positively correlated (simultaneously expressed among all
samples) or negatively correlated (expressed only when the other is not)
regardless of context or the changing cellular environment. Though a convenient
simplification, such correlative approaches are obviously incomplete, and are
likely to overlook essential processes such as thresholding, regime shifts, and
gene check-pointing that specifically arise from dynamic, context-dependent
behavior. This project will investigate empirical dynamic modeling (EDM) as an
emerging framework that explicitly accounts for both the context and temporal
sequence of expression events. The work will be a mixture of proof-of-principle
and application to a cell differentiation pathway in mice associated with breast
cancers. Development of EDM will provide an important complement to current
approaches, with the capability to dramatically increase the efficacy of
bioinformatics and systems biology research, and to reveal important regulatory
hubs of genes that are non-correlated and thus invisible to current
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate and further
develop empirical dynamic modeling (EDM) as a conceptual framework to identify
causal interactions among genes and produce mechanistic understanding that can
be validated by prediction. As an approach that accommodates the reality of
natural (non-engineered) nonlinear (context-dependent) interconnected systems,
EDM is well-suited to leverage temporally-explicit genomic datasets that have
only recently become feasible. In the first phase, the approach will be applied
to construct gene interaction networks during the yeast (S. cerevisiae) cell
cycle to explore how an explicitly nonlinear and dynamic approach can reveal
information that is hidden to current analytical methods. Building on this, the
second phase will seek to develop and implement an EDM approach (static cross-
map) to single cell data that necessarily lack an explicit time sequence. The
approach will be developed and tested on computational models of gene circuits,
then applied to single cell data obtained from a stem-cell differentiation
sequence in mice. Work will be validated by comparison to existing ontologies
and by tailored experiments to be carried out by a collaborating lab at The Salk
Institute. Software will be distributed through BioConductor:
https://www.bioconductor.org/, all other materials (video animations,
interactive demos, etc.) will be hosted on the Sugihara Lab website:
http://deepeco.ucsd.edu.