* 1660624
* Linking Theory to Practice: Developing a School-University Partnership to Supply STEM Teachers in High-Need School Districts
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Richard Foreman, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 74,993.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
Albany State University (ASU, listed among Historically Black Colleges and
Universities) partnering with the Dougherty County School System (a high-need
local educational agency, LEA), will use capacity-building funds to develop a
strong infrastructure to establish pipelines for STEM teachers in southwest
Georgia. This project will work to address an increasing need for highly-
qualified STEM teachers in this rural region. Toward meeting this need, the
project team will: conduct needs assessments across the region to determine
priorities; strengthen partnerships between ASU and regional LEAs; design
alternative curriculum pathways for teacher certification; and develop a
systematic pipeline to recruit future STEM teachers. The project will develop a
model that can be adapted for other rural contexts, while reflecting the needs
of the local and regional business, industry, and education communities of
southwest Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU and project partners will develop a
long-term plan for increasing the number of STEM teachers prepared to teach in
high-need school districts. In collaboration with the partners, the project team
will conduct needs assessments for the region, identifying common needs and
goals with the systems, parents, and community partners. The project team will
develop streamlined curricular pathways that emphasize culturally responsive
teaching. Evaluation questions include, (1) What are barriers to becoming a STEM
educator in Southwest Georgia? (2) What are the specific STEM shortage areas in
high-needs schools? (3) What specific strategies can be implemented to produce
increased numbers of qualified STEM teachers who are willing to teach in high-
need schools? Thus, this Noyce Capacity Building project will support the
partners in developing evidence-based innovative models and strategies for
recruiting, preparing, and supporting teachers and will establish the
infrastructure for implementing a future Noyce scholarship project.