* 1660175
* SBIR Phase II:  Neural Algorithms for Multimodal Sensory Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Andrew Nere, Thalchemy Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2019
* USD 890,565.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable continuous
sensing applications in a wide range of energy-constrained sensor-enabled
devices. Without dramatic innovations in the development of ultralow power
sensory processing, continuous and accurate sensing will remain a niche
application limited to environments with a stable and plentiful power source and
significant computing resources. The technology described in this proposal will
demonstrate the viability and potential widespread deployment of continuous
sensing devices in mobile or remote environments with strict energy constraints.
An important immediate market for the proposed technology with significant
customer base is the smartphone and wearables market, where many new and
emerging end user applications could leverage environmental sensing to trigger
context-based and anticipatory actions. The proposed technology is broadly
applicable to a number of other markets and domains, including medical, health,
and safety monitoring of critical patient sensors, personal fitness devices,
military applications, and environmental monitors. The ability to flexibly
deploy continuous sensing for these and other applications has the potential to
revolutionize these markets and create entirely new and unforeseen application
domains. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 2
Project plans to research and develop algorithms based on the properties of
biological spiking neurons and the sensory processing capabilities of the human
brain. The human brain is truly unique in its ability to use a basic
computational element, the spiking neuron, and perform a broad variety of tasks.
The brain has the ability to accurately classify sensory patterns from multiple
modalities (touch, sight, etc.), to interpret the outside world, and to
recognize the current context. A key intellectual merit of this project is a
demonstration of how these novel neural algorithms can perform accurate, robust,
and low power sensory analysis across multiple sensory domains. Just as the
brain is capable of processing data from very different sensors. Researching and
developing these neural algorithms will provide insight as to how the human
brain learns to recognize important sensory information, how it is able to
integrate information from such different sense modalities, and how it is able
to perform complex analysis so efficiently.