* 1660606
* Developing and Supporting Excellence in STEM Teaching: A Regional Collaboration to Increase Teacher Diversity, Preparation, and Continuity
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Barbara Alvin, Eastern Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,449,985.00

Through this Noyce Track 1 project, Eastern Washington University (EWU) is
responding to the persistent STEM teacher shortage in the State of Washington by
designing a project that will increase the number, diversity, and preparation of
STEM teachers. This project will aggressively recruit strong STEM majors during
their first two years of college to participate in early experiences related to
teaching in grades 5-12. Students then will be recruited from this pool of
interested and qualified STEM majors to receive scholarship support in the
junior and senior year as EWU Noyce Scholars who will earn both a baccalaureate
degree in a STEM discipline and a Bachelor's of Arts in Education. Ultimately,
at least 33 STEM majors will become certified to teach through this project. In
doing so, the project will increase the number of teachers from a variety of
STEM disciplines and from under-represented populations. In addition to the
early engagement of potential pre-service candidates in the freshman and
sophomore years, another signature feature of this project that will have
lasting effects is that it will increase collaboration across K-12, community
colleges, and EWU. A key project design element develops strong collaboration
among faculty in mathematics, science, and teacher education, which will
positively affect the teacher preparation program at EWU, and ultimately
increase knowledge in the larger teacher education community. Other impacts on
the program and the region arise from continued support for teacher development
through their first two years of teaching. The induction activities will allow
for continued connections among partners, strengthening teacher preparation,
teacher educator knowledge, the pipeline of potential STEM teachers from
community colleges, and K-12 teacher development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
freshman and sophomore STEM majors will be recruited from EWU and EWU's primary
feeder community colleges, Spokane Falls Community College and Spokane Community
College, to participate in early experiences, which include: an early practicum
in Spokane Public Schools (SPS), the partner high-need school district, and the
Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement (MESA) program; serving as
volunteers for 5-12 mathematics and science events held at EWU; and joining
junior and senior Noyce Scholars in activities such as Inquiry Circles and
attending Undergraduate Research Symposia. This five-year project will: increase
the number of teachers who graduate from EWU with a degree in a STEM discipline
and are certified to teach; increase the number of Noyce Scholars from physics,
geoscience, chemistry, and mathematics; prepare Noyce Scholars to understand and
effectively apply pedagogy emphasizing Standards for Mathematical Practices
(SMP) and Science and Engineering Practices (SEP) to improve student learning in
their classrooms; and increase the capacity and dispositions of secondary STEM
teachers to effectively teach high-need students, including students from low
socio-economic circumstances, from under-represented populations in STEM, from
rural or remote schools, and English language learners. Strategic EWU project
activities designed to develop skills and dispositions necessary to effectively
teach high-need students mathematics and science include: online learning
modules and field work designed by faculty specializing in Ethnic Studies and
English as a Second Language (ESL); participation in three six-week rotations in
classrooms of exceptional STEM teachers with high-need students; design and
implementation of Inquiry Circles (after-school middle and high school students
STEM events) in order to practice designing, implementing, and reflecting on
activities for high-need students; participation with graduates in their first
two years of teaching in a Video Club to explore the challenges of implementing
effective inquiry learning; and research on an important aspect of teaching in
their discipline and presentation of their studies at the EWU Student Research
and Creative Works Symposium. After certification and obtaining a teaching
position, Scholars will remain active in the EWU Noyce Program by participating
in the Video Club three times per year and through regular contact with EWU
faculty. The project will benefit from the collaboration and support of the
Noyce Advisory Board and Noyce Collaborators. These groups will monitor and
advise project leaders, ensure that the project is integrated into the culture
at EWU, monitor recruitment and Scholar progress, and provide advice to resolve
issues that arise. Ultimately, the EWU research-based project design provides
activities within a learning progression that enables Scholars to develop into
impactful and reflective STEM teachers.