* 1660086
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a STEM Educational Platform Using Electronic Neuron Simulators
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Joseph Burdo, NeuroTinker, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 770,000.00

This project seeks to develop, manufacture, and evaluate a novel nervous system
simulation platform consisting of freely connectable electronic neuron modules.
These devices will be used in the secondary education and post-secondary
education classroom to further students? conceptual grasp of neuroscience,
engineering, and physiology, and to generate lasting enthusiasm for a career
path centered on the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) sector.
Per a 2012 study by the Department of Education, undergraduate STEM major
retention rates are only 35% from initial declaration through graduation.
Studies have shown that unengaging introductions to STEM are partially to blame.
The firm believes that their product?s positive effect on new knowledge
formation and student enthusiasm for STEM has the ability to increase this low
retention rate. They also believe that the company will grow at a similar rate
to our benchmark companies in STEM and neuroscience education which, after
approximately five years in business, each have several dozen employees and
annual sales greater than $1 million dollars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome
of our proposed project includes development of an electronic neuron simulation
ecosystem, as well as development of instructions, experiments, and curricula
for NeuroBytes secondary and undergraduate education classroom use. The
prototypes produced during Phase I of this project were suitable for proof of
concept demonstrations and testing, but much work is needed to develop robust
and student-friendly devices for large scale manufacturing at the end of Phase
II. Through our Phase I customer development interviews, much important insight
was gained into needed and desired input/output devices, accessories, and kits
in the secondary and tertiary education segment. These accessories and devices
will be an important outcome for increasing the commercial potential of our
products. The curricula will be developed in conjunction with partner educators
at the middle school, high school, and college levels to ensure that they are
properly structured and documented for the maximum possible benefit by our
future customers.