* 1660096
* SBIR Phase II:  Kaiser Trigger: A Nano-Watt Powered Technology for Ultra-Low Power Fatigue Crack Detection
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Mehdi Khandani, Resensys, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,148,007.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the result of
introducing a new generation of low-power wireless sensors for detecting
Acoustic Emission events and detecting fatigue damage in structures. According
to the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), the US transportation
infrastructure has 605,102 operational bridges, of which 66,561 are structurally
deficient. In particular, the fatigue damage monitoring technology of the
project will initially target the more than 18,000 US highway bridges that are
categorized as ?fracture critical? by the Federal Highway Administration. The
technique?s ultra-low energy consumption will enable its use in low-power
wireless sensors and make it an ideal response to this challenging problem. The
anticipated benefits and commercial applications of this project are (1) a low-
cost, easy-to-use mechanism for effective monitoring, allowing for early
detection and timely repair of fracture and fatigue damage in infrastructure
systems such as highway bridges; (2) improved public safety, with reduced
maintenance costs and extension of the service life of critical and high-valued
infrastructure systems; and (3) additional commercial applications in monitoring
the structural health and integrity of other structures, including aircraft, oil
and gas pipelines, machinery, cargo cranes, ships,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2
project addresses distributed structural health monitoring (SHM) of
infrastructure systems, particularly highway bridges. Because the creation of
fatigue cracks in a structure is accompanied by the propagation of acoustic
emission (AE) waves, wireless AE sensors can be used to detect such cracks.
However, a challenge of AE detection sensors is high energy consumption,
significantly more than the energy available in a battery-operated wireless
device. As a result, conventional AE detection methods cannot be used with low-
power wireless sensors. This project uses a novel and ultra-low power technique
for long term monitoring of strain. Then, AE monitoring is activated only if
history of tensile strain in the structure under monitoring suggests likelihood
of fatigue damage. In addition, using history and pattern of AE events, the
method estimates the severity of fatigue damage in a material. Moreover, the
method uses a variety of techniques to eliminate the effects of mechanical noise
on AE measurements and achieve a high reliability in fatigue damage assessment.
After development, the method is planned to be evaluated on highway bridges,
airframes, and pipelines.