* 1660928
* Regulated sialylation modulates cardiac excitability and conduction
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Eric Bennett, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 354,569.00

Electrical signaling occurs in all cells and is of primary importance to
excitable cell function. Neurons, skeletal and cardiac muscle communicate
through production and conduction of electrical signals called action potentials
(AP), a transient depolarization of the membrane produced by the concerted and
highly regulated activities of many voltage-gated ion channels. Slight
alterations in ion channel activity often lead to altered excitability. Some of
the ion channel functions depend on sugar groups, called glycans, that may
comprise ~15-30% of the mature ion channel mass. Most studies showed that sugar-
dependent gating effects were imposed primarily by the terminal residue, sialic
acid. However, little is known about whether and how regulated sialylation
modulates excitability and conduction, in vivo. Thus, questioning whether and
how (mechanistically) regulated sialylation modulates cardiac excitability and
conduction will be investigated. A broad range of methods including molecular,
cellular, tissue, whole animal, and computational techniques will be used at
several organizational levels on an animal model comprised of 1)
Sialyltransferase (ST) knockout strains producing proteins with fewer attached
sialic acids, and 2) The enzymatic removal of sialic acids and N-glycans. The
proposed studies are designed to test the viability of a novel mechanism by
which glycans modulate electrical signaling, in vivo and in silico. The paradigm
challenges being studied throughout this work and the melding of disparate
biological areas including ion channel and glyco-biology, have broad
implications. Because ion channel activity is involved in the function of all
cells of the body, and since nearly all ion channels are glycosylated, gaining
an understanding of a functional role for glycosylation in electrical signaling
will likely have broad scientific impact. If the studies indicate that glycan
structures influence ion channel function, then future studies should address
the impact of glycans on ion channel structure as it relates to channel
function. In addition to these broad scientific implications, the proposed
studies will have broader impact that includes education, communication, and
health. To address these broader issues, undergraduate, graduate, and medical
students, particularly including minority students, will be trained in the
scientific method by asking a fundamental question utilizing a variety of
techniques. The generated scientific findings will be shared with the general
scientific community, the lay public, and our collaborators, and effectively
communicate the impact of these findings on the health of society.