* 1660224
* SBIR Phase II:  AERODYNAMIC FLOW DEFLECTOR FOR CURRENT AND FUTURE WIND TURBINES TO INCREASE THE ANNUAL ENERGY PRODUCTION BY 10% AND REDUCE THE LEVELIZED COST OF ENERGY BY 8%
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Arturo Villegas Vaquero, XPEED Turbine Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2020
* USD 898,955.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in enabling more efficient Annual Wind
Energy Production (AEP) while reducing the cost of energy (COE). This will make
wind energy more attractive economically, improve the energy security of the
U.S, create jobs, and indirectly help reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A 2% AEP
increase is generally considered attractive. Two turbines (5kW and 50kW) tested
during Phase I have shown an increase in AEP between 2% to 8% while reducing the
COE by 1% to 6%. About 150,000 turbines worldwide can be potentially be
retrofitted with this technology.

This project will address challenges related to aerodynamic efficiency of wind
turbines and the cost of wind energy. It is based on a deeper understanding of
wind turbine aerodynamics from a more 3-dimensional point of view; most wind
turbine designs are based on 2- dimensional theories. The key technical
challenge in bringing this technology to market is to demonstrate the increase
in AEP of utility scale turbines retrofitted with our deflector technology in
realistic field conditions while reducing the COE. This will be addressed by
performing testing at a few customer wind farms and NREL testing centers. The
R&D plan consists of designing, manufacturing, and installing deflectors on a
few utility size turbines (30-100 meters diameter rotors). The tests will
include power performance comparison between baseline and retrofitted turbines
according to international standards.