* 1660400
* Conferences:  Training and Retaining Leaders in STEM Geospatial Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,194.00

This project focuses on professional development for women in the geospatial
sciences (GIScience, remote sensing, spatial analysis, and mapping sciences).
The research team will develop and offer a multi-year series of workshops, and
the materials that are subsequently produced will be made available for use by
the wider community. These materials will include videos, podcasts, and written
compilations of recommendations, best practices, and strategies for improving
experiences of women in geospatial science careers. Because these fields lack
visibility among other STEM disciplines, its practitioners have fewer
opportunities for disciplinary-focused professional development, including the
development of leadership skills, career retention strategies, mentoring
training, work-life balance considerations, and practical knowledge that can be
passed onto future generations of women entering academic careers in geospatial
sciences. By developing a strong and robust cadre of women geospatial
scientists, the project will further contribute to capacity building by
addressing confidence and competence in geo-spatial thinking, technology use,
and computing, factors that are otherwise limiting to recruitment and retention
in these academic fields. This project immediately benefits the current
generation of women in geospatial STEM disciplines and creates conditions to
then improve experiences for future generations of women and men, altogether
contributing to a culture change. The workshop format is optimal for catalyzing
a wide support network for women in the geospatial community as it allows the
participants to develop confidence around the issues, experience a shared sense
of belonging within this professional community, and engage within a mentoring
framework that models what has been proven to be an effective STEM strategy,
namely, women leading women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The title of this project,
Training and Retaining Leaders in STEM - Geospatial Sciences (hereafter TRELIS-
GS), is a metaphor for constructing a human capital trellis or scaffold of
support for academic and professional development. Moreover, the trellis
metaphor recognizes that career paths are often neither singular nor linear and
may require jumps or leaps, unlike a traditional single-track "ladder". TRELIS-
GS will be conducted through a partnership involving the University of Maine and
the University Consortium for Geographic Information Science (UCGIS), a non-
profit organization that has long promoted GIScience within higher education.
This partnership will leverage existing UCGIS research and infrastructure and
contribute to its long-term commitment to build capacity to share information
and resources with the broader geospatial sciences community.