* 1660204
* SBIR Phase II:  Vivid Pixel array for Reflective, Full-color Digital signage
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Roger Diebold, Solchroma Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,471,741.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project evaluates the
feasibility of constructing vivid, full-color, reflective display modules for
large-area outdoor digital signage driven by dielectric elastomers suitable for
pilot testing. Completion of Phase II objectives is expected to have the
following impact: Commercially, the availability of new signage products will
create significant economic impact through partial capture of the $14.2B
domestic billboard and sign manufacturing market. Up to 10% of US zoning codes
are estimated to prohibit LED-based (light emitting diode) signage while
potentially permitting a reflective digital signage technology, expanding the
domestic market up to $5.6B, with a 10x impact worldwide. Environmentally,
greenhouse gas reduction is expected as an alternative to LED-based technology;
up to 40x reduction in energy consumption is anticipated relative to LEDs.
Additionally, billboard wrap waste will be reduced by replacing printed signage.
Scientifically, the use of dielectric elastomers as a class of materials in
products would be promoted through addressing technological and manufacturing
hurdles currently limiting market translation. Societally, increased impact from
timely public service announcements on digital billboards displayed during
natural disasters, when catching fugitives from the FBI?s Most Wanted lists, and
with Amber/Silver alerts are expected through large-area digital sign
proliferation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In phase II, electroactive polymer-based
proof-of-concept display modules will be constructed and tested, ready for pilot
testing with initial customers. The low-cost display design uses unique electro-
hydraulic driving principles to enable exceptional refractive index matching
within the optical stack for highly vivid and reflective full-color generation.
In phase I, a functional proof-of-concept pixel array module was fabricated
using scalable processes. To achieve pilot readiness, improvements in
performance, resolution, and calibration to meet advertiser standards are
needed, as well as environmental qualification for outdoor operation,
development of industry-conscious software control, and qualification of supply
chain inputs to enable further production at scale. Phase II research will
address these technical challenges by introducing process refinements and
quality control standards, conduct color calibration using existing techniques,
perform industry-relevant environmental testing, work with vendors to source
soft-tooled components, and develop module and multi-module control software.
The result of phase II efforts will be a calibrated and rugged one square foot,
full-color, 16mm pitch, reflective display module ready for scaling to pilot
production following phase II.&lt;br/&gt;