* 1660908
* 3D Reconstruction of Inherently Flexible Macromolecular Assemblies.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Bradley Palmer, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 975,221.00

This research aims to develop new methods for carrying out the 3D reconstruction
of flexible biological macromolecules, and determining their range of structural
conformations. Biological macromolecules are highly regulated nanomachines that
are dynamic and often show considerable flexibility while performing their
functions. Knowing the full range of the conformations that molecules may take
during a functional cycle is essential for understanding those functions.
Methods for preparing biomolecules for imaging using electron microscopy can
preserve this rich conformational landscape, allowing researchers to study the
full range of structures. Improvements in electron microscope technology allow
researchers to obtain resolutions as low as 0.5 nm when macromolecules have one
or only a few conformations. However, the more flexible the macromolecule the
more conformations it can take, and it has not been possible to obtain a similar
level of resolution of molecules having global or continuous structure
variations - this research aims to fill that gap. In this project we will
develop multivariate statistical methods to facilitate the exploration of
structural variations covering the full conformational space. We will implement
highly adaptable non-linear dimensionality reduction techniques for applying to
the results of established multivariate statistical image analysis techniques,
or directly to the data. After sorting data according to similarity, a second
step is necessary to determine the conformational spectrum. Sufficiently
homogeneous subsets of projections or volumes are extracted and can be used for
3D structure determination, either through 3D reconstruction from projections or
sub-tomogram averaging. For efficiently obtaining high resolution structures,
these techniques will be combined with a new streamlined method for the
correction of the microscope contrast transfer function (CTF) addressing
specifically the continuously varying CTF in images of tilted specimens. The new
methods will be applied to two biologically relevant systems: Complex I and
EmaA. Complex I, the first and largest enzyme in the respiratory chain of
mitochondria and bacteria, is essential for the survival of all aerobic living
cells. However, its function is still little understood. EmaA is a very large
glycosylated bacterial adhesin that binds to collagen during the first and
essential step of the infectious process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new tools
developed will provide a timely, reliable and robust methodology to discern the
different conformations of biological macromolecules and will be applicable to
large number of biological complexes. The reconstruction of Complex I will
contribute to the understanding of this enzyme, central to cellular energy
metabolism. Knowledge of the structure of bacterial adhesins will help resolve
between the existing paradigms explaining the role of glycosylation in bacterial
adhesion and thus will help advance the understanding of key elements of the
infectious process. These two biological systems are not unique, and the methods
developed here will help advance the understanding of the structure function of
an abundant number of macromolecules, whose function is still little understood.
The results of the project will be presented at national and international
meetings, and published in peer-reviewed journals. All software developed will
be documented and made freely available to the scientific community under an
open source license. Solved structures will be deposited in the EMDataBank.