* 1660388
* RUI: Assessing the Environmental and Human Drivers and Cultural Dimensions of Changes in Oak Forests of the Eastern U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Chris Larsen, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2021
* USD 232,099.00

This project will investigate the changes in abundance of white oak forests in
the eastern United States over the past two centuries as well as consider the
societal ramifications of these changes. White oak forests provide numerous
material and non-material benefits to society that include commercial timber
products, habitat for animal species, and cultural value. Historically white
oaks were an essential component of eastern U.S. forests, being the most
abundant tree in forests prior to Euro-American settlement. However, white oak
abundance has declined over the past two centuries, motivating this study to
understand the reasons for high abundance in the past and the reasons for their
decline. The project will investigate two significant processes that likely
contributed to white oak abundance in the eighteenth century: vegetation burning
by Native Americans to maintain open landscapes, and the occurrence of high-
severity droughts that favored drought-tolerant species such as white oak. The
project will analyze present-day forests to understand environmental and
historical land-use conditions under which white oak forests persist or decline.
To comprehend the human dimensions of oak decline, the project will assess
economic and cultural values that stakeholder groups, including Native American
communities, ascribe to white oak trees and forests. The research will provide
undergraduate student training, including those traditionally underrepresented
in the sciences, with field and lab-based educational experiences in STEM
fields, specifically in geographic information systems, tree-ring analysis, and
statistical modeling. The outcomes of this project will contribute new knowledge
for managing oak landscapes to meet economic, ecological, and cultural goals.
The framework and methods are scalable to other ecosystems with shared Euro- and
Native American land-use legacies. Project findings will be widely shared with
entities such as state and federal land management agencies, the Seneca Nation
of Indians, and land conservancies. Findings will also be communicated through
various means, including a book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be
conducted in the forests of northern New York state and focuses on three central
research questions: (1) Were environmental factors or Native American land-use
practices responsible for the high abundance of oak and other xeric (dry-site)
tree species in the past? (2) Under what environmental and land-use conditions
have white oaks regenerated or declined? (3) What material and non-material
benefits do white oak trees and forests provide communities in the eastern
United States? Historical records will provide insight into landscape
characteristics and land-use practices during late Native American (ca. 1790)
and early Euro-American (ca. 1790-1850) settlement period, and will be used to
construct a land-use history. Statistical models will determine relationships
between past forest composition, environmental conditions (e.g. topography,
soils), and Native American land-use. Dendrochronological studies will be
conducted using tree-core samples extracted from remaining old trees to assess
patterns of tree growth in relation to drought patterns and land-use changes.
Modern tree species composition will be compared with environmental conditions
(e.g. soils) and land-use histories to understand settings under which white oak
persisted or declined. Surveys and interviews of stakeholders in the study area
will be used to ascertain the present-day economic and cultural values
associated with white oaks.