* 1660759
* A Multi-Faceted Approach to Building STEM Teacher Education Capacity Utilizing Near-Peer Tutoring of High School Students
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Gale Rice, Fontbonne University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 11/30/2018
* USD 74,803.00

Fontbonne University's Multi-Faceted Approach to Building STEM Teacher Education
Capacity Utilizing Near-Peer Tutoring of High School Students is a Capacity
Building Project in the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program that will build
capacity for creating a pipeline for underrepresented students to become
successful secondary mathematics and biology teachers in high-need school
districts. This pipeline will connect Fontbonne University with additional high-
need school districts with diverse populations. Fontbonne will also develop
relationships and formal agreements with community colleges to increase the
pipeline of students from these institutions into Fontbonne. At Fontbonne
University, students will continue their studies in STEM alongside their
education bachelor's degree programs. This capacity grant will also increase the
achievement of high school students in STEM, specifically students in high-need
schools with a large percentage of underrepresented minority students.

The goals of this project are to increase the number of area high school
students, transfer students, and current Fontbonne University STEM students who
choose to pursue careers as secondary mathematics and biology teachers and to
improve the preparation of students for success in secondary mathematics and
biology licensure. To meet these goals, this project will develop ongoing
partnerships with high-need high schools with diverse populations to support
mathematics and science education. Specifically, this project will develop a
tutoring program to strengthen the recruitment and preparation of
underrepresented high school students in STEM. In addition, this project will
develop ongoing collaborations with community colleges to support bachelor's
degree completion through 2+2 articulation agreements in science and
mathematics, develop a coordinated advising system to facilitate clear direction
for students seeking secondary STEM licensure, and develop an in-person seminar
and online tutoring program based on alignment of the STEM curriculum courses
with the required licensure exams to ensure student success on the state
teaching licensure exams. These activities will encourage high school, transfer,
and current STEM majors at Fontbonne University to consider secondary
mathematics and science teaching as a career path. The activities will also
facilitate a clear course direction and additional support for students as they
seek to complete their STEM education licensure.