* 1660247
* SBIR Phase II: PAX Rotor Optimization for Flexible Micro-Hydro
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Jayden Harman, PAX Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 789,351.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the effort to bring our biomimetic rotor
design to the marine hydrokinetic (MHK) market. MHK energy is a socially and
environmentally friendly alternative to hydroelectric power, which harnesses
energy from rivers, tides, ocean currents and manmade waterways without the use
of a dam. This market is potentially large but still nascent due to high
technology costs, concerns over turbine survivability, fish friendliness, and
difficulty in permitting deployments. Our rotor's small, flexible configuration
is a unique approach that addresses many MHK challenges with the mission of
reaching the largest set of individuals underserved by current energy
technologies. Our rotor seeks to displace diesel generation and complement
intermittent renewable energy sources by providing an affordable, baseload clean
energy solution for any individual or community; with the objective of scaling
up to larger deployments by leveraging the scalable rotor design. This R&amp;D
Project will expand the body of knowledge for the rapidly emerging field of
biomimicry by developing a flexible micro-hydro solution that enables energy
generation from flowing water by allowing fluids to move over the surfaces of
the rotor in their naturally preferred way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will transform our
promising proprietary rotor design into an optimized MHK turbine to be
incorporated as the key component of a flexible micro-hydro system that
addresses many of the challenges faced by the MHK market. The rotor is based on
biomimicry and was designed using streamlines found in moving bodies of water
with a deep profile to maximize the power transfer from low speed flows. The
logarithmic design with receding edges results in a turbine that avoids damaging
impacts with debris and marine life. The design is stable in variable flow
conditions, which allows for a flexible power takeoff configuration with both
the generator and power electronics housed above the water for improved
affordability. During the project, computational fluid dynamic modeling will be
used to simulate design changes and drive performance improvements. The most
promising designs will be prototyped and integrated with multiple generator and
tether combinations to determine the most efficient flexible power takeoff
system. Conversion to power output for 12V battery charging will also be tested
and optimized resulting in a complete power conversion chain. The performance of
the rotor and system will be characterized by full scale testing locally and
with The University of Washington.