* 1660049
* Mechanisms for the Seasonal Transition of Precipitation Organization in the Southeastern United States: Current and Future Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Thomas Rickenbach, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2022
* USD 446,104.00

-------------------------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southeastern United States (SE US) owes its ample
water resources to many forms of precipitation, from the large-scale
precipitation associated with frontal weather systems to sea-breeze convection
associated with the adjacent Atlantic, to tropical cyclones, mesoscale
convective systems and afternoon thunderstorms. These precipitation types differ
in important ways including their predictability and their sensitivity to
changes in regional climate, thus an understanding of their behavior and
relative contributions to mean precipitation and precipitation change over the
SE US is desirable. The PIs have developed a simple characterization of
precipitating cloud systems into mesoscale precipitation features (MPFs), which
consist of a contiguous region of precipitation of at least 100 km length, and
smaller and shorter-lived isolated precipitation features (IPFs). Despite the
simplicity of the classification scheme, it has proven effective for
understanding the geographical and temporal behavior of SE US precipitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key result of the PIs' previous research is that while
MPFs (which include frontal precipitation and mesoscale convective systems) do
not exhibit a strong seasonal cycle, the seasonal cycle of IPFs is characterized
by a relatively abrupt spring onset occurring between May and June and
concentrated over Florida, the adjacent coastline of the Gulf of Mexico, and the
Atlantic coast as far north as Cape Hatteras. The onset of IPF rainfall over the
SE US is somewhat reminiscent of the abrupt transition to the rainy season in
monsoon regions such as West Africa and East Asia, which have been more
extensively studied than the SE US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work conducted here
explores the springtime IPF onset using a combination of observational data and
numerical model simulations. Observational data come from the National Mosaic
and Multi-sensor Quantitative Precipitation Estimation (NMQ) dataset, a
precipitation dataset constructed from the NEXRAD network of radar stations that
covers nearly all of the continental US. The PIs have developed an automated
precipitation organization classification algorithm to identify MPFs and IPFs,
and they apply the algorithm to 11 years (2002-2012) of NMQ data on an hourly
basis to capture statistics of the spring IPF onset. These data will be used in
conjunction with the North American Regional Reanalysis to assess contributions
to the onset from thermodynamic factors such as convective available potential
energy and convective inhibition, and circulation changes such as the seasonal
movement of the North American subtropical high (NASH) and low-level jets in the
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further goal is to understand how IPF
seasonality may change in a changing climate. The PIs hypothesize that the IPF
onset should occur earlier in a warmer climate, as the relevant thermodynamic
conditions would likely occur earlier in the year. Research on IPF sensitivity
to background warming is conducted using the Weather Research and Forecasting
(WRF) model, which is used to simulate weather and climate over a regional
domain given meteorological conditions at the boundaries. The simulations use
the pseudo global warming (PGW) method, in which meteorological conditions are
taken from operational meteorological analysis to simulate the seasonal
transition in recent years of record, and simulations are then repeated using
boundary conditions to which differences between future and present-day climate
simulations are added to represent anticipated climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seasonal transition of precipitation types over the SE
US is of interest for practical as well as scientific reasons, as decision
makers rely on weather and climate forecasts for agricultural planning as well
as guidance on precipitation-related hazards and urban development. The PIs
engage with local communities from Raleigh to the Outer Banks through venues
including presentations at public libraries. Results of the project are used in
courses taught by the PIs, in part through a WRF-based teaching laboratory for
weather forecasting, which serves an educational purpose and also enhances the
success of students pursuing careers in weather prediction.