* 1660653
* Urban Clinical Residency and Induction Support for Preparing Secondary STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Katherine Stickney, University of Indianapolis
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,147,623.00

The University of Indianapolis will undertake "UIndy STEM3", a Noyce Track 1
(Scholarships &amp; Stipends) project that will recruit and prepare at least 36
STEM graduates and/or STEM professionals who are committed to serve as secondary
STEM teachers. To prepare highly effective STEM teachers who possess both
content and pedagogical knowledge, the project will integrate coursework with
classroom practice in a year-long clinical residency, during which Noyce
Scholars will work under the guidance of a cooperating mentor teacher in a
partnering high-need school district. This will be followed by two years of
post-residency mentoring support. To enhance learning in STEM courses, Noyce
Scholars will incorporate project based learning as an instructional strategy.
This model will prepare Noyce Scholars to serve as teacher leaders who are able
to: translate content knowledge into culturally and developmentally responsive
curricula; employ a variety of strategies to encourage students' literacy,
engagement, and self-efficacy; employ differentiated instruction to meet the
needs of all students; assess the impact of professional practice on student
achievement; use data-driven reflection to modify professional practice; and
advocate for high-quality urban education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UIndy STEM3
Noyce Initiative will model best practices in teacher preparation through: the
integration of a clinical residency experience with rigorous coursework;
authentic collaborative relationships between the university and high-need local
education agencies; and authentic collaboration between the faculty of the
Shaheen College of Arts and Sciences and the School of Education. Coursework and
clinical residency experiences will be integrated in a full-time program aligned
with local education agency calendars and will result in scholars earning,
within one year, a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) degree along with licensure
in a STEM content&lt;br/&gt;area. The impact of the clinical residency on both
the Noyce Scholars and the cooperating mentor teachers (CMTs) will be evaluated.
Additionally, the extent to which CMTs benefit as teacher leaders through their
experience engaging Noyce Scholars and from their relationships with university
faculty will be assessed. Ultimately, the findings from this project will
contribute to the knowledge of effective practices in teacher education in
Master of Arts in Teaching MAT programs throughout the country and the benefits
of clinical residencies.