* 1660490
* Linking Basin-Scale, Stand-Level, and Individual Tree Water Stress Indicators for Groundwater-Dependent Riparian Forests in Multiple-Use River Basins
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Dar Roberts, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2022
* USD 449,982.00

This research project will develop a suite of water-stress indicators at several
scales to assess the health of riparian ecosystems in response to sustained
groundwater decline. This project will address a topic of scientific and
societal importance, namely how to evaluate and help prevent negative impacts of
drought and human-induced water shortages on vulnerable, high-value riparian
ecosystems. It will integrate advanced methods in two rapidly emerging fields,
hyperspectral remote sensing and isotope dendroecology, to develop a more
holistic understanding of water stress at multiple scales of resolution. The
project will compare water stress indicators that vary in their timing,
strength, and rates of change, and it will facilitate the evaluation of warning
signs and time lags among physiological water stress, reduced growth, and
dieback in individual trees as well as synoptic forest decline evident
throughout a river corridor. This project has the potential to influence
groundwater management practices throughout California and in water-limited,
multiple-use basins elsewhere. In partnership with The Nature Conservancy and
other project collaborators, the investigators will integrate project findings
with statewide guidelines for protecting groundwater-dependent riparian
ecosystems mandated under California's recently implemented Groundwater
Sustainability Management Act. The investigators will interact with groundwater
conservation and management efforts in river basins through workshops for
managers and stakeholders. They will mentor early-career environmental
scientists, including women in STEM fields, and they will conduct outreach
activities for elementary and secondary school students to increase regional
environmental awareness in the study region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riparian
forests and woodlands are hotspots of biodiversity, and they support key
functions and habitats within river corridors, but they are particularly
sensitive to large changes in water supply. This project will take place in the
Santa Clara River in southern California, where sustained groundwater pumping
for irrigation during a severe drought has had negative impacts and allows for
study of riparian woodland response to changing environmental conditions over
both short and longer terms. The investigators will assess the signals and
thresholds of water stress over the last decade using high-resolution aerial
imagery and tree-rings to develop predictors of long-term impairment and
collapse. They will capitalize on extensive groundwater well records to link
water-table dynamics with changes in plant water status detected at two
different scales through the use of basin-wide, high-resolution aerial imagery
taken seasonally during the drought and annual growth and carbon isotope data
from tree rings covering the same period.