* 1660853
* Instructional Practices that Enhance Learning for Students Struggling with Rational Numbers: A Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Russell Gersten, RG Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,903.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the proposed research synthesis is to conduct a statistical summary
(a meta-analysis) of rigorous intervention research for students struggling with
fractions, ratios, and proportions. The meta-analysis will synthesize
instructional intervention research conducted with struggling students in grades
3-9 from 1986 to the present. The research team will carefully analyze the
nature of instruction provided in each intervention study. This analysis will go
beyond a mere coding of how authors describe their intervention and will probe
deeply into the nature of instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
conduct a meta-analysis focused on rational number to synthesize findings across
a wide-range of studies in and identify the most effective practices and the
conditions under which those practices are effective for student with learning
disabilities. This project takes the field further by (a) including the recent
influx of studies on this topic, (b) ensuring included studies meet rigorous
evidence standards, (c) focusing on studies of struggling students -- students
performing below the 35th percentile and students with learning disabilities,
(d) broadening the range of rational number topics beyond fractions, and (e)
using state-of-the-art meta-analytic techniques. The research will help meet the
demands of relevant stakeholders (teachers, interventionists, administrators) by
synthesizing the best practices from prior research.