* 1660752
* Preparing Preservice Mathematics Teachers for Success in High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Craig Spencer, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,239,983.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
Kansas State University (K-State), partnering with the Kansas Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation project, the Professional Development School
Partnership, and the Center for Rural Education and Small Schools, will recruit
and prepare mathematics majors for careers in teaching middle and high school
mathematics. The project will (1) disburse scholarships for juniors, seniors,
and post-baccalaureate mathematics majors to pursue careers in teaching; (2)
provide opportunities for freshmen and sophomores to work in informal
mathematics education settings both on and off campus; (3) implement a pre-
service seminar and in-service mentoring program to support the Noyce Scholars
in their first two years of teaching in high-need districts, with special
emphasis on rural schools; and (4) conduct research into support structures
appropriate to rural school mathematics placements. A focus on districts in
southwest Kansas will also enable the project to build a larger base of Hispanic
mathematics majors who are licensed to teach at the middle and high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will include a year-long seminar
focused on working with English-language learners in teaching mathematics,
managing multiple mathematics teaching assignments, and integrating mathematics
with other content areas. New teacher support will be provided through master
teachers in each district assigned to mentor new teachers as well as an early
teacher collaborative managed by the K-State College of Education Office of
Innovation and Collaboration. Quantitative and qualitative methods will address
questions such as: To what extent are the project's activities effective in
increasing the number and diversity of mathematics majors with teacher licensure
in middle and high school teaching? Which program components are most
influential on scholars' career path choices and why? Findings will advance
knowledge about preparing mathematics majors to teach in high-need rural school
districts.