* 1660605
* Collaborative Research: Field Measurements of Clouds and Aerosol Particles over the Southern Ocean in SOCRATES
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Cynthia Twohy, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2022
* USD 340,870.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work funded under this award is
part of a larger field campaign titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation,
Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The primary activity of the
campaign is the deployment of a Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained
by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for Atmospheric
Research. The GV will be based in Hobart, Australia and make multiple flights
across the South Polar front collecting data on SO clouds and the meteorological
conditions in which they occur. The GV is equipped with dropsondes to record
ambient meteorological conditions, radar and lidar to observe the clouds, and
instruments mounted on the wings or positioned behind inlets to to sample,
collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles (liquid droplets and ice
crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO activities planned
internationally and by other US agencies, including surface observations taken
on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island at 54 degrees
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue to be addressed in the campaign is the
relative abundance of supercooled liquid water (SLW) droplets and ice particles
in SO clouds, as SLW is more prevalent in SO clouds than their Northern
Hemisphere counterparts. The PIs hypothesize that the extent to which SLW cloud
droplets freeze into ice particles is more strongly modulated in SO clouds by
the vigor of cloud updrafts than by the availability of Ice nucleating particles
(INPs, particles within liquid droplets which trigger freezing). The PIs also
seek to determine the relative influence of overlying free tropospheric aerosol
concentrations versus local surface and boundary layer controls, including
precipitation and wind speed, in determining the concentration of liquid
droplets in boundary layer clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work funded under this
award contributes to SOCRATES by measuring aerosol and cloud hydrometeor
properties, specifically addressing three questions (from the proposal
summary):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) What are the chemical and physical properties
of sub-micron and coarse-mode aerosol particles in the region, and how do they
relate to cloud condensation nuclei (CCN, particles around which cloud droplets
form), INP, and cloud properties?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) What fraction of SO
condensed water remains supercooled as a function of temperature, and can this
be related to a dearth of INPs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) What is the role of
biological aerosol particles in cloud formation over the
SO?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions are addressed through in-situ air
sampling using inlets available on the GV. Sampling of cloudy air uses a
specialized inlet known as a counterflow virtual impactor (CVI), which separates
cloud droplets and ice crystals from smaller aerosol particles and other non-
cloud material. Droplets and ice crystals are heated in the CVI to evaporate
their water substance and the resulting vapor is measured with a laser
hygrometer to determine total condensed water content. Once the water is
evaporated the droplets and ice are reduced to their nucleating particles
(referred to as residual particles), which are counted and sized using an
aerosol spectrometer. A fluorescence-based spectrometer is used to separately
count and size biological particles so that their role in nucleation can be
assessed. Residual particles are collected on slides for laboratory analysis
using electron and X-ray microscopy that can determine morphology, composition,
and mixing state. A key question in the analysis is the hygroscopicity of the
particles, meaning their ability to absorb water vapor and thus serve as CCN.
Additional measurements from wing-mounted supercooled liquid probes are used to
estimate the ratio of SLW to ice content in the clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work has broader impacts due to the potentially significant role of SO clouds in
determining the sensitivity of global climate to external forcing from
greenhouse gas increases and other factors. Data from the campaign will be used
to develop better representations of clouds in models used for weather
prediction and climate impacts assessments. The data will be made available to
the worldwide scientific community, thus the campaign has broader impacts by
creating a community resource for basic science research. A further contribution
to basic research is the development of a clean-in-place system for the CVI
inlet, which will improve the reliability of the CVI for future users,
particular in salty marine environments. Campaign outreach to K-12 students and
the general public is conducted through regular newsletters and blogs, and an
interactive "Ask SOCRATES" website. Events in which campaign videos, microscope
images of cloud particles, and aerosol samples collected during the campaign are
presented to the general public, are also planned. This award provides support
and training to a graduate student and funds the participation of a second
student in the campaign, thereby contribution to the development of the future
workforce in this research area.