* 1660392
* Ideal Probe Single Molecule Imaging for the Study of Small Molecule and Polymeric Glass Formers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2021
* USD 510,288.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Laura Kaufman of Columbia
University is using advanced imaging techniques to study how molecules move in a
class of materials known as glass formers. Glass formers may exist as
supercooled liquids or glasses, materials that demonstrate unusual and poorly
understood behaviors at both the microscopic and macroscopic scales. These
materials are ubiquitous in nature and in modern technology, present in window
glass, plastics, and medications delivered as pills and tablets. Understanding
how molecules move in these systems not only addresses fundamental questions but
also enhances understanding of how to stabilize these materials against various
types of degradation. The PI develops and uses single molecule imaging
approaches to detail the rotations and translations of molecules in these
systems, teasing out key time scales and length scales related to molecular
motions and relaxations in these environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The single
molecule imaging experiments in supercooled liquids underway employ newly
designed and synthesized ideal probe molecules; these are probes that do not
average in space or time over heterogeneities in a glassy host. As a result,
these probes directly interrogate length and time scales of interest in these
systems and test predictions of theories of the glass transition. The
experiments detail dynamic heterogeneity as manifested in relaxation and
exchange time distributions of rotational dynamics in both small molecule and
polymeric glass formers. In addition, experiments that require sub-diffraction
localization are being performed to follow translational dynamics and structural
rearrangements in supercooled liquids to resolve questions regarding the poorly
understood phenomenon of rotational-translational decoupling. Related techniques
employing two types of probes are employed to measure dynamic correlations,
allowing identification of length scales of heterogeneity in supercooled
liquids. Ideal probe single molecule measurements are also being performed in
thin polymeric films, with a focus on identifying the putative surface mobile
layer that has practical ramifications for the stability of thin film devices
and vapor-deposited glasses. To complement studies of glassy systems prepared
through cooling, studies of such systems prepared through swelling are also
underway. These studies both detail aspects of dynamic heterogeneity and
directly visualize structural rearrangements underlying long time scale
relaxations in these systems.