* 1660274
* The Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee, Geospatial Intelligence, and Civil Rights
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Joshua Inwood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2023
* USD 373,925.00

This project will examine how Civil Rights Movement leaders and workers used
geospatial data and techniques to calculate, map, and analyze the spatial and
social dimensions of segregation and discrimination in the US South during the
1960s freedom struggle. At the center of this geospatial labor was the Student-
NonViolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), which generated a series of detailed
reports and other products that informed civil rights projects but which have
been largely neglected by social scientists. From their field-based operations
in Deep Southern small towns and rural areas, SNCC workers strategically
compiled, disseminated and interpreted spatial and social information for the
purposes of documenting and challenging the normative power of white supremacy
and racial inequality. Understanding how Civil Rights organizations engaged in
this "Geospatial Intelligence" (GI) advances an understanding of the potential
of geographical data collection, application, and analysis to be utilized for
the purposes of non-elite activism and social change. This research project
contributes to Geographic knowledge and has the potential to impact Geographic
curriculum and public thought through its plan of publication and innovative
outreach. Specifically, the investigators will distribute research findings to a
broad collection of community actors, including through the Tennessee Geographic
Alliance and its partners within the state alliance movement and the National
Council for Social Studies. They will create education materials for both the
broader public and to facilitate classroom teaching and learning about the role
of space and place in challenging segregation and discrimination during the
Civil Rights Movement. In addition, findings of the research will be
disseminated via the University of Tennessee "Pipeline Program", which offers an
opportunity to engage with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
and to recruit minority students for further graduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project relies on archival work at several
Civil Rights related collections across the United States as well as a series of
open-ended interviews with surviving members of SNCC familiar with the
generation and implementation of geospatial data gathering and analysis
techniques. Critical race theory and methodology and discourse analysis will be
used to investigate the following questions: 1) How and in what ways and
political contexts did civil rights workers employ mapping and geographical data
collection and analysis strategies to identify patterns of racial inequality and
targets for protest? 2) How did Civil Rights workers use or operationalize their
Geospatial Intelligence methods and analytical products to plan and execute
major civil rights projects and how do those products expand our definition and
understanding of Black Geographies? 3) How do everyday forms of Geospatial
Intelligence used by Civil Rights workers problematize and expand contemporary
understandings of GI that strongly associate Geospatial Intelligence with
defense and national security concerns? While the focal point of academic work
for over a decade, GI-related research confines the craft to military-industrial
applications. SNCC's use of geographical data and GI practice expands this
definition and context as well as understanding of the inner workings of African
American politics and the value of a Black Geographies perspective within a
study of the Civil Rights Movement.