* 1660374
* Measurements of CCN on the NSF/NCAR HIAPER G-V to Study Aerosol-cloud Interactions as Part of the Southern Ocean Clouds Radiation Transport Aerosol Transport Experimental
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Gregory Roberts, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2021
* USD 507,637.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work funded under this award is
part of a larger field campaign titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation,
Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The primary activity of the
campaign is the deployment of a Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained
by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for Atmospheric
Research. The GV will be based in Hobart, Australia and make multiple flights
across the South Polar front collecting data on SO clouds and the meteorological
conditions in which they occur. The GV is equipped with dropsondes to record
ambient meteorological conditions, radar and lidar to observe the clouds, and
instruments mounted on the wings or positioned behind inlets to to sample,
collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles (liquid droplets and ice
crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO activities planned
internationally and by other US agencies, including surface observations taken
on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island at 54 degrees
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue to be addressed in the campaign is the
relative abundance of supercooled liquid water (SLW) droplets and ice particles
in SO clouds, as SLW is more prevalent in SO clouds than their Northern
Hemisphere counterparts. The PIs hypothesize that the extent to which SLW cloud
droplets freeze into ice particles is more strongly modulated in SO clouds by
the vigor of cloud updrafts than by the availability of Ice nucleating particles
(INPs, particles within liquid droplets which trigger freezing). The PIs also
seek to determine the relative influence of overlying free tropospheric aerosol
concentrations versus local surface and boundary layer controls, including
precipitation and wind speed, in determining the concentration of liquid
droplets in boundary layer clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award
seeks to determine the abundance of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), aerosol
particles which absorb water vapor from the air to form liquid water droplets
that are collectively visible as clouds. CCN abundances are assessed using two
miniature CCN counters, or mCCNs, each weighing 1.5kg. The mCCNs are diffusion
chambers in which aerosols collected in clear air (meaning outside of clouds)
are subjected to humidity values above the saturation level so that those which
are able to serve as CCN at a given temperature and supersaturation form
droplets which can be counted. One mCCN is operated at a constant
supersaturation value which is representative of the mean supersaturation level
in local clouds as determined by other instruments on the aircraft. The mCCN has
a 1Hz sampling rate so that it can be used to produce high-resolution CCN
concentration profiles as the GV ascends and descends through the boundary
layer, cloud layer, and free troposphere. The other mCCN is operated at
supersaturation levels which are adjusted over the range of supersaturation
values expected in SO clouds, so that a full CCN spectrum (CCN concentration as
a function of supersaturation) can be recorded over five minute sampling
intervals during level flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three hypotheses are
addressed with the measurements, along with other campaign
data:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Anthropogenic aerosols are transported over the SO
in the free troposphere and mixed downward into the boundary layer during the
passage of frontal weather systems. The balance between the injection of
aerosols by downward mixing and their removal by rain events establishes a
north-south gradient in aerosol and CCN concentration across the South Polar
front.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Sea spray and continental transport determine
aerosol and CCN properties over the SO, while the seasonal cycle of biological
activity plays a larger role in aerosol-cloud interactions in the Antarctic
coastal regions (south of 56 degrees);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Relatively small
changes in CCN concentration over the SO has a profound impact on cloud
microphysical properties as the sensitivity of cloud microphysical properties is
high at these low aerosol concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the potentially significant role of SO clouds in
determining the sensitivity of global climate to external forcing from
greenhouse gas increases and other factors. Data from the campaign will be used
to develop better representations of clouds in models used for weather
prediction and climate impacts assessments. The data will be made available to
the worldwide scientific community, thus the campaign has broader impacts by
creating a community resource for basic science research. This project has
educational benefits for undergraduate interns from the NSF-funded Marine
Advanced Technology Education (MATE) center and a students from a local charter
school, who will assist with calibration and operation of the instrumentation
and data analysis. In addition, the project support and trains a postdoc,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research area.