* 1660604
* Collaborative Research:  Using SOCRATES Datasets to Improve Simulations of Clouds, Aerosols and their Climate Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Christopher Bretherton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 530,746.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a component of the
Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study
(SOCRATES). The primary activity of the campaign is the deployment of a
Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained by the Earth Observing Laboratory
of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The GV will be based in Hobart,
Australia and make multiple flights across the South Polar front collecting data
on SO clouds and the meteorological conditions in which they occur. The GV is
equipped with dropsondes to record ambient meteorological conditions, radar and
lidar to observe the clouds, and instruments mounted on the wings or positioned
behind inlets to to sample, collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles
(liquid droplets and ice crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO
activities planned internationally and by other US agencies, including surface
observations taken on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island
at 54 degrees South. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work supported here uses data
collected in the SOCRATES campaign to improve the representation of SO clouds
and cloud-aerosol interactions in climate and weather models. Several possible
reasons for the cloud deficiencies are addressed, including deficiencies in the
representation of cloud microphysics leading to overly rapid freezing of
supercooled liquid water (SLW) cloud droplets, excessive precipitation from
shallow cumulus clouds, errors in the representation of small-scale turbulent
motions and their effects on the distribution of condensed water in clouds, and
inaccurate representation of aerosols and their ability to serve as condensation
nuclei for liquid cloud droplets and nucleating particles for cloud ice. Much of
the activity in the campaign is focused on the abundance of SLW in SO clouds,
which are less glaciated (i.e. they contain more very cold liquid droplets and
fewer ice particles) than their Northern Hemisphere counterparts, and work in
this project uses model simulations to understand this
difference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two categories of models are used, global
atmospheric models and large-eddy simulation (LES) models. Global models include
the Community Atmosphere Model version 6 (CAM6), developed by and for the
research community and hosted at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
and the Atmospheric Model version 4 (AM4), developed by the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory. The LES model is the System for Atmospheric Modeling (SAM),
developed by researchers at the State University of New York at Stony Brook and
the Colorado State University. For the global models, a "nudged meteorology"
strategy is used to facilitate comparisons between observations and model
simulations. In this strategy the model is subjected to forcing terms which
constrain it to remain close wind and temperature values produced by operational
weather forecasting centers. The goal is to reproduce the large-scale
meteorological conditions in which campaign observations were made, so that the
cloud and aerosol observations from the campaign can be reasonably compared to
their simulated counterparts. The PIs intend to use the understanding developed
from these comparisons, and from the LES modeling, to develop a representation
for ice nucleating particles in CAM6. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader
impacts due to its potential value for improving models used for weather
prediction and future climate projections. The work on model improvement also
has broader impacts for the scientific research community, as CAM6 and AM4 are
widely used tools for scientific research. The nudged meteorology simulations
are available for community use as part of the long-term online archive of data
collected in the campaign, along with the meteorological analyses used to nudge
the models and ancillary cloud and sea surface observations from satellites.
While the SO is a remote region, it can play an important role in understanding
the influence of anthropogenic aerosols on cloud behavior, as the unpolluted
conditions there allow an assessment of what clouds, aerosols, and their
interactions would look like in the absence of aerosols from industry,
agriculture, and other human activities. In addition to the broader impacts of
the work performed, the project provides support and training for two postdocs,
thereby providing for the development of the scientific work force in this
research area. The PIs also contribute to campaign outreach activities including
a SOCRATES blog.