* 1660263
* STTR Phase II:  SMART Colorimetric Sensor for Airborne Methane Detection
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Seung-Wuk Lee, Calyx, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,409,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project aims to develop
a sensor with the ability to provide an accurate, small, cost-effective, and
low-power device for the detection and quantification of natural gas. The
current U.S. industrial natural gas leak detector market is estimated to be $325
million, while the residential natural gas detector market exceeds $2 billion,
both of which indicate the strong market potential of this technology. Phage-
based colorimetric sensing is a new sensing mechanism, and has the potential to
replace and improve detection across many applications. This project, if
successful, will have a number of broader impacts. Firstly, 670 billion cubic
feet (cf) of methane is leaked annually in the U.S. natural gas industry. Better
monitoring and recapturing of the lost gas will result in less reliance on
imported gas (3 trillion cf in 2015), thus stimulating economic growth and
reducing waste. Additionally, a new type of sensor that provides accurate,
compact, inexpensive, and power-efficient natural gas monitoring with wireless
communication capabilities will enable large scale natural gas emission
monitoring studies, providing a tool for scientists and regulators. Finally, a
reduction of methane emissions will help combat climate change, as methane is a
powerful greenhouse gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Phase I project, we
have successfully fabricated colorimetric thin-film sensors, developed a data
analysis algorithm, and shown our sensors are both consistent and selective
against individual components of natural gas at industrially-suitable
sensitivity. In Phase II, we will further improve the production and performance
of the phage sensors. There are six objectives in this Phase II project. The
first is to do sensor calibration using precise gas calibration instrumentation
to improve sensor accuracy. Secondly, the sensors will undergo environmental
stress testing to evaluate longevity. Third, a scale-up feasibility study will
be undertaken to determine and optimize sensor cost. The fourth task involves
the development of improved and more inexpensive sensor designs, while the fifth
task will optimize the production process of the new sensor. The sixth objective
involves a more comprehensive characterization of the sensor. It is anticipated
that by the end of Phase II, we will have a precisely- calibrated gas sensor
with data recognition algorithms, and an established and scalable manufacturing
model, resulting in an improved colorimetric sensor development kit for natural
gas that better meets customer needs in the field.