* 1660323
* Intersections of Social and Geographic Marginality in Contemporary Urban Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Jonah Steinberg, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,710.00

The research supported by this award investigates the complex and changing
intersections between social marginality and geographic marginality in
contemporary cities. Marginal urban spaces, such as highway underpasses, urban
forests, and abandoned lots, increasingly are co-inhabited by distinct marginal
groups who may differ in language, religion, culture, and history. The goal is
to understand what transpires in these spaces, how the people who inhabit them
relate to each other, how they relate to the rest of society, how the comings
and goings of different groups may affect all of those relationships, and what
these processes may reveal about marginality more broadly. The conjunction of
social and geographic marginality is an increasingly visible global phenomenon
but many aspects of its social dimensions remain unknown. Do the people in these
spaces see themselves as marginal? Does co-habitation produce solidarity or
competition? When new groups come in does that change opportunities and
experiences of older, more established groups? Is this phenomenon best described
as social segregation or hiding? In response to these and other unknowns, the
fundamental concern of this research is to develop a general theory of how
spatial and social marginality intersect wherever they co-occur.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by University of Vermont
anthropologist Dr. Jonah A. Steinberg, who will employ the case study method,
alongside a range of techniques of detailed spatial analysis and mapping. He has
chosen to conduct the research in the industrial conurbation of Marseille,
France, where a long-present pariah group, mobile Roma (sometimes erroneously
called "Gypsies") from Danube and Balkan territory in Eastern Europe, are now
overlapping extensively with Muslim refugees, in particular from Syria and
Afghanistan. This is an appropriate site because it presents a convergence of
forces that occur independently elsewhere: a large influx of migrants, attacks
by members of transnational political movements, and ascendant nationalisms. He
will focus his detailed spatial observations on four hyperdiverse zones of the
city with high levels of intercultural contact, incorporating several
marketplaces and sites of informal housing. Through participant observation,
surveys, interviews, and archival research, with a focus on differentiating
consistent inhabitants and shorter-term residents, he will collect data on both
people and space, exploring through microspatial analytical methods precisely
how individuals and families from multiple groups interact in urban marginal
zones over variable scales of time. These data will be complemented with "life
cartographies," map-like descriptions of trajectories through space over time
elicited from individuals. Results from the research will be shared with
policymakers and the research community, and, through partnerships with schools
and museums, the broader public.