* 1660005
* Assessing the Paleoecology and Taphonomy of the New Early Jurassic Ya Ha Tinda Lagerst?tte (Canada) and the Significance of the Toarcian Ocean Anoxic Event
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Rowan Martindale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2022
* USD 380,306.00

Marine biotic communities are never perfectly fossilized in rocks because
delicate organisms and those without hard parts are rarely preserved. Ya Ha
Tinda in Alberta, Canada, is a newly discovered exceptional fossil deposit with
extraordinary preservation of soft tissues. It is the first of its kind from
North American Jurassic rocks (201 to 145 million years ago) and will generate
significant new ecological data about the marine communities that lived in this
region at this time and also will yield essential information about how soft
tissue fossils are preserved. This deposit formed during the Jurassic Oceanic
Anoxic Event, a period of significant extinctions caused by environmental
changes which might be similar to predicted future conditions. The Ya Ha Tinda
study will provide vital new information about the influence of this global
event on ocean communities. Results of this work will be shared with the public
through field blogs, lectures, interactive fairs, and institutional outreach
programs. Specimens will be included in museum exhibits at the Royal Tyrrell
Museum of Palaeontology and as a virtual display through the UT Austin Non
Vertebrate Paleontology Lab. Additionally, a hands-on teaching module on
extinction events will be developed for an 8th grade science class with material
for the visually impaired. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief goals of this project
are to: 1) assess the Ya Ha Tinda faunal composition, extinction, and recovery
dynamics; 2) compare these data with coeval deposits from Europe; 3) develop a
model for soft tissue preservation at Ya Ha Tinda; and 4) determine if
preservation was driven or enhanced by the Oceanic Anoxic Event. The project
will integrate paleontological, sedimentological, and geochemical research on
the Ya Ha Tinda fossils and compare the data with European specimens from black
shale deposits of the same age to provide a unique perspective on this global
anoxic event. Fossils will be analyzed with microscopy and analytical
geochemistry on a newly-designed scanning electron microscopy-based instrument,
which allows oversized, 3D samples to be quantitatively analyzed.