* 1660785
* University and Community College Collaboration for Mathematics and Biology Scholar Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Joel Olfelt, Northeastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,450,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, University and Community College Collaboration for
Mathematics and Biology Scholar Teacher Education will recruit undergraduate
majors in mathematics and biology, and prepare them to teach at the high school
level. The project will fund 45 scholarships over 5 years. In this project,
Northeastern Illinois University will collaborate with Wilbur Wright and Harry S
Truman Colleges and the Chicago Public Schools Offices of Math and Science.
Faculty, coursework, and research will be shared across the Noyce learning
community created by these four institutions, blending the experiences for the
Noyce Scholars into a single, collaborative, multi-institutional program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to building identities as collaborative
scientists and educators, Noyce Scholars will benefit from a variety of
supplemental activities, such as course-embedded research, guided summer
research projects, and experiences with students and teachers in high-need
schools. Additional supports for Noyce scholars include informal education
programs, mentoring by faculty and master-teachers in biology and math, training
for peer leadership in PLTL (Peer Led Team Learning) groups, and content-
specific new teacher induction and mentoring after graduation. The program will
also sponsor scholars' attendance at professional conferences as well as
presentations of their research with peers and faculty partners. Building on
these efforts, the project will seek answers to three questions: 1) What is the
relationship between Noyce Scholars' experiences in this STEM teacher
preparation program, with its emphasis on collaboration, and community building
in their school communities via their engagement in collaborative practices? 2)
To what extent do pre-service collaboration practices facilitate Scholars'
collaboration in other parts of their academic program and later in their
teaching careers? 3) Do teacher quality and teacher retention in high-need urban
schools improve as a result of such collaborations?