* 1660075
* SBIR Phase II:  Topological Interlocking Manufactured Concrete Block
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Peter Roberts, Spherical Block LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2020
* USD 871,901.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in providing manufactured concrete blocks
that can be used to build arches, including roofs. This feature has never been
done with manufactured concrete block, and holds the potential to greatly expand
the uses, benefits and capabilities of concrete block to an entirely new market
segment. The structures expected to be made possible with this novel masonry
system include inexpensive, high-performance, energy efficient buildings with
increased fire safety ratings, resistance to termites, increased safety for
tornadoes, hurricanes, tsunamis and other sever weather events, and greatly
increased building life cycle time. This technology could have a large positive
economic impact on masonry construction and on the concrete block manufacturing
industry in particular, both across the US and around the globe. This work is
expected to provide a greater understanding of the anisotropic strength of
manufactured concrete block, and how this anisotropic strength is to be
maximized within a given structure; this scientific understanding is expected to
benefit the catenary thrust-line analysis of masonry arches. This technology is
expected to make superior construction available to homeowners, businesses,
government buildings and public works (including bridges) at greatly reduced
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a design for a
building which will utilize as many of the common features made available by
this masonry system which the average user (homeowner, building owner, business,
government agency, etc.) is expected to want to use. This building will be
designed as a planetarium for Alfred University's Stull Observatory, and will
include a twenty-four foot diameter planetarium room, as a domed hemisphere,
made as a third frequency truncated icosahedron. This building will also include
a separate meeting room and a separate office. This building will include Gothic
windows, arched roofs, and flying buttresses which will create an outdoor porch
which rings the outside of this building. This building will be designed with a
Professional Engineer and a Registered Design Professional (architect) to show
all the equations, stress analyses, free body diagrams, etc., which were used to
arrive at the final design. Once completed, this building will serve as a test
or sample building used to obtain an Evaluation Report by the International Code
Council - Evaluation Services (ICC-ES). A positive Evaluation Report from ICC-ES
will allow this technology to be sold globally in accordance with the
International Building Code (IBC).