* 1660816
* Development of Symbolic Number Processing Brain Networks from Kindergarten to 2nd Grade
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Gavin Price, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,345,085.00

Math skills are a strong predictor of life success, yet many people struggle to
acquire basic numerical and mathematical skills. Being able to fluently process
symbolic numbers (i.e. Arabic digits) is a key foundation for the development of
basic math skills. However, very little is known about the brain systems which
support the processing numerical symbols, how those systems develop in the early
school years, and how they are related to math skill development. Understanding
the development of these systems will help in achieving new insights into
typical and atypical math development. This project, led by a team of
researchers at Vanderbilt University, will provide the first multimodal,
cohesive characterization of the trajectories and interrelations of the
component mechanisms within the symbolic number processing brain network, and
crucially, their relation to growth in math skills, during a window of time
crucial for successful math development. In so doing, this project will provide
significant new knowledge regarding typical development of symbolic number
processing mechanisms and their relation to math that is crucial if we are to
understand the sources of math learning disabilities. Thus, the results of the
proposed project will lay the foundation for future research investigating the
causal mechanisms underlying math learning disabilities such as dyscalculia, by
providing both an experimental and theoretical framework for empirical testing.
Furthermore, this project will yield new insights into the developmental
relations between symbolic and nonsymbolic number processing mechanisms, and the
relation between brain structure and function. The results of this project will
provide empirical evidence to support the development of more effective
pedagogies and intervention approaches for math education. Such knowledge is
crucial if we are to better understand math disabilities and better facilitate
the acquisition of math skills. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research
literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
provide a multimodal characterization of the neural networks involved in the
processing of symbolic numbers using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), as well as structural metrics of grey and white matter. No prior study
has assessed the longitudinal development of children's number processing neural
networks. The proposed connective network for symbolic number processing
(intraparietal sulci, left angular gyrus, supramarginal gyri, ventral occipito-
temporal cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus) is well-motivated from the
literature on adult symbolic number processing. The project will examine the
development of those networks from kindergarten through 2nd grade, and will
examine the extent to which they predict math skill development. Investigators
will study 120 children longitudinally from kindergarten to 2nd grade. In each
year participants will complete a battery of symbolic and nonsymbolic number
processing tasks in the fMRI scanner, in addition to a battery of behavioral
tests measuring math skills and general cognitive abilities. Measures of brain
structure will also be collected in each year.