* 1660540
* Integration of Teaching Co-ops in a Master's of Education Program for STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* M Barbara Silver-Thorn, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,199,886.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team from
the Colleges of Arts &amp; Sciences, Education, and Engineering at Marquette
University, partnering with Brown Deer School District and West Allis-West
Milwaukee School District, as well as with a number of schools, will recruit and
prepare science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors as post-
baccalaureate Noyce Scholars for careers in teaching secondary mathematics or
science. The project will build on a prior Noyce project (DUE award 0934442)
that was focused on undergraduate Noyce Scholars and that successfully
integrated teaching cooperative education experiences (intensive field
experiences) with education pedagogy and STEM content knowledge. By the end of
the five-year project, 28 Noyce Teachers will have begun their teaching careers
in high-need local education agencies in the greater Milwaukee
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods for building a
community of graduate students, K-12 school teachers and administrators, and
university faculty focused on STEM education across the traditional boundaries
of departments, colleges, schools, and school districts. Use of the co-op model
will provide the Noyce Scholars with extensive hands-on, career related work
experience and the opportunity to develop professionally as well as
academically. The goals of the project will include: (1) build on knowledge
gained through the prior successful undergraduate Noyce program to develop a
STEM teacher preparation providing a graduate level program for individuals with
a B.S. in a STEM discipline; (2) provide an exceptional STEM master's level
teaching licensure program specifically targeted to address the challenges of
high-need schools; and (3) mentor and retain these highly qualified STEM
teachers through various networking, support, and professional development
activities