* 1660840
* Mapping Non-Response to Math Interventions
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Benjamin Clarke, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2018
* USD 692,302.00

Students who perform poorly in mathematics early in school are at risk for
continuing to struggle in mathematics throughout elementary school and beyond.
Recent empirical studies of targeted interventions for students at-risk in
mathematics indicate overall effectiveness at positively impacting student
outcomes. However, a subset of students fail to exhibit a positive response to
generally efficacious intervention programs. To date limited research has
investigated the behavioral, cognitive, and neural mechanisms underlying non-
response to such mathematics interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to identify patterns of performance on critical mathematics
constructs, their underlying neural signatures, and achievement outcomes for on-
track learners, at-risk controls, responders, and non-responders within the
context of a random control trial of a research validated first grade math
intervention. Functional magnetic resonance imaging will be utilized to explore
patterns of imaging-based measures in concert with behavioral measures to
facilitate an in depth exploration of critical early math processes and the
behavioral and neural indicators thereof. Findings from the work will be
utilized to generate hypotheses on critical math constructs as potential targets
for supplemental intervention components to improve intervention outcomes for
non-responders. Coupling neuroimaging and intervention research in an early
mathematics context represents a unique contribution to the field, as it has not
previously been attempted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.