* 1660620
* A Community Building Approach to Preparing Secondary Science and Math Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Christine Blaine, Carthage College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,197,872.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Carthage Noyce Scholarship program will recruit
undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics and prepare
them to become grades 6-12 science and math teachers. This Track 1 Noyce project
will fund 26 scholarship recipients over 5 years. In this project, Carthage
College in Kenosha, WI will collaborate with high-need middle and high schools
in southeast Wisconsin. Scholars will be recruited into the teaching licensure
program with early teaching opportunities through a STEM teaching immersion in
the January term and through subsequent seminar classes. Scholarship recipients
will conduct authentic STEM research alongside faculty in Carthage's well-
established Summer Undergraduate Research Experience. This 10-week summer
program will also provide an opportunity for scholars to work alongside in-
service science and math teachers, who will be invited to participate in an
affiliated 4-week research experience. The project will provide mentorship
opportunities for scholars before teaching licensure and during their early
years of teaching through a community of STEM teaching practice. Community
building activities will include regular task-oriented meetings and summer
retreats involving integrated STEM curriculum creation alongside effective and
experienced in-service teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A coalition of
STEM and education faculty at Carthage College will implement a distinctive math
and science teacher recruitment and preparation program in partnership with
secondary schools in Wisconsin. The Carthage Noyce Scholarship program will
prioritize early recruitment through immersive, well-supported teaching
experiences and will tailor subsequent preparation for successful secondary-
level teaching in urban settings through specific coursework as well as targeted
clinical experiences in high-need schools. Exposure to authentic scientific and
mathematical research will improve the depth of teacher preparation and provide
valuable experience with the interdisciplinary nature of professional-level
science and math to pre-service and in-service teachers . The project will also
establish a community of STEM teaching practice wherein networking events,
formal mentorship arrangements, and summer retreats develop scholars'
professional identity and self-efficacy as teachers. Community of STEM teaching
practice events will culminate each year in a summer retreat where scholars and
in-service teachers are challenged to collaboratively design interdisciplinary
curricula aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards. Integrated STEM
lessons produced by curriculum design retreats will be made widely available as
an outcome of the program to enhance curriculum in other high-need STEM
classrooms.