* 1660459
* Long Term Human Impact On A Tropical Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Michael Heckenberger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 187,240.00

Dr. Michael Heckenberger (University of Florida) and Brazilian colleagues will
conduct research to study the scale and organization of terminal pre-Columbian
complex societies in the Upper Xingu region of the southern Amazon. The research
builds on prior NSF-supported archaeology, which provided clear evidence of
large, densely settled pre-Columbian populations and regional organization in
two integrated clusters of walled towns and non-walled villages, ca. 1250-1650
CE, within a 1,200 km² study area. This project will provide important new data
on the techno-economic systems and the resource base of production systems
associated with the large, sedentary pre-Columbian populations, including forest
and wetland management systems. These systems not only altered forest conditions
but may have helped maintain or even expand forest in this mosaic area of
transitional tropical forest. It is suggested that semi-intensive land use
practices in production landscapes associated with primary food and industrial
crops were concentrated in cluster core areas and high working forests dominated
in peripheral areas. Rather than predominantly slash and burn agricultural
practices or open field farming that denude forest, it is suggested that pre-
Columbian groups of the region practiced hybrid systems that involved forest to
forest conversion across the region, which helped maintain and expand forest
species across the region, even during the period ca. 1250-1650 CE when
settlements reached their maximum size and integration in clusters. The research
informs debates on pre-Columbian population levels and human impacts in the
Amazon, notably the maximal degree of anthropogenic influence on pre-industrial
Amazonian forest ecosystems in the southern Amazon transitional forests and
dynamics of coupled human-environmental systems in relation to climate change,
sustainability and cultural heritage. It articulates with scientific and public
interests in sustainability, including multi-scalar and multi-cultural
collaborations in large projects and public anthropology developed through
participation, partnership and education in Brazil and the
USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Heckenberger and his team will examine putative
off-site production areas situated between major terminal pre-Columbian towns
and villages and compare these settings to settlement areas and putative areas
of non-production standing forest areas, in terms of soils and forest cover. The
team includes archaeology, paleoecology and ethno-ecologists and continues a
successful participatory research program that involves international
collaboration and engagement with local indigenous communities. Four months of
fieldwork, including training and collaboration workshops, will focus on off-
site soil sampling in 45 discrete areas, as well as general ethnoecological
characterization of forest vegetation in each area. Additionally, wetland
testing is proposed to collect well controlled samples of pollen, micro-
charcoal, and other remains, to provide a picture of local vegetation in areas
of large settlements and broader regional patterns.