* 1660689
* Using a Culturally Responsive Teaching Framework to Prepare Middle and High School Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* David Pugalee, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,983.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the University of North Carolina at Charlotte's Culturally
Responsive Teaching (UNCC CResT) project will recruit undergraduate majors in
mathematics and prepare them to become middle and high school mathematics
teachers. The project will fund 24 scholarships over 5 years. In this project,
UNC Charlotte will collaborate with Charlotte-Mecklenburg School District to
develop and prepare scholars with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions
necessary to engage culturally and linguistically diverse students in
mathematics classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Culturally Responsive Teaching
(CRT) framework will guide the development of the Noyce scholars by building on
the knowledge and experiences of culturally and linguistically diverse (CLD)
students. This framework views the culture and experiences of diverse students
as resources, rather than deficits that can be used to build higher interest in
content. The CRT framework will better prepare the Noyce scholars to work with
CLD students who form the majority of students in high-needs school in the
Charlotte area and many urban and rural districts across North Carolina. In
addition to completing content and pedagogy courses, the scholars will (i) learn
about CLD students through professional interactions and reflecting on these
experiences, (ii) develop and advance their understandings of CRT practices
through seminars about CRT and teaching CLD students, and (iii) draw on personal
experiences to develop and teach mathematics lessons that build on the cultural
and lived experiences of CLD students.