* 1660185
* Developing a Network of n-Alkane Hydrogen Isotope Records to Identify Drivers and Impacts of Holocene Droughts
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2023
* USD 398,945.00

This project will address patterns and drivers of past droughts and their
effects on humans and the biosphere. The researchers will analyze lake-sediment
cores to develop records of precipitation variability associated with past
shifts in major drivers of atmospheric circulation that influenced the broader
circum-Caribbean region, including the U.S. Gulf Coast. The precipitation
records will be compared to evidence of past human activity and biomass burning
in lake watersheds, to explore local consequences of regional shifts in
atmospheric drivers. The work will form the foundation for an expanded network
of precipitation reconstructions across the region that will allow examination
of processes at a larger spatial scale and of additional drivers. The project
will provide experience in multi-laboratory collaborative research to four
faculty and ten or more graduate and undergraduate students. Results from
project activities will be broadly disseminated in publications and
presentations. The researchers will share scientific knowledge of past
environmental change with K-12 students and teachers in Tennessee and North
Carolina through outreach projects that will include hands-on activities and
authentic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop
precipitation records using compound-specific hydrogen isotope analyses of
n-alkanes in lipids in sediment cores from five lakes along two transects that
cross climate and ecosystem regions. Hydrogen isotope analysis of lipids in
sediment cores is an alternative to oxygen isotope analysis of biogenic
carbonates that can be applied in a wide variety of lakes, making possible the
development of a network of sites using the same precipitation proxy. The
hydrogen isotope records will be produced from existing cores from lakes in
Costa Rica, and will serve as the western anchor in a larger network of
precipitation records that the researchers plan to develop through the broader
circum-Caribbean region, including the U.S. Gulf Coastal Plain. The hydrogen
isotope analyses will document the geography of multi-decadal drought during the
Terminal Classic Drought (~1200-850 cal yr BP), the Little Ice Age (~500-100 cal
yr BP), and at other times, and reveal whether these were exceptional or outlier
droughts for the Holocene as a whole. Comparison with local paleoenvironmental
and archaeological evidence will show how past droughts affected vegetation,
fire regimes, and prehistoric agriculture.