* 1660481
* Co-Production of Environmental Conservation and Social Equity: Is Conditionality in Payments for Ecosystem Services a Necessity or an Impediment?
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2022
* Laura Zanotti, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 399,778.00

Modern conservation approaches have proved largely ineffective to redress
ecosystem degradation, and there is growing interest in market-based
conservation methods, such as payment-for-ecosystem-services (PES), as a
promising alternative. At the core of PES is the assumption that payments made
to natural resource managers to produce environmental benefits must be
conditional on observable actions or measurable outcomes, which implies that
natural resource managers need to be coerced to conserve the environment.
However, previous research has suggested that strictly enforced conditionality
in PES is not necessary for producing desired outcomes, and it often increases
inequities within communities. This project will investigate whether
conditionality is necessary to achieve conservation objectives and the extent to
which enforcement of conditionality leads to undesirable environmental, social,
and economic effects. The project will contribute to theoretical understandings
of how market-based approaches affect conservation outcomes and transform human-
environment relations. This knowledge will provide a framework for understanding
the paths by which market-based approaches produce intended and unintended
outcomes. Knowledge generated from this project may contribute to broadening PES
program participation. Results are likely to assist conservation organizations,
policy makers, and society improve the design of conservation programs. Finally,
the project will advance graduate student research and training and
undergraduate teaching. De-identified data from the project will be made
available to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine
the role of conditionality in PES in shaping human-environment relations, and
the extent to which conditionality can be relaxed or removed to produce
environmental benefits without increasing inequities. The investigators will use
a political ecological framework that recognizes the social, cultural, political
economic, and institutional contexts of conservation to analyze PES programs and
their defining feature: conditionality. Specifically, the investigators ask
three questions: (1) What are the effects of conditionality in PES on
conservation? (2) What are the effects of conditionality in PES on inequalities
within households and communities? (3) What are the mechanisms through which
conditional and unconditional payments produce intended and unintended outcomes?
The investigators will answer these questions using a mixed-methods approach
that integrates a randomized controlled trial with qualitative enquiries to
assess conditional versus unconditional PES in rural Bolivian communities.
Results from this project will be disseminated through a PES forum, and made
available to public and private entities that fund or manage PES programs
worldwide.