* 1660309
* Early Career:  Acquisition of a Particle Size Analyzer for Interdisciplinary  Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* James Kaste, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 80,135.00

This project will enable the College of William and Mary to obtain a laser
diffraction particle size analyzer to support faculty research and undergraduate
education at several institutions. The instrument's capacity for rapid analysis
of the size and distribution of particles makes it broadly applicable for
characterization of sediments to address geologic questions in terrestrial,
marine, and lacustrine settings. The instrument will be used in projects that
study Arctic climate change, interactions of early humans and landscapes,
agricultural runoff in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, and coastal processes.
Because the instrument is robust and user friendly, it will be used to support
undergraduate research training, augment undergraduate courses and laboratory
exercises, and will also provide educational outreach opportunities to faculty
and students at Thomas Nelson Community College, a local two-year community
college.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The laser diffraction particle size analyzer will
contribute to a variety of research projects at the College of William and Mary
and the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences by providing rapid analysis of the
size and distribution of sediment to differentiate geologic units and evaluate
present and past conditions in a variety of depositional settings. A major study
is to generate high-resolution reconstructions of past climate changes in the
Pleistocene and Holocene at sites in Greenland, Norway, Svalbard, and the Faroe
Islands from lake sediment cores. A second project is assessing agricultural
runoff in the Chesapeake Bay watershed and the effectiveness of control measures
to reduce sediment and nutrient transport. A third project is examining
pollution sources in watersheds and sedimentary environments by coupling
detailed grain size data with measurements of metal content and short-lived
radionuclides. More broadly the instrument will support research at the Virginia
Institute of Marine Sciences on coastal and estuarine physics, coastal
morphologic evolution, salt marsh development and response to environmental
change, and sedimentation in continental margin environments.