* 1660578
* Madigadao Aru Maagigishki (Study of our STEM Family): Transformative Capacity Building Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Kerry Hartman, NUETA HIDATSA SAHNISH COLLEGE
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,900,107.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. The Madigadao Aru
Maagigishki: Transformative Capacity Building Project aligns with this goal
through its focus on enhancing and updating the environmental science (ES) and
computer science (CS) degree programs at Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College (NHSC),
using a variety of evidence-based strategies to recruit, retain and graduate
students with these degrees. The project has the potential to increase the
representation of Native people earning STEM college degrees and pursuing
challenging STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Madigadao Aru Maagigishki
project's goal is to enrich and expand STEM instruction as a means to increase
NHSC students' completion of STEM degrees and entry into STEM professions.
Focusing on the disciplines of ES and CS, the project will enhance these degree
programs by developing student learning communities, providing faculty-mentored
summer research internships for students, incorporating significant cultural
content and contexts into the curriculum, and engaging the college and larger
tribal community in research symposia. Curriculum improvements will include
employing evidence-based pedagogies such as problem-based learning in the study
of STEM issues relevant to the tribal community. Local tribal elders will work
closely with faculty members in revising their courses to include cultural
content. Work on the college's CS program will emphasize updating the curriculum
to meet the current demands of the field.