* 1660506
* Inclusive STEM Teaching Preparation at an Urban Commuter University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Hsiu-Ping Liu, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,449,970.00

Recruiting and retaining mathematics and science educators responsive to the
needs of underrepresented communities is critical for the STEM pipeline. This
project funded by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program will prepare 35
mathematics and science majors with experiences, skills, and knowledge to become
highly effective inquiry-based teachers committed to working in high-need urban
schools. In addition to being one of the largest teacher preparation providers
in the state, Metropolitan State University of Denver (MSU Denver) serves the
highest percentage of minority students in Colorado and demonstrates a strong
commitment to inclusive equity. Many students at MSU Denver are first generation
college students who often take multiple pathways into and through their
university studies, including from partner and a neighbor institution, the
Community College of Denver. Grant funding will be used as a tool for
recruitment and retention of qualified junior and senior STEM majors to become
secondary teachers through scholarships, guidance, and a community of support.
This Noyce project, the Inclusive STEM Teaching Preparation at an Urban Commuter
University (U-STEM) effort, which builds upon work done through a Noyce Capacity
Building project, will strengthen the university's science and mathematics
licensure programs, and create opportunities for integrated STEM teaching and
learning aligned with the needs of its K-12 and community partners. Particular
emphasis will be placed on recruiting underrepresented students into STEM majors
and the teaching pipeline. MSU Denver currently partners with more than 20
metropolitan area school districts; this grant will be used to expand and
enhance these relationships to positively impact schools and districts
throughout the extended Denver metro area. The project aims to recruit and fund
at least 35 U-STEM Scholars through graduation and hiring, improve
collaborations with high-need school districts in meeting STEM teacher needs,
and establish an innovative induction program for U-STEM Teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals and objectives for the proposed U-STEM program
include increasing the number of students recruited into and graduating from
STEM licensure programs; increasing the diversity of students recruited into and
graduating from STEM licensure programs; preparing Noyce Teachers to work in
high-need districts; assisting districts with professional development for STEM
equity; establishing an innovative induction program for Noyce Teachers serving
in high-need districts; improving mentoring of in-service teachers; and creating
opportunities for Noyce Teachers to further their learning through professional
learning communities. U-STEM will produce at least 35 new secondary teachers
with baccalaureate STEM degrees in biology, chemistry, environmental science,
mathematics, or physics. Research questions align with program goals and
objectives, with a focus on illuminating promising practices for supporting STEM
undergraduates at an urban commuter university as they take a variety of
pathways to become teachers in high-need schools. A mixed method research design
will yield findings of interest for educational institutions in urban contexts,
researchers aiming to diversify the teaching population, and STEM programs
striving to better serve underrepresented students.