* 1660355
* Maintaining Indigenous Languages within Immigrant Oaxacan Communities in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Mary Bucholtz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 388,098.00

The project supported by this award aims to help a key immigrant community in
California document and preserve its rich linguistic resources. Due to economic,
cultural, and political pressures, languages with small speaker communities are
disappearing rapidly throughout the world. Analyzing such languages helps
linguists and linguistic anthropologists to understand the human capacity for
language and to preserve invaluable cultural knowledge. Therefore, linguists
seek to systematically document the structure and use of these highly vulnerable
and valuable languages. Linguists also believe that it is important to
understand how the languages are changing through their contact with politically
dominant languages, a complex linguistic situation that emerges frequently as a
result of immigration. For this project, the researchers will focus on a
previously undocumented dialect of the Mixtec language of Mexico, working
collaboratively with a local Mixtec organization that serves immigrants. The
project will produce a dictionary, a grammar, and a collection of recorded
language examples. The project is innovative in its focus on indigenous
immigration as a context for language change. It will provide a model for other
researchers seeking to gain insight into the workings of language as a
fundamental human activity. Findings will also help develop community resources
to support multilingualism and multiliteracy across
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken by linguists
Dr. Eric W. Campbell and Dr. Mary Buholtz of the University of California in
Santa Barbara. Many immigrants from Mexico speak Mixtec languages, which are
entirely unrelated to Spanish and use tone to distinguish word meaning (as in
Chinese). These speakers face multiple linguistic obstacles both in Mexico and
in the United States. The project will bring together the scientific tools of
language documentation, sociolinguistics, and linguistic anthropology to
understand this complex linguistic situation. The project partner is a community
organization that serves an indigenous immigrant community from Oaxaca, Mexico,
now settled in Oxnard, California. The project has four interrelated goals: (1)
to document the structure of local Mixtec languages by creating a grammatical
description, a dictionary, and a collection of recorded speech; (2) to conduct a
survey of the community status of Spanish, English, Mixtec, and other indigenous
languages; (3) to document and analyze Spanish, English, and indigenous language
and literacy practices through recordings of everyday interaction; and (4) to
develop community multilingualism and multiliteracy resources. Participating
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students will receive
training in anthropological and linguistic methods of data collection and
analysis. The project advances language documentation and Mesoamerican
linguistics by documenting and analyzing previously undescribed Mixtec
languages. It also contributes to research on language contact. Moreover, the
project advances linguistic anthropology and sociolinguistics by investigating
speakers' attitudes and practices regarding the maintenance or loss of home
languages. Finally, the project helps open up a new field of linguistic study of
a growing national and global phenomenon, the resettlement of indigenous
language communities through immigration.