* 1660448
* Characterization of Hydrodynamics and Behavior of Viscoelasticity at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ryan Tung, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2021
* USD 332,204.00

The ability to measure physical properties of materials at very small scales is
key to advancing scientific research and technological progress. Measurements
that occur at the nanoscale, where the physical dimensions involved are on the
order of one billionth of a meter, are of particular importance. The atomic
force microscope (AFM) is one of the primary tools for making quantitative
measurements of material properties at the nanoscale. However, there exist many
physical phenomena at the nanoscale that prevent accurate quantitative
measurements from being made, especially in liquid environments. This project
aims to understand and fully characterize two such phenomena: fluid forces that
arise at the nanoscale when the AFM is operated in liquid environments
(hydrodynamics) and the underlying principles that govern the behavior of the
material being interrogated (viscoelasticity). This project will enable
quantitative measurements of material properties at the nanoscale in liquid
environments on a variety of inorganic and biological materials. This will
enable new and cutting-edge research in areas such as medicine, biology, and
materials engineering. In addition, the project's educational plan will develop
a hands-on, interactive, and portable learning platform that will expose K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students to AFM and the scientific principles used
in its operation. The educational plan will engender further interest and
retention in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of
this project is to understand the effect that complex sample viscoelasticity and
hydrodynamic forces at the nanoscale have on the resonant behavior of
measurement systems by developing mathematical and numerical models that capture
and quantify these phenomena. These effects can be addressed through the lens of
contact resonance (CR) spectroscopy AFM. The CR spectroscopy system is an ideal
measurement platform to understand these phenomena because it is well understood
in the absence of these effects and has the ability to interrogate both the
hydrodynamic and viscoelastic parameter spaces of interest. The focus of this
project is on accurately predicting the three-dimensional fluid-structure
interactions present in CR spectroscopy systems, establishing material models
for CR spectroscopy to account for biological and non-classical viscoelastic
materials, and experimentally validating the fluid-structure interaction and
viscoelastic models. The success of the project will enable accurate contact
resonance based quantitative nanomechanical characterization of biological
materials in liquid environments, which in turn will facilitate research in
several key areas such as study of biomaterials and bio-polymers with
applications to the medical community, study of nanomechanical structural
changes in osteoarthritic bones, and study of dentin and tooth enamel.