* 1660246
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-Stick / Easy-Clean Coatings for High Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Atieh Haghdoost, Maxterial, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,245,012.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
novel heat-resistant easy-clean coating that can effectively be applied to
surfaces of oven cavities and pipes. Ovens and heat-exchangers, as the primary
application domains of this technology, present an estimated annual market size
of $40.9 million and $19.4 billion, respectively. The technology will provide a
safe and environmentally-friendly solution for the unmet market demand for heat-
resistant easy-clean coatings. In addition to its impact on the aforesaid
market, the proposed development in Phase II will be an implementation of a new
generation of non-stick coatings that can provide answers to a broad range of
existing technological challenges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The development project
is based on patent-pending technology for scalable and affordable manufacturing
of textured coatings using existing electroplating facilities in the industry.
The proposed technology will create a new generation of coatings that provide
non-stick functionality where the existing nonstick coatings fall short. The
existing non-stick coatings decompose at high temperatures and may produce toxic
fumes. The challenge for the existing non-stick coatings is even greater when
application is needed for hard-to-reach areas, such as inside of oven chambers
and pipes. The anticipated outcome of the Phase II proposal is an inorganics-
based and PTFE-free non-stick coating that can provide more thermal-resistance
than existing non-stick coatings and can be applied to different surfaces
through a scalable and affordable route.