* 1660692
* Exploring the Capacity to Improve Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Melissa Rhoten, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 05/31/2018
* USD 121,186.00

With capacity-building funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program, a team at Longwood University (LU), partnering with Danville Community
College, John Tyler Community College, and Southside Virginia Community College
(members of the Virginia Community College System, VCCS), will develop plans to
prepare STEM teachers in Southside Virginia by strengthening LU's secondary STEM
teacher pipeline. The two goals of this project are to (1) improve the capacity
to recruit Virginia Community College System (VCCS) STEM students who will
transfer to Longwood in pursuit of careers in STEM teaching; and (2) develop
strategies for recruiting, preparing, and supporting STEM majors in Longwood's
secondary mathematics and science teacher preparation programs. This project
will address the acute shortage of secondary STEM teachers in this region,
helping to catalyze regional advancement in the Southside
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To strengthen collaboration with community
colleges, this capacity-building project will (1) establish new relationships
with faculty at the partnering community colleges, (2) improve advising and the
availability of information for students considering transfer into LU's STEM
education programs, and (3) implement and assess a pilot recruitment event for
VCCS. This project will also identify at least two school districts surrounding
each of the three VCCS partners that are interested in participating in a
secondary STEM education mentoring program. Additional intellectual merit rests
in plans to investigate factors impacting STEM student decisions regarding an
education concentration and to promote the secondary STEM education programs to
incoming students with strong mathematics and science backgrounds who are not
initially STEM majors, but would become STEM majors prior to receiving Noyce
scholarship support in a potential future Track 1 project that might emanate
from this Capacity Building project. Furthermore, the project will investigate
learning communities and other supports for pre-service STEM teachers. Extensive
data collection and analysis activities will support the relationships between
Longwood and partnering community colleges and by shedding light on factors
related to recruitment.