* 1660794
* Redefining STEM Teacher Preparation by Teaching, Learning ,and Leading with Schools and Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Peter Tingley, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,198,968.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, the Loyola
University of Chicago (LUC) School of Education, College of Arts &amp; Sciences,
Center for Science and Math Education will partner with Chicago Public Schools
(CPS) to recruit and prepare mathematics and science majors for careers in
teaching secondary mathematics or science. Specifically, this project will
recruit two to four undergraduate and up to three graduate LUC-Noyce Scholars
per year, with each Scholar receiving one to two years of support, for a total
of at least 24 new teachers prepared. The project will leverage and expand
substantial existing school, community, and informal education partnerships in
order to prepare teachers to support students' learning, development, and
achievement within the complex realities of urban schools and communities.
Further, by studying the implemented teacher preparation model, the project will
advance knowledge about preparing STEM teachers in close collaboration with
urban schools and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LUC-Noyce Scholars will
be prepared through a program built on four key research-based cornerstones: (1)
mutually-beneficial partnerships with schools and communities, (2) teacher
preparation for diverse classrooms, (3) authentic teaching practices, and (4)
participation in professional learning communities. The project will embed
teacher education in Chicago schools and communities from the start to provide
candidates with extensive opportunities to work alongside experts in high-need,
high-performing educational settings, with an emphasis on fostering reflective
teaching, learning and leadership skills. As part of the preparation to work
with culturally and linguistically diverse students, all LUC-Noyce scholars will
fulfill requirements for the Illinois State Board of Education's English as a
second language (ESL) endorsement as well as the International Baccalaureate
(IB) certification. LUC is the first undergraduate institution in the U.S.
approved to prepare pre-service teachers in all three IB programmes: the Primary
Years Programme (Grades K-5), the Middle Years Programme (Grades 5-10), and the
Diploma Programme (Grades 11-12). Thus, this project will fill an important need
to develop mathematics and science teachers who have the background, experience,
and certification necessary to fill positions in the CPS high schools where all
ninth and tenth grade students are enrolled in IB programs.