* 1660502
* RAPID Flood Extent/Depth Data Identification, Acquisition, Cataloguing, and Processing
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Scott Hagen, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2018
* USD 73,678.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description explaining the
broader significance of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extreme rainfall
event in Louisiana in August 2016 caught many people by surprise. Flood maps and
emergency preparations were designed for overflow from the Mississippi River and
tributaries, but the extent and rapidity of direct precipitation caused
unanticipated behaviors in the local stream watersheds. This RAPID project will
examine the extent and the timing of the flooding in order to develop an
effective model of the regional response to the rainfall. These data then will
be incorporated into existing models of coastal flooding caused by storm surges
to develop scenarios for different types of impacts on the region. This research
will help in future planning and emergency management for various weather-
related impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will generate three key
products: 1) A time-independent representation of the furthest extents and
maximum depths of flooding; 2) Time-dependent representations of the extent and
depth of flooding; and, 3) Documentation of the methodology to directly and
quickly incorporate the data into a hurricane storm surge model. The field
effort will collect ephemeral data to validate flood extents and depths derived
from remote sensing technologies. Science will be advanced in three key areas:
1) remote sensing algorithms for near real-time flood detection; 2) numerical
implementation of coupled hydrologic and hurricane storm-surge models; and 3)
the geophysics of flow for hydrologic and surge interactions over a large
region.