* 1660235
* SBIR Phase II:  Quasi-Active Prosthetic Ankle System:  Dynamic Angle and Stiffness Optimizations for Multiple Gait Activities
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Jeffrey Ward, SpringActive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2020
* USD 899,945.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the proposed
system will enhance the ability of the 1.3 million people currently living in
the United States with a lower limb amputation to walk in unconstrained
environments. The proposed Quasi-Active Prosthetic Ankle System (QPAS) addresses
the RH6: Human Assistive Technologies area. QPAS will be lightweight, have a
long battery life, and optimize the passive dynamics of amputee gait in
unconstrained environments by using battery energy to tune its physical system
properties, ankle equilibrium angle and torsional stiffness. The device provides
a unique set of features that do not currently exist in the market,
strengthening its value proposition. The amputee population is growing; 2,000
new lower limb amputation are performed each week. Therefore, QPAS will have
strong market potential and the significant societal impact of improving health
by supporting a more active lifestyle for lower limb amputees. This will also
lead to more community and family involvement. Additionally, because of the many
possibilities to control QPAS, gait researchers will be able to study amputee
compensation preferences. A better understanding of the kinematic and kinetic
preferences could lead to improvements in the design of purely passive ankle
prostheses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project addresses the needs of lower limb amputees. Lower limb amputees
suffer from reduced self-selected walking speed, increased metabolic cost,
increased reaction loads on the sound limb, poor gait symmetry, and reduced
stability with increased risk of falling. Passive prosthetic feet are only tuned
for level ground walking at one speed. QPAS will utilize a patented compliant
actuator to achieve a unique set of features: passive energy storage with an
articulating ankle joint, adaptable ankle angle for slope gait, low electrical
energy usage, a large range of ankle motion, adaptable stiffness to optimize
variable cadence level ground and slope gait, and controlled energy delivery to
ensure energy builds naturally and smoothly. In this phase 2 SBIR, an intuitive
and autonomous controller will be built for the QPAS and human subject
evaluations will assist in refining the device towards commercialization. QPAS
will become a successful product by focusing on improved amputee gait
performance in unconstrained environments, and being simple to fit and adjust,
reliable and affordable.