* 1660683
* Making Noyce in New Hampshire: Building Capacity for a Statewide Master Teachers Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Christopher Bauer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 11/30/2018
* USD 74,978.00

The Making Noyce in New Hampshire: Building Capacity for a Statewide Master
Teachers Program is a Capacity Building project in preparation for a Track 3
Master Teaching Fellowships proposal in the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program. The project has a goal of bringing together key stakeholders from
across the state to develop a future Noyce Master Teaching Fellowships project
in New Hampshire (NH). This project comes at a critical time for New Hampshire
because of science education's shift toward Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS), the development of new statewide performance assessments, and a changing
student demographic. In order to have a competitive STEM workforce in the
future, teachers will need strong STEM pedagogy and a curriculum that improves
the educational opportunities and achievements for all students, including the
underachieving student populations of the socioeconomically disadvantaged,
English language learners, and racial/ethnic minorities. The project team will
bring together key stakeholders in NH to develop a proposal for high-need school
districts to provide opportunities for teachers to become Master Teachers in
their districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary partners of this Noyce
Capacity Building project will include the NH State Department of Education; two
key school districts: Rochester and Nashua, NH; two professional societies: the
NH Science Teachers Association and the NH State Math Teachers Association; and
the University of New Hampshire, including STEM education researchers and
teacher professional development expertise from the university. Given the size
and autonomy of NH, implementing a statewide program for Master Teachers will
require a significant partnership building and needs assessment. During the
capacity building period, the project will bring together these key stakeholders
to conduct a needs assessment and develop a statewide program proposal. The
Making Noyce in New Hampshire project will have the following primary goals: 1)
establishing strong within-district STEM pedagogy expertise, 2) developing and
sustaining enhanced science and mathematics learning for students, and 3)
developing and delivering STEM instruction and curricula that improve the
educational opportunities and achievements of underachieving student
populations. The project's long term goal includes advancing the capacity of
STEM teachers to become teacher leaders in high-need school districts. This
project recognizes that identifying and placing Master Teachers will not be
successful without the creation of a network that understands the needs of
individual districts and teacher candidates. As such, this capacity building
project will allow us to work towards a successful model for Master Teachers in
NH, one that will work in school districts across the state and could be used as
a model for other states that are challenged with changing standards and student
demographics.