* 1660450
* Relationships Between Removal of Infrastructure Subsidies and Coastal Development:  The Impact of the U.S. Coastal Barrier Resources Act
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* David Salvesen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2021
* USD 348,507.00

This research project will determine whether the withdrawal of federal
infrastructure subsidies is an effective way to discourage urban development in
environmentally fragile or risk-prone areas. The project will use the 1982 U.S.
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (CBRA) as a kind of "natural experiment" to
examine how and why rates and type of urban development have differed depending
on whether the coastal areas were affected by the act, which eliminated federal
funding for infrastructure in designated coastal areas along the East Coast and
Gulf of Mexico without prohibiting development. The project will enhance general
knowledge about the factors influencing development and redevelopment of coastal
areas by identifying the interrelated and conflicting motivations of different
organizations involved in the urban development process. It will address
theoretical debates about future legal frameworks that could mirror the CBRA to
protect wetlands, floodplains, endangered species habitat, and other areas
experiencing severe future risk from changing environmental conditions. Project
findings will be shared with policy makers and coastal managers through a
professional toolkit that will explain results and suggest best practices for
coastal development and infrastructure decisions. Findings also will be
transformed into educational materials for use in high schools across North
Carolina and the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban development relies on numerous
factors, including federal assistance with infrastructure development, whether
through roads, utilities, or other major investments. Although the CBRA
attempted to reduce incentives for development in areas that were extremely
vulnerable to natural hazards, such as areas subject to hurricanes or storm
surges development still has occurred in these areas. The investigators will
focus on the key tension created by the CBRA, as increased infrastructure costs
may be offset by local permitting and infrastructure funding as well as premiums
placed on seclusion promoted by the act. They will seek to ascertain to what
extent development has occurred in coastal areas where public infrastructure,
disaster relief, and flood insurance subsidies have been withdrawn. They will
examine how these development rates compare to coastal areas with continued
subsidies, and they will identify whether there are economic or population
growth thresholds for which withdrawal of federal funding has no effect on
development rates, and they will assess how local land-use, infrastructure, and
permitting decisions interact with and possibly offset restrictions on federal
subsidies. The investigators will evaluate the rates, types, and intensities of
residential development in units affected by the CBRA and adjoining, non-
affected areas throughout Alabama, Delaware, Florida, North Carolina, and South
Carolina. They will use a quasi-experimental framework based on a matched pair
analysis to understand the impacts of various factors. Focused case studies will
then explore why some units affected by the CBRA have developed and others have
not.