* 1660717
* Integrating Science Content and Engineering Thinking in the Elementary Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Matthew Bell, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,127,305.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Integrating Science Content and Engineering Thinking in
the Elementary Classroom Project will recruit Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics majors and professionals and prepare them to become elementary
teachers. The project will fund 10 stipends per year over five years, resulting
in the preparation of 50 elementary science teachers. In this project, the
University of Massachusetts at Boston will collaborate with two Boston public
elementary schools and the Conservatory Lab School to build on the idea of
engineering design process as a teaching-learning approach that can be used to
promote science learning. Teaching through engineering design has the potential
to facilitate integrated instruction that meets the requirements of the new
science education standards. Design-based learning can help students develop
scientific inquiry and real world problem-solving skills, enhance discipline-
specific content knowledge and critical thinking skills, and promote interest in
science or engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
knowledge and understanding in the area of STEM teacher preparation at the
elementary level by preparing elementary teachers to use engineering practices,
integrated with science content, to teach science to elementary-aged children.
Project outcomes will help determine the effectiveness of recent reforms in K-12
education, particularly those that call for the integration of engineering with
science education, and will integrate the practices of science and engineering
with didactic content. There are very few elementary teacher preparation
programs that focus exclusively on preparing elementary teachers to teach STEM
content. Built into the proposed teacher preparation program are two new
assessments for tracking the ability of teachers to integrate engineering and
science content in the elementary classroom, the Video Case Diagnosis and the
Curriculum Critique and Revision tools. With its focus on STEM at the elementary
level, this unique program will utilize these two tools to determine the
effectiveness of STEM integration for building science content knowledge for
elementary students.