* 1660733
* Examining the Trajectories of Black Mathematics Teachers: Learning from the Past, Drawing on the Present, and Defining Goals for the Future
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Jenice View, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2021
* USD 729,641.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. To that end, this research project
will collect data about the experiences, beliefs, and praxis of Black
mathematics teachers from historical and contemporary perspectives to: (a)
inform recruitment and retention efforts; and (b) contribute to theory building.
This study is highly important since the number of Black mathematics educators
choosing to teach mathematics at the secondary are either choosing not to select
mathematics as a career or leaving the profession due to racial/ethnic biases
and stereotype threats that often question their ability to teach the subject.
To help encourage more Black educators to choose teaching mathematics as a
career, this study will document the oral histories and experiences of Black
mathematics teachers pre- and post-de jure school desegregation as a means of
informing contemporary recruitment and retention procedures and processes. It
will also examine the experiences of practicing Black secondary mathematics
teachers about their beliefs about mathematics content, recruitment, retention,
racialized experiences in education, and perceptions and beliefs about current
pedagogical practices. This information will be used to inform educational
policy and provide implications for recruiting and maintaining a more diverse
mathematics education teaching force. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods
research design will be used to collect data through oral history interviews
with retired Black mathematics teachers and focus group sessions with current
mathematics teachers. A large-scale survey will also be adapted and administered
to capture the experiences of current Black secondary mathematics teachers from
a sociocultural perspective. Through these data sources, this research will
advance knowledge of the historical and sociocultural influences that impede
recruitment and retention of a diverse teaching force by focusing efforts on
understanding these issues in relation to Black mathematics teachers. It will
also inform research methodology in STEM by integrating untapped, yet
appropriate methodologies suitable for challenging issues of recruitment,
retention, and praxis of other underrepresented racial and ethnic groups across
time periods and school contexts. Further, this project will contribute to
theories about the development of mathematics identity and mathematics teaching.
This outcome, in turn, will help broaden participation of underrepresented
teachers and students in STEM while improving mathematics achievement and
performance overall. Through these avenues, findings from this research will
reach a variety of academic and general public audiences through online digital
portal and website that will provide informational and educational tools for the
larger education community.