* 1660972
* Collaborative research: Development of sliding laws for glacier-flow and landscape-evolution models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Neal Iverson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2020
* USD 352,025.00

With this project, mathematical relationships needed to predict the sliding
speeds of glaciers and ice sheets (that is, sliding laws) are developed.
Variability of the forms of existing sliding laws adds major uncertainty to the
results of computer models of glacier flow. These computer models are the
principal tools used to both assess glacier wastage and resultant sea-level rise
over the next century and to study rock erosion by glaciers. This work improves
sliding laws by deriving them from the actual topography of glacier beds and
incorporating the frictional resistance of debris within and underneath
glaciers. Thus, this study has the potential to improve predictions of glacier-
flow models and assessments of their uncertainty.

Field and laboratory measurements are combined with 3D flow modeling, with the
goal of fully bracketing the range of sliding behavior possible. The topography
of glacier beds exposed by receding glaciers in Canada and Switzerland is
measured at high resolution and statistically described. Also, frictional
resistance to slip is measured in laboratory experiments in which ice containing
debris is slid over a rock bed. These two sets of measurements are used in
numerical simulations of glacier sliding that yield relationships among sliding
speed, stresses at the bed, bed topography, debris concentration in ice, and
areal extent of water-saturated sediment dividing ice from rock.