* 1660433
* Promotion of the Selective Hydrogenation of Unsaturated Aldehydes with Pt-Cu Bimetallics: From Surface Science to Nanostructured Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 468,850.00

Heterogeneous catalysis is used in many industrial chemical processes to make
the chemical reactions occur through more selective and efficient chemical
pathways, and the design of the solid material heterogeneous catalysts that help
to effect these chemical transformations is a field of intensive study. Dr.
Francisco Zaera of the University of California-Riverside is investigating the
properties of Cu-Pt alloys to determine the effect of adding copper to very
active but not particularly selective platinum catalysts with the aim of
improving their selectivity to produce desired products while limiting the
creation of unwanted byproducts. Dr. Zaera's goal is to design a catalyst that
can bring about the reaction of carbon-oxygen (C=O) bonds to alcohols, without
affecting other bonds in the molecule. He performs a three-pronged approach to
understand the mechanisms in these reactions; kinetic measurements on model
systems with few, well-defined surface sites that probe the surface-layer
composition and reactivity of the Cu-Pt materials under well-defined, low-
pressure conditions; reactions performed on model catalysts and reactions under
actual catalytic conditions and; studies with well-defined, supported catalysts
that most closely resemble industrial catalysts in their structure and
complexity. Broader impacts of this work result from an enhanced fundamental
understanding of the molecule-level chemistry of mixed-metal surfaces. The
knowledge deriving from this work has broader impact in education as well, by
providing data to illustrate basic principles in kinetics and catalysis for
undergraduate and graduate classes. The PI is also active in promoting
collaborations with Latin American research groups and recruits students from
groups underrepresented in STEM fields, Hispanics in particular, to participate
in research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Francisco Zaera of the
University of California-Riverside is supported by the Chemical Catalysis
Program to investigate the catalytic properties of Cu-Pt alloys in the selective
hydrogenation of C=O bonds. One of the major challenges in catalysis is to
achieve high selectivity toward the desired products. It has been shown that
selectivity may be controlled by mixing two or more metals, an approach that is
used in many industrial applications but not fully understood. The focus of this
proposal is to help resolve some pending issues associated with bimetallic
catalysis, including the determination of the contributions of electronic versus
geometrical effects and the identification of the most active surface in terms
of the degree of metal intermixing and the oxidation states of the constituent
elements. Dr. Zaera combines fundamental surface-science studies on the
mechanistic details of the reactions with the design and evaluation of realistic
catalysts. . Three types of interconnected experiments are involved : (1)
kinetic measurements on model systems using high-flux molecular beams to emulate
close-to-atmospheric pressures locally at specific surfaces while maintaining
the ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) environment necessary for their controlled
preparation and characterization; (2) research of model systems in operando mode
by combining kinetic measurements with mass spectrometry detection and
characterization of the surface intermediates using infrared absorption
spectroscopy; and (3) kinetic measurements with well-defined supported catalysts
made by using colloidal and other nanotechnologies. Broader impacts of the
research result for an improved understanding of catalytic selectivity, which
translates into more efficient hydrogenation catalysts particularly important to
the industrial production of fine chemicals. Broader impacts are also made in
curriculum development by providing data to illustrate basic principles in
kinetics, catalysis, and nanoparticle synthesis for undergraduate and graduate
classes. The PI is also active in forging collaborations with Latin American
research groups, and in the recruitment of students from groups underrepresented
in STEM research fields, with a particular focus on Hispanics.