* 1660447
* Coastal Erosion Vulnerabilities, Monsoon Dynamics, and Human Adaptive Response
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Bimal Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2022
* USD 405,868.00

This project will investigate how coastal erosion in low elevation environments
is linked to seasonal precipitation patterns, how humans perceive their
vulnerability to erosion risk, and how humans secure livelihoods in the face of
erosion. Rural populations in coastal zones are dependent on land resources to
support agriculture and on marine resources to support fishery-based activities.
Coastal erosion has potential to threaten economic and geopolitical stabilities
due to the permanent nature of lost land resources that deprives population of
land-based resources and access to marine resources. Variation in the location
and timing of erosion events produces uncertainty for populations who must
negotiate erosion threats without the benefit of consistent science-informed
information regarding risk and vulnerability. This project contributes to a
better understanding of the intersection of coastal environmental change,
lowland coastal populations, atmospheric science, and economic development.
Results will inform coastal processes, as well as human vulnerability and
resilience, and will also make methodological advances in quantitative
geospatial analysis. Students will be trained in STEM science and project
elements will be used to enhance modules of existing courses at two
universities. Project results will be disseminated in journals and other
outlets, presented to government agencies and NGOs, and shared with local
stakeholders. The project will become registered with the Resilience Connections
Network, an international virtual space for the interaction between global and
local leaders on resilience science and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study site for this project is the delta of a large river that is the outlet for
water discharge driven by monsoon precipitation in a large watershed with a
shoreline particularly vulnerable to erosion. The region has high rates of
annual erosion whereby shorelines may retreat over 100 meters per year causing
livelihood disruption and displacement of farming and fishing households. The
project has three objectives. The first objective characterizes time-space
patterns of shoreline erosion and monsoon dynamics at multiple scales.
Understanding erosion rates at annual scales is particularly important to
characterize vulnerability because households need to forecast and respond over
relatively short time horizons that are not resolved at coarser decadal scales.
The second objective assesses predictive relationships between monsoon
precipitation and erosion dynamics with the hypothesis that time-space patterns
of rainfall can help predict erosion behavior. A third objective assesses social
vulnerability, risk perception and how resource endowments and adaptive behavior
may promote resilience. These objectives will be addressed using a mixed-methods
approach that combines geospatial analysis using earth observation data,
statistical and machine-learning predictive modelling, and quantitative and
qualitative primary social data collected in two villages. Investigators will
produce an approximately 50-year time series record of shoreline change that
will used in concert with monthly precipitation data to develop an annual
predictive model of erosion risk. Field research will be done to collect social
data from local populations in terms of their risk perception, vulnerability,
and adaption behaviors by conducting a household survey, focus groups, and key
informant interviews. Although the project will focus on the delta region of the
Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna river system in Bangladesh, the research will provide
new insights for dealing with coastal erosion in densely populated coastal zones
in other regions, including the United States.