* 1660640
* Recruiting, Preparing and Retaining Excellent STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Christopher Stromberg, Hood College
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,449,086.00

Hood Colleges Recruiting, Preparing and Retaining Excellent STEM Teachers: Noyce
Teacher Education Partnership (Track 1: Scholarships &amp; Stipends) project
will address the national need for STEM teachers who have strong subject-matter
backgrounds and quality teacher preparation. This national need is evident in
Maryland's critical shortage of STEM teachers, where STEM teachers often must be
recruited from other states. Hood College's Noyce Teacher Education Partnership
will be conducted as a collaboration between Hood College, Frederick Community
College, and Frederick County Public Schools. The project will recruit and
provide scholarships, specialized teacher preparation, and mentoring to 22
biology, chemistry, and mathematics students who will become teachers in high-
need schools. Major program features will be (1) robust subject-matter
preparation; (2) high-quality teacher preparation, including an opportunity to
earn computer science endorsement; (3) collaboration between a college, a two-
year institution, and a high-need school district; and (4) support mechanisms
such as seminars, mentoring, field trips, student research, and summer
internships working with at-risk youth in STEM. Benefits will be broad-reaching.
Program graduates will be highly-qualified based on their participation in
scientific inquiry and STEM problem-solving. The education program will prepare
scholars for cultural diversity as they rotate through several school settings.
Long-term partnerships between institutions will serve as a model of
collaboration. The effectiveness of the program elements will be assessed,
particularly for the internships, STEM teacher preparation methods, and summer
scientific inquiry opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Noyce Teacher
Education Partnership project will be a model program for recruiting diverse
students into STEM teacher education, preparing them to work effectively and to
be culturally responsive, and supporting them so they are retained in high-need
school placements. The goals will be to recruit, retain, and graduate 22
secondary STEM teaching candidates; to promote their retention through mentoring
efforts and financial and professional support; to build their cultural
proficiency and professional skills; and to institutionalize program elements
based on evaluation findings. Strategies to strengthen the depth and breadth of
teacher preparation include the opportunity to complete research in a STEM area
and teaching experiences at multiple partnership schools. Supplementary
activities include a STEM 101 experience, seminars, workshops, field trips to
build cultural competency, summer internships working with at-risk youth, and
targeted advising and mentoring. With this strong preparation program, graduates
will be poised to model STEM content knowledge excellence and scientific
thinking, and inspire their own secondary students to consider STEM careers. The
partnership with a community college and local public school system will result
in collective institutional know-how for preparing culturally proficient
secondary STEM teachers and a sustainable pipeline of future STEM educators.
This model could be used to launch similar partnerships by other colleges and
universities to develop their own pipeline of culturally responsive STEM
teachers.