* 1660921
* ABI Innovation: A Metabolomics Toolkit for NMR and Mass Spectrometry
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Robert Powers, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 695,000.00

With support from the Advances in Biological Informatics in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure, Professor Robert Powers and his research group at the
University of Nebraska - Lincoln will further develop their MVAPACK software
toolkit that analyzes data generated in metabolomics research. Metabolomics is
the study of the chemical signatures of the small molecules, like sugars, that
are the products of biological processes. Metabolite fingerprints reveal a great
deal about the recent activities occurring in biological samples. Knowing how
organisms respond to their surroundings gives important leads to understanding
events in fields like plant biology and agriculture, environmental and water
quality studies, and human health research into nutrition or diseases. The
chemical fingerprints are generated using two different technologies, called
nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry. The results can be very
complex and difficult to merge. This means the challenges for data analysis are
also high, and include requirements to develop new approaches, like multivariate
statistical methods. This proposal aims to produce software tools that will
extract the most possible information from the data, including data format
conversion, preprocessing, validation, significance testing, visualization, and
metabolite identification at defined levels of confidence. The MVAPACK toolkit
will enable important, currently unavailable data processing functions in the
form of freely available and open source software modules, with an impact on
data quality, sharing, information content resulting in deeper biological
insights from studies that include metabolite profiling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; During the award period, this
research project will further enhance the MVAPACK metabolomics toolkit by
including additional and urgently needed capabilities. Such improvements will
include adding features to load and process liquid chromatography (LC)-MS, gas
chromatography(GC)-MS and multidimensional datasets; to expand capabilities to
integrate multiple datasets for chemometrics; and to automate metabolite
identification, which is one of the more challenging and time-consuming aspects
of metabolomics. This work will employ, among other approaches, graph theory,
covariance NMR, back-scaled pseudospectral loadings, and a combined NMR and MS
approach to facilitate the accurate and rapid assignment of metabolites from
complex biological samples. Overall, these efforts will lead to an improved
MVAPACK software package (http://bionmr.unl.edu/mvapack.php) for the
metabolomics scientific community that will enhance the information content,
utility, and ease of processing and combining various types of NMR and MS
datasets.