* 1660536
* Resilience and Bio-Geomorphic Systems: The 48th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* David Butler, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2018
* USD 39,250.00

Resilience thinking is a rapidly emerging concept that is being used to frame
how scientists approach the study of biophysical systems. It also seeks to
determine how societies, economies and biophysical systems can be managed to
ensure resilience; that is, how to maintain the capacity of a system to absorb
disturbance. There are strong overlaps between the scientific discipline of
geomorphology (the biophysical processes that shape Earth's landscapes) and the
concept of resilience. There is however a lack of awareness of the foundations
of the former in the emergence of resilience. Thus, resilience is limited and
limiting in its application to bio-geomorphic systems. A collective examination
of bio-geomorphic systems and resilience will conceptually advance both areas of
study and further cement the relevance and importance of understanding the
complexities of bio-geomorphic systems in an emerging world of interdisciplinary
research endeavors.

The 48th annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium (BGS) on Resilience and Bio-
Geomorphic Systems will bring together leading and emerging scientists in bio-
geomorphology and resilience thinking. The meeting will be organized around
themes related to interactions between bio-geomorphic systems and resilience:
(1) Foundations in geomorphic systems and resilience thinking; (2) Extreme
events, thresholds, and resilience; (3) Cross-scale interactions; (4)
Longitudinal resilience: mountains to coasts; (5) Eco-geo connections; and (6)
Social-ecological systems. All papers presented orally and selected papers
presented as posters at the BGS are published in the internationally recognized
journal Geomorphology. In keeping with the tradition established by past BGS,
the 2017 meeting will promote and enhance student education and participation.