* 1660465
* Evaluation of the Processes Shaping Geographic Patterns of Language Diversity with Process-Based Simulation Models
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Michael Gavin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 04/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This research project will examine the processes underlying the origins and
geography of language diversity in North America. Hundreds of languages are
spoken on the continent besides English, French, and Spanish, and these
languages are unevenly distributed, with far more diversity in some places than
others. Although this language diversity is well documented and fundamentally
affects how humans communicate, relatively little is known about the processes
that have shaped the geographic patterns of language diversity. The
investigators will refine a new simulation modeling approach to provide new
understanding regarding the degree to which different social and environmental
processes have influenced language diversity patterns over the last 10,000
years. The methods the project will use will provide new tools for larger-scale
and longer-term contributions to the discovery of processes that influence
multiple facets of cultural diversity across the planet. The investigators will
map North American language diversity and produce an open-access resource for
the researchers, educators, students, and the public. The project will further
enhance an international and interdisciplinary network of researchers and will
increase the utility of a global, open-access database created to enable studies
of cultural and linguistic diversity. The project also will provide
interdisciplinary education and training opportunities for a diverse set of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do humans
collectively speak so many languages, and why is the geographic distribution of
these languages so uneven? Dating back centuries, researchers from many
disciplines have debated the degree to which different sociocultural,
environmental, and geographic factors have shaped linguistic diversity, but the
few tests of these hypotheses have failed to reach consensus due to
methodological limitations, including inadequacies in multivariate analytic
approaches, the failure to account for non-independence of societies due to
spatial proximity and common ancestry, and inadequate attention to complex webs
of causal factors and to spatial and temporal dynamics of diversification and
extinction. Previous research also has relied largely on correlation-based
analyses, which imply only associations and cannot determine the mechanisms that
lead to diversity patterns. The investigators undertaking this project have
pioneered the use of process-based simulation modeling in biogeography to
overcome the prior methodological limitations. They will build on experience
gained during those activities to use recent modeling advances to conduct tests
of long-standing and competing hypotheses from multiple disciplines regarding
the geography of language diversity. Previous work employing this approach
enhanced understanding of how rainfall and demography shaped language diversity
patterns in Australia. By expanding their attention to North America, the
investigators expect to provide new insights into the social, cultural,
historical, and environmental processes that influence many facets of cultural
diversity in different locales across the planet.