* 1660774
* The Virginia Mathematics Specialist Initiative: An Online Program to Prepare K-8 Mathematics Teacher Leaders for High-Need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Aimee Ellington, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,499,991.00

This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project, The Virginia Mathematics
Specialist Initiative: An Online Program to Prepare K-8 Mathematics Teacher
Leaders for High-Need School Districts, will prepare 20 K-8 mathematics teachers
to be mathematics teacher leaders in high-need school districts throughout
Virginia. In addition to preparing 20 new mathematics teacher leaders for
partnering school districts throughout Virginia, the project will: (1) help
retain K-8 mathematics teachers in the partnering districts due to the
availability of daily in-school professional development and (2) develop a
sustainable, rigorous, interactive online program for preparing mathematics
teacher leaders that will be accessible to teachers in Virginia and in other
states across the country. Research has shown that preparing and deploying
mathematics specialists is an effective way to provide professional development
for K-8 teachers of mathematics and ultimately increase student achievement. The
project's 20 mathematics teacher leaders will provide ongoing, professional
development for K-8 teachers to help them develop a deep understanding of the
mathematics content and effective pedagogical strategies needed to help students
understand mathematics and make connections to other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowships project
is a collaboration between Virginia Commonwealth University, the MathScience
Innovation Center, the Virginia Mathematics and Science Coalition, and 20 high-
need school districts across Virginia. This innovative project will advance the
research of preparing and implementing mathematics teacher leaders in K-8
schools throughout Virginia by: (1) advancing knowledge about providing online
professional development for teacher leaders and developing a framework for
analyzing online professional development programs; (2) producing a highly
effective online mathematics specialist preparation program that will be ready
for future cohorts of teachers from districts inside and outside of Virginia and
inform others interested in developing online professional development programs;
(3) producing an online mentoring program for mathematics teacher leaders in
high-need school districts that will help teacher leaders be successful in their
early years and inform others interested in developing online mentorship
programs; and (4) collaborating with high-need school districts in Virginia,
many of which have not been part of previous efforts to prepare and implement
mathematics specialists.