* 1660985
* Towards a More Human(e) Genetics Education: Exploring how Knowledge of Genetic Variation and Causation Affects Racial Bias among Adolescents
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Susan Kowalski, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,299,042.00

This project draws on the relation between genetics instruction and
psychological biases associated with the development of racial stereotyping.
Previous research has suggested that when students are taught genetics in
particular ways, it increases faulty assumptions. For example, learning about
the prevalence of sickle cell anemia in people of African descent and the
prevalence of Cystic Fibrosis in people of European descent can cause middle and
high school students to infer that racial groups vary in intelligence, academic
ability, and science ability because of genetics. Conversely, educational
interventions which teach students that there is more genetic variation within
races rather than between them can reduce the belief that genes cause racial
groups to differ in their intellectual, academic, and science abilities. What is
still unknown is why does human genetics education cause these changes in racial
bias during adolescence? Using experimental, quasi-experimental, and qualitative
research methods, this research will identify the cognitive, social, and
educational factors that link the learning of human genetics to reductions in
racial bias. In doing so, this project will explore how learning about human
difference in the biology classroom affects how adolescents view people of
different races outside of the classroom. Consequently, this work could help
educators understand how to teach about the science of human difference in a
socially-responsible manner. This project is supported by the Education and
Human Resources Core Research program, which funds fundamental research in STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
factors that mediate and/or moderate the impact of an anti-essentialist genetics
education on explicit and implicit forms of racial bias during adolescence.
Genetic essentialism of race is a psychological bias which leads people to
underestimate the actual genetic variability that exists within races and to
overestimate the genetic variability that exists between races. Studies have
established that this bias is implicated in the development of racial
stereotyping and prejudice across human development and across cultures in
Western societies. Essentialism is also associated with misconceptions about
biological variation and evolution. The links between essentialism, racial bias,
and biological misconceptions are due, in part, to the fact that essentialist
worldviews are inconsistent with biological theory and data. This project will
explore the enactment of an anti-essentialist genetics intervention in the
context of middle and high school biology classrooms to understand whether and
how this intervention reduces implicit and explicit forms of racial bias. The
work will center on the implementation of an existing anti-essentialist genetics
education intervention which has been shown to reduce explicit forms of racial
bias among adolescents. In phase one, the project will use think-aloud protocols
and qualitative methods to identify the social and cognitive factors which
moderate how students reason in response to intervention materials. In phase
two, a comparative interrupted time series, focus groups with students, and
video-based analyses of the teaching of the intervention will be used to
identify social and cognitive variables that are potential mediators of
intervention effects on racial bias. In phase three, an individually randomized
trial with clustering will be used to test pre-registered mediating and/or
moderating mechanisms that link the intervention to reductions in implicit and
explicit racial bias. During each phase of the study, developing knowledge of
the causal mechanism will be used to revise the intervention materials to make
them more effective at increasing genetic literacy and reducing racial bias
among adolescents.