* 1660557
* Developing Leaders in Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Janis O'Donnell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,499,363.00

The University of Alabama Tuscaloosa Noyce Teaching Fellowship Track 2 project,
Developing Leaders in Science Teaching (LIST), will be a teacher education model
focusing on creating 15 new science teacher leaders through teacher
certification and induction support. An overall goal of the project will be to
increase the quality and quantity of biology, chemistry, and physics STEM
professionals entering and remaining in science teaching careers, while
developing them as science teacher leaders. By increasing the number of highly
qualified middle and high school science teachers, the program will help ease
acute shortages in science teaching in Alabama and throughout the nation. LIST
will increase the diversity of the teacher workforce by encouraging the
participation of Fellows from underrepresented minority groups. Teaching Fellows
will benefit from working relationships already established with high-need local
educational agencies. A 4-year intensive induction program will sustain the
project's Teaching Fellows as they develop science teaching expertise and
ability to engage diverse students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce Teaching
Fellowship Track 2 project will be a partnership between University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, two high-need Alabama local educational agencies (LEAs), the
nonprofit Texas STEM Coalition (T-STEM), and the Alabama Math, Science, and
Technology Initiative (AMSTI/ASIM). The project will develop and implement a
model to increase the number and diversity of STEM professionals in biology,
chemistry, or physics as certified secondary science teachers in high-need
school districts. Teaching Fellows will participate in a strong clinically-based
program developing skills in engaging diverse students. The program will have a
long-term focus on moving teachers from mentored novices to teacher leaders. The
project's timeline will begin in Year 1 with preservice coursework, ending with
graduation and teacher certification in an Master of Arts (MA) program. A 4-year
induction program will follow in LEAs. LIST has four major goals with objectives
addressing high-need LEAs including: 1) increasing the number and diversity of
certified science teachers, 2) developing preservice teacher expertise through
intensive clinical field experiences, 3) mentoring through collaborative
strategies supporting and sustaining Fellows through an evolving induction
program, and 4) fostering Fellows' leadership skills. LIST will actively recruit
STEM professionals from university science graduates, local communities
surrounding a coalition of 12 community colleges, campus student professional
organizations, and social/local media outreach. The LIST model will provide a
multistage transformative approach incrementally moving STEM professionals to
teacher leaders. The model will be disseminated for use by other teacher
preparation programs to increase the quality of science teachers and their
students' depth of learning. The LIST model will demonstrate the use and
upgrading of existing infrastructure to enhance research-based science teacher
education.