* 1660259
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Heat Dissipation Product for Chip Testing and Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Craig Green, CARBICE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,406,366.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project comes from addressing the thermal challenges
brought about by the significant increase in transistor density that
semiconductors have experienced over the past few decades. This trend has
enabled many advancements ranging from high performance servers to Internet of
Things devices. Still, with every advance in chip technology, the difficulty of
chip cooling continues to increase. Three major thermal interface material (TIM)
market segments exist: polymer composites, metallic materials and phase-change
materials. Commercial carbon nanotubes (CNTs) will create a fourth market
segment that will supplant existing TIMs, initially in the chip testing market
and eventually extending into servers, high performance computing and Internet
of Things devices. CNT researchers and small businesses have made little
progress towards a commercial TIM product. Among other factors, this failure is
driven by poor positioning in the crowded low-cost TIM space, which is currently
dominated by thermal greases and pads. Progress towards a viable solution lies
in the strategic alignment of product features with industry pain points. This
Phase II SBIR aims to develop a means to scale the ability to produce CNT based
TIMs as well as to further improve their performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives of this SBIR Phase II project are to: 1) scale up of the
CNT TIM manufacturing process to achieve a production capacity of 200,000 sq. in
of product annually and to 2) enhance the conductivity of the CNT array by a
factor of 3x or more to facilitate entry into the TIM1 and TIM2 market. This
project will ultimately develop processes that will translate into achieving
production scale CNT based thermal interface materials for the first time in the
world. Scale up will be achieved through a combination of physical vapor
deposition and chemical vapor deposition processes developed on tools designed
specifically for CNT production. In Phase I of this research effort, two
commercial products aimed at the semiconductor chip testing market were
developed and validated through collaboration with leading chip manufacturers.
In addition to the chip testing market segment, in Phase II products will be
developed for entry into the TIM1 and Internet of Things markets.&lt;br/&gt;