* 1661662
* Diagnosis of Simulated Deep Convective Upscale Growth Errors and Their Causes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Edward Zipser, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2023
* USD 498,894.00

The Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale
Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations (RELAMPAGO) and Cloud, Aerosol, and
Complex Terrain Interactions (CACTI) field campaigns in late 2018 in central
Argentina will study storms that are capable of developing into the tallest and
largest in the world according to satellite observations. These field campaigns
will focus a large number of environmental and radar observations in a
topographically regulated storm initiation hot spot location, where growth of
individual storm cells into larger, longer-lived, and higher impact systems
commonly occurs in close proximity to initiation locations, limiting
unpredictability of storm timing and location that has plagued previous field
campaign sampling strategies. Research associated with RELAMPAGO and CACTI is
focused around improved understanding and prediction of high impact storms in
Latin America, the US, and many other locations around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through comparison of an ensemble of carefully
designed model simulations with unique RELAMPAGO and CACTI measurements, this
project seeks to identify root causes of storm structure and life cycle biases
in high-resolution weather models, so that methods to mitigate these biases can
be established. Through this process, the relative roles of various
environmental factors in controlling the probability and evolution of isolated
storms into more impactful larger and longer-lived systems will be established.
Large and long-lived systems have much larger societal impacts than shorter
lived, single cell storms because of their association with high-impact weather
such as flooding, large hail, damaging winds, and tornadoes, and their
significant contribution to rainfall in many regions of the world. Improved
representation of their development and life cycle in weather and climate
prediction models will improve forecasts that help communities make better-
informed decisions that limit their negative impacts and accentuate their
positive impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Remote sensing of Electrification,
Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations
(RELAMPAGO) field campaign, from 1 November to 15 December 2018, and the Cloud,
Aerosol, and Complex Terrain Interactions (CACTI) experiment, from 15 August
2018 to 30 April 2019, will provide comprehensive in situ and remote sensing
datasets with fixed and mobile platforms capable of high spatiotemporal
characterization of the evolution of thermodynamic, kinematic, and microphysical
conditions in and around convective storms in central Argentina. This location
experiences some of the most intense and organized convective systems in the
world with focused and frequent deep convective initiation over the Sierras de
CÃ³rdoba orographic barrier and predictable convective cell movement with
frequent upscale growth into larger and longer-lived systems near the high
terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the probability, timing,
location, and morphology of deep convective upscale growth into larger, longer-
lived mesoscale convective systems with high impact rainfall and severe weather
will be examined using RELAMPAGO-CACTI field campaign measurements and an
ensemble of carefully designed model simulations. Potential model errors will be
related to environmental thermodynamic and kinematic conditions, model
resolution, and model parameterization of microphysics. Causes for potential
simulated deep convective upscale growth biases will be studied, highlighting
the separate roles of (i) environmental thermodynamics and kinematics, (ii)
interactions between convective drafts, microphysics, and cold pools, and (iii)
mesoscale circulation development in response to the deep convective cloud
system. The following hypotheses will be tested:&lt;br/&gt;1. The probability
that orographically initiated deep convective cells grow upscale is primarily
controlled by cold pool depth and strength coupled with low-mid level vertical
wind shear and instability.&lt;br/&gt;2. Overly strong and frequent initial deep
convective cells with too much large, rimed ice in simulations produce cold
pools that are stronger or more abundant than observed, leading to more frequent
upscale growth than observed and overly organized convective
features.&lt;br/&gt;3. Simulated mesoscale flows responding to biased latent
heating and cooling distribution reinforce model deep convective upscale growth
and organization biases.&lt;br/&gt;4. Convective upscale growth biases are most
limited in simulations that best reproduce observed convective updraft kinematic
and microphysical properties.