* 1661581
* I-Corps: Flexible On-Skin Computing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Joanne Lo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will include
continued advancement in the fields of flexible electronics printing techniques,
data visualization schemes specific to on-skin applications, and interactive
modalities that go beyond the limitations of current mobile devices. The
electrical and mechanical design guidelines specific to the devices subjected to
high degrees of flex, stress, and strain will be highly applicable to the
continuation of wearable technology in various forms. The project will also
address effective data visualization techniques for wearable applications, which
is crucial for users' ability to discern relevant information while inundated
with an exponentially growing amount of data. The technical capabilities enabled
by this project will ultimately allow users to interact with technology in a way
that is seamless, natural, and intuitive.

This I-Corps project will explore the market opportunities and potential
customers for a thin, flexible, non-obtrusive on-skin interactive computing
platform. By eliminating high cost cleanroom fabrication process and adapting
proven techniques from the field of roll-to-roll flexible electronics
manufacturing, this project will create an on-skin device that is priced for the
consumer market for everyday use. Previous research activities have demonstrated
that novel on-skin devices, which includes programmable LED displays, on-skin
buttons for mobile device control, and a posture monitoring strain gauge, can be
prototyped using a low-cost screen printing method. The technical development of
these on-skin devices will continue to ensure their robustness and reliability
for the appropriate commercial applications. The proposed activities will
empirically identify the market segments and customers for which this NSF-funded
research on-skin computing platform has the largest impact/benefit.