* 1661863
* Dual Polarization Radar Observations, Analysis and Retrievals of Convective Lifecycle during RELAMPAGO
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* V. Chandrasekar, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 399,067.00

Traditionally meteorological radars have observed storms using single
polarization to measure the intensity and velocity within storms. Past research
has shown that significantly more information about the storms, their particle
types, and stage of evolution can be gleamed from using two orthogonal
polarizations in radars. This research focuses on the dual-polarization radar
observations during the RELAMPAGO experiment in west Central Argentina. This
region has among the most intense convective systems in the world in terms of
frequency of large hail, very high storm tops, and extreme lightning activity,
yet much remains unknown about the intense convection in this region. Because of
the repeatability of storms in the region, this experiment will observe these
storms to address science questions related to the initiation, initial
organization/severe-weather generation, and growth stages of storm development,
which are poorly understood. This research will improve the understanding of,
and the ability to predict, severe convective storms worldwide. Similar
environments exist in many parts of the world including the US Rocky Mountains
and Asia (such as Chengdu basin in China and Himalayan plains on the Indian
subcontinent). The radar techniques developed from this project has the
potential to benefit all the nationwide deployment of dual-polarization radars
in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically address the
analysis and retrieval of dual-polarization radar observations in some of the
most intense convective storms, developing advanced retrieval techniques. The
RELAMPAGO field observation set up will elucidate the tight connections between
the, complex terrain, and the production of severe weather, role of terrain in
initiating and developing organized convective storms and resultant intensity.
Development and application of advanced radar techniques, specially using
frequency domain procedures, to identify the type of precipitation particles in
the storm is an important part of this project.