* 1661214
* Reducing Attrition in STEM Doctoral Education: A Longitudinal Investigation using Momentary Assessment and Social Psychological Intervention
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Cook, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,406,476.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This study will examine whether
stress from psychological threat helps explain why nearly half of doctoral
students overall and even higher rates of women and underrepresented minority
students leave graduate school before attaining their terminal STEM degrees. The
proposed research will be guided by the self-affirmation theory in determining
whether social psychological interventions can be effective strategies for
improving retention in doctoral education by helping students alter their
appraisal of environmental threats. Since few, if any, studies have
longitudinally and rigorously explored factors that negatively impact
trajectories of doctoral students and how psychological interventions can alter
these trajectories, this research will be an important initial step in that
direction. To that end, this study will advance knowledge in the field about
ways to increase overall participation in STEM areas at the doctoral level while
at the same time help to diversify the future STEM professional workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will take on the form of a longitudinal
randomized controlled trial conducted among two cohorts of incoming STEM
doctoral students at three major research institutions. First-year graduate
students will be randomly assigned to a control condition or to either a
standard or contingent affirmation intervention. The standard affirmation
involves an empirically-validated writing exercise that has participants reflect
on their important values. The newly-developed contingent affirmation has
participants explicitly link their values to their long-term educational goals.
A smartphone application will be used to provide periodic booster interventions
and collect ongoing ecological momentary assessment data on students' lived
experiences. This method will provide needed psychological and behavioral data
to chronicle long-term indicators of stress that may contribute to student
attrition from STEM doctoral programs. Results will provide a window into the
psychological and performance trajectories of STEM graduate students and the
factors that predict attrition and retention, including the effectiveness of
affirmation interventions in this population. Results will also help advance
theory related to social identity, motivation, and goal pursuit in STEM
education and will further expand and extend affirmation theory, by providing
needed longitudinal information on the mechanisms underlying affirmation
interventions. Testing the effectiveness of tailored smartphone delivery of
booster interventions expands affirmation theory in particular and the delivery
of mobile psychological interventions generally.