* 1661657
* Collaborative Research: Radar Observations of Convective Lifecycle near Argentina's Sierras de Cordoba
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Kristen Rasmussen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 382,845.00

Arguably the most intense storms in the world occur in mountainous west central
Argentina. Our current knowledge of the storms in this region largely comes from
weather satellites, which provide valuable snapshots but lack spatial and
temporal details needed to fully understand and predict their formation. The
RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, and
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) project seeks
to understand how these intense storms initiate, grow, and produce severe
weather in the vicinity of the Sierras de Cordoba. By using state-of-the-art
ground-based instruments, detailed observations of these storms throughout their
lifecycle, and the environment in which they form, will allow for a comparison
with severe storms over the U.S. to help understand and improve prediction of
intense convection in Argentina and around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, involving researchers at the University of Washington and Colorado
State University, includes participation in the field phase of RELAMPAGO
occurring 1 November - 15 December 2018 near Cordoba, Argentina to study which
factors lead to intense upward motion in the storms, how these storms rapidly
grow upscale near the mountains, and how these processes and environmental
conditions compare to other mountainous regions of the world with intense,
severe storms. To achieve this goal, a network of fixed and mobile research
weather radars, atmospheric soundings, lightning arrays, and satellites will
provide the necessary measurements for addressing these science objectives.
These research activities will also foster international collaborations and
provide the opportunity to reach out to the public, both locally and abroad, to
highlight the goals of this project, promote science, and serve as role models
for future generations of atmospheric scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite studies have highlighted focused initiation and
upscale growth of intense convective systems near the Sierras de Cordoba (SDC)
in Argentina. The RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, and
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) field campaign
aims to understand the processes responsible for this convective lifecycle and
associated severe weather by leveraging the recurring focused topographic
initiation of this region. The research will use the RELAMPAGO radar network,
including the NSF-supported, dual-polarization, Doppler, dual-wavelength S-PolKa
radar, to document the full lifecycle of these intense storms and, with
coincident RELAMPAGO environmental observations, determine the relative roles of
steep terrain and localized and large-scale atmospheric flow patterns in the
rapid upscale growth and maintenance of these systems near the SDC. Results from
this research will provide the first continuous view of the storm lifecycle and
will provide a means to compare with deep storms in other mountainous regions to
develop conceptual models for improving global prediction of these hazardous
events. This project is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering.