* 1661064
* Profiles of Science Engagement: Broadening Participation by Understanding Individual and Contextual Influences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jennifer Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,927.00

The ECR (Education and Human Resources Core Research) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. This study will investigate student engagement in science in the
interest of of broadening participation in STEM fields. This will be an
important undertaking since research shows that low student engagement is a
major challenge for students from subpopulations often underrepresented in STEM
fields. The research will help advance knowledge in STEM areas where empirical
studies of student engagement have lagged behind theoretical work in this area.
Few studies have measured student engagement holistically as a multifaceted
construct for broadening participation in science. This study will advance
knowledge in STEM education by identifying instructional contexts that foster
optimal student engagement and by examining whether adolescent students'
engagement profiles in science vary systematically by gender, grade,
race/ethnicity, and the intersection of these factors. It will serve the
national interest by investigating the extent to which engagement profiles are
consistent across and related to features of the science learning context,
achievement and persistence-related outcomes; and if these relationships differ
by gender, grade, race/ethnicity, and the intersection of these factors. The
study will also examine how science educators respond to the identified profiles
and to variations observed, and will use this knowledge in designing materials
to disseminate findings to practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use a person-oriented analytic approach to examine individual differences
and contextual variation in students' engagement in different science learning
environments, and to link engagement patterns to students' achievement and
persistence in STEM fields. Rich multi-method data sets will be used to develop
profiles of student engagement involving adolescents' cognitive, affective, and
behavioral states during the science learning process. These data will be
instrumental in focusing, guiding, and communicating research efforts to
practice. In addition to the knowledge generated and disseminated through
traditional academic outlets, the project will develop two tangible products.
The first product will be a free and publicly available statistical software
library, or package, of tools and functions needed to conduct person-oriented
analysis in R, the open-source programming language and software. These tools
will be available for researchers, scholars, and developers. The second product
will be a user-friendly guide that will inform science educators about
engagement profiles and practices that engage students, including those from
underrepresented groups in science, in the most meaningful ways. The guide to
student engagement will help educators identify and respond to student
engagement around science content, and to design lesson plans that may support
greater engagement. The guide will be used for purposes of professional
development and teacher preparation, impacting STEM scholars and educators, and
training graduate students and post-doctoral fellow as they take part in
research activities.