* 1661497
* ABI Development: Leveraging NSF-funded national cyberinfrastructure to spearhead biological discovery with Galaxy
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Nancy Ide, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,659,890.00

Due to the rapidly increasing volume of biological data from sequencing,
imaging, and other technologies, data processing needs in the Life Sciences are
now on par with physical and engineering disciplines. Importantly, the
distributed nature of data generation in biology makes this situation even more
challenging. Today one can hardly find a research institution or university
without multiple high-throughput DNA sequencing machines, and there are often
references to a "data crisis" in biology. Federal agencies, and the NSF in
particular, are investing heavily in cyberinfrastructure by supporting
development of high performance computing (HPC) resources such as the Extreme
Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). Yet to a large extent,
these resources remain unknown to biological researchers who overwhelmingly
continue to rely on fragile in-house computation. The goal of this project is to
ensure effective utilization of federal funds that have been invested into
development of the national computing infrastructure. This project will extend
the Galaxy software platform to leverage existing NSF hardware resources,
increasing the value of existing infrastructure for biology researchers that
were previously unable to take full advantage of these
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will follow a comprehensive
approach that addresses the needs of experimental scientists, tool developers,
and administrators of high performance compute systems (HPC). Access to national
compute infrastructure will be expanded so that Galaxy will function as a
middleware interface to existing heterogeneous environments such as XSEDE or
individual systems such as Jetstream. Software components necessary to optimize
Galaxy as a link between researchers and existing HPC will be developed based on
pilot projects with the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), XSEDE, PSC, and
Indiana University. (2) XSEDE resources to enable interactive data exploration
and visualization will be leveraged to expand Galaxy's current capacity for
dynamic scientific data analysis. Integration with Interactive Analysis
Environments, such as Jupyter or RStudio will allow manipulation and creation of
Galaxy datasets using common scripting languages. Taking advantage of XSEDE
resources will enable Galaxy's interactive environments and visual analytics to
scale to large datasets and sophisticated workflows. (3) Sustainable training
and outreach will focus on creating and disseminating curricula that enable
investigators to learn skills needed to analyze large datasets. Creation of pre-
configured infrastructure components for running workshops and develop modules
for undergraduate and graduate face-to-face and on-line classes will expand the
current educational portfolio to scale support for increasing numbers of Galaxy
users, including disciplines beyond life sciences such as Natural Language
Processing. Outcomes of this project will be available at
http://galaxyproject.org and https://github.com/galaxyproject.