* 1661323
* An Investigation Of Long Term Integrative Mechanisms In A Colonial Context
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Steve Kosiba, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2022
* USD 213,759.00

Dr. Steve Kosiba, of the University of Minnesota, and colleagues will conduct
interdisciplinary research to understand the practices through which people of
diverse ethnicities create new communities to withstand oppressive political
regimes. Previous scholarship on such communities has studied the cultural
resilience of already-established ethnic groups, focusing on historical accounts
of how enslaved or colonized peoples endured their social predicament by
maintaining traditions, developing common cultural symbols, or participating in
public political actions. Archaeology, with its unique ability to trace the
materials and spaces people used across time, is well positioned to offer
important new insights into the formation and persistence of ethnically diverse
communities. It can reveal the more inconspicuous practices and hidden
interactions whereby people living under social duress sought to work across
ethnic boundaries, form social ties, and bolster their autonomy in the face of
authoritarian rule. Many of these practices were meant to be covert, and
therefore they are not contained in the written histories or administrative
documents of dominant regimes. In terms of broader scientific impacts, the
project trains U.S. students in advanced scientific methods, and creates a
permanent laboratory and museum space for social science, environmental, and
cultural heritage research in South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kosiba and
the research team will combine archaeological and historical methods to study
labor conditions in an authoritarian state, with emphasis on whether and how
subject laborers founded communities by orchestrating a hidden economy. The
project focuses on Rumiqolqa, a massive labor colony in Cuzco, Peru where
forcibly relocated workers from various Andean ethnicities quarried stone for
successive Inca and then Spanish imperial regimes (AD 1450-1650). Preliminary
archaeological research indicates that Inca and Spanish authorities segregated
and confined laborers at Rumiqolqa, but archival studies demonstrate that these
laborers banded together and founded a new community that persisted for
centuries. The research tests the hypothesis that, despite persistent imperial
attempts to restrict interaction and cultural expression within the colony,
these laborers coordinated domestic tasks and other production routines in
inconspicuous ways to empower a community that was beyond the view of
authorities. Detailed archaeological mapping and excavations will record the
architecture of the colony, revealing how Inca and Spanish regimes constrained
interactions among laborers. Excavations of neighborhoods and work areas will
uncover the practices through which the laborers integrated communities by
pooling labor, establishing clandestine trade networks, or sharing resources.
Archival studies and analyses of human burials will provide unprecedented
information on the ethnic claims, physical trauma, health, nutrition, and
individual status of indigenous Andean people who labored for Inca and Spanish
empires. To link together and analyze these types of evidence, the project
assembles a digital database that will benefit archaeological science by
developing a method for the systematic documentation and analysis of artifacts
and materials across space and time.