* 1661329
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Dark Ecology: Deep Learning and Massive Gaussian Processes to Uncover Biological Signals in Weather Radar
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Steven Kelling, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 309,306.00

Every spring and fall billions of birds migrate across the US, largely under the
cover of darkness. Data collected by the US network of weather radars and new
analysis methods let us track these migrations. The Dark Ecology Project will
develop new resources allowing us to estimate the densities of migrating birds
as they have changed in the last 20 years. One outcome will be our better
ability to monitor bird populations and their migration systems, and the impacts
of various environmental factors. The US network of weather radars has recorded
a comprehensive 25-year archive of images of the atmosphere, which provides the
baseline information about bird movements. Extracting biological information
from the images is not automated currently, making it very slow and inefficient.
A team of ecologists and computer scientists will conduct novel research
combining methods in computer vision and machine learning to unlock detailed
information about bird migration from the entire US archive of weather radar
data. The resulting dataset will be freely available, providing an information
resource for researchers to estimate the number of birds migrating on any given
night, measure the patterns and trends of bird populations, and do hypothesis
driven science. The research will advance big data analysis and visualization
techniques for large-scale science questions, and will engage scientists,
conservation planners, students, and the general public with data,
visualizations, and educational material about bird
migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dark Ecology will leverage large-scale cloud
computing and develop novel computer vision, machine learning, and radar
analysis methods to measure the densities and velocities of migrating birds
across the US. Deep convolutional networks will be trained to discriminate
migrating birds from precipitation and other clutter in the radar data. New
techniques for domain transfer and weakly supervised training will enable the
training of convolutional networks with only modest-sized training sets.
Gaussian process (GP) models will be developed to create smooth national maps of
migration density and velocity. Novel GP methods and cloud-computing workflows
will allow us to scale to massive radar data sets and analyze the more then 200
million archived radar scans. The resulting data and tools will be curated with
open access policies, and used by the research team to conduct ecological
research about patterns and drivers of continent-scale migration. Project
information can be found at http://darkecology.cs.umass.edu.