* 1661842
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Laser Holographic Nanopatterning Using Metamaterial Phase Masks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Yuankun Lin, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2021
* USD 217,524.00

There is a strong need for nanomanufacturing technologies that are digitally
controllable in space and in laser wavelength. These new technologies are
desired to generate spatially varying nanostructures for a wide range of
applications from electronics to photonics to energy storage. Examples include
gradient multiple-symmetry nanostructures to improve light extraction efficiency
of organic light emitting devices, light coupling efficiency in photovoltaic
devices, and light absorption in photo-detectors. This award investigates
nanostructure and process design principles involving laser beam steering
through a metamaterial photomask and selective laser material removal, leading
to the formation of complex functional nanosystems. Despite progress at single
wavelengths, a photomask-based nanofabrication technology that can steer lasers
at multiple wavelengths at high resolution is lacking. This project paves the
way for future parallel, multi-wavelength, spatially varying three-dimensional
nanopatterning that can significantly simplify the photolithography process used
by the semiconductor industry. The project provides education opportunities in
the fields of nanomanufacturing, optical design, simulation and characterization
to students at both undergraduate and graduate levels. It also includes outreach
activities engaging women and under-represented minorities in research and
targeting the general public via the Fort Worth Museum of Science and
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates laser holographic
nanofabrication of a new type of spatially-gradient nanostructure using new
metamaterial phase masks designed and operated at multiple laser wavelengths.
The current phase mask patterning technology controls light sequentially. For
example, in traditional dielectric phase masks with gratings in two layers, the
light modulated by the first layer grating is modulated again by the second
layer grating. In order to realize selective laser modulation in space and in
wavelength, the new phase mask concept consists of resonators distributed in one
or two layers that can be used to realize desired phase and amplitude profiles
at multiple wavelengths independently and simultaneously, namely, in parallel.
Using the new plasmonic resonator-based metamaterial phase mask, the laser light
is only modulated by resonators pre-determined by design, leading to the
manufacturing of 3D nano-architectures with high spatial resolution and feature
size reduction from microns to 100 nm in spatially-gradient photonic super-
crystal structures. Overall, the single plasmonic element and single exposure-
based nanofabrication process provides a highly efficient approach with a simple
optical setup for realizing spatially-gradient nanostructures for many
applications.