* 1661485
* ABI Innovation: Authors in the driver's seat: fast, consistent, computable phenotype data and ontology production
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Joel Sachs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 641,763.00

Modern evolutionary research requires organism character data from multiple
branches of the Tree of Life, but the majority of such data are in a "legacy"
format that computers can not use. Highly trained postdoc scientists are
employed to manually convert them. By one estimate, one year's worth of English
biomedical journal publications alone would take a full-time postdoc over 30
years to convert. This manual process is fundamentally problematics for three
reasons: First, it does not stop the continued publication of character
descriptions in the legacy format. Second, it takes time away from highly
trained scientists and preventing them from making new and more important
discoveries. Third, it does not address the fundamental causes of large
differences (~ 40%) in the data converted by different scientists, resulting in
less useful data. This project will investigate a transformative approach that
solves the problem at its root, by enabling authors of biodiversity works to
directly produce computable data at the time of publication, eliminating the
need for subsequent post-publication data conversion. Scientists will be able to
direct use the published data in the new format to address grand conservation,
environmental, or medical challenges facing humankind today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has great potential to solve the phenotype
data production problem at its root. It recognizes that authors make (implicit)
ontological commitments when writing a descriptive work and that they are best
qualified to interpret the work. Instead of limiting authors to any
"standardized" terminology, authors will be provided with a low-barrier,
efficient, open-collaboration platform to describe characters as accurately as
they wish using an ontology built collectively with other authors working on
similar taxa. This process makes authors more aware of term usage in the
community and helps the community (including younger generation of scientists)
converge on best practices. The result will be that all character terms included
in the descriptive work are documented/defined in the taxon-specific ontology
and the descriptions are consequently made semantically clear, and ready for
software to harvest computable character data. The software platform to be
developed by this project exposes disagreements among authors and usage-based
term status in the ontology, and notifies authors of updates and conflicts via a
mobile-friendly app. Taking into account user motivation and attribution
factors, the project will design, implement, and evaluate the approach from both
human social behavior and software usability perspectives, employing recent
results from open online collaboration research and cutting-edge usability test
techniques (e.g., measuring user stress levels via eye-tracking and pupil
dilation). The success of the project is generalizable to other domains and will
fundamentally change the way phenotypic characters are documented and used in
biological research. The results of the project will be found at
http://github.com/orgs/biosemantics/projects.