* 1661490
* ABI Innovation: Improved modeling of marker-trait associations in polypoid and diploid organisms using genotyping-by-sequencing with genotype uncertainty
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Erik Sacks, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 669,458.00

Many economically important crop plants have more than two copies of each
chromosome - they have more than 2 alleles of each gene in their genome and the
genotypes for their important traits should reflect the level of polyploidy.
Genotypes are used to predict the phenotype in breeding programs, for traits
like flowering time, seed weight or oil yield. Marker genotypes for such traits
are currently determined in targeted sequencing experiments, termed genotype-by-
sequencing (GBS). GBS has drastically reduced the cost of detecting genetic
variants and determining the genotypes of individuals, thus making high-
throughput genotyping more accessible within the fields of agriculture and
ecology. However, marker genotypes determined using GBS are frequently incorrect
because, due to random chance, some alleles do not get sequenced in some
individuals. Polyploidy further complicates the issue of genotype ambiguity
because genotypes can no longer simply be classified as homozygous or
heterozygous, but instead are defined by the number of copies of each allele
that they possess. This project aims to develop methodology and software for
quantifying uncertainty in DNA marker genotypes determined by genotyping-by-
sequencing (GBS), particularly in polyploid species, and for incorporating that
uncertainty into analyses that relate genotype to phenotype. Given that many
economically-important crops are polyploid, genotyping improvements that result
from this project will be especially beneficial for securing the world's supply
of food, fuel, and fiber through marker-assisted plant breeding. This project
will result in increased sensitivity for identifying marker alleles that are
associated with phenotypic differences, as well as improved prediction of
phenotypes from GBS data. More broadly, it will promote a paradigm shift in the
field, treating genotypes as probability distributions rather than values that
are known with certainty. Additionally, YouTube videos teaching linear algebra
as well as computer programming in Python and R will be created during the
course of this project, making these concepts more accessible for students in
the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are
to (1) create an algorithm that estimates genotype probabilities in diploids and
polyploids as accurately as possible from GBS data and (2) create genome-wide
association study (GWAS) and genomic selection (GS) methodologies that fully
utilize genotype probabilities. An iterative algorithm will be developed that
will generate a probability distribution of each individual being each possible
genotype at a given locus. The algorithm will use read depth at each of two or
more alleles and will model multiple biological and technical parameters,
including allele frequencies, population structure, inbreeding, linkage
disequilibrium, inheritance mode, differential amplification, and sample
contamination. The algorithm will be implemented in a publicly-available R
package that will integrate with existing GBS bioinformatics pipelines and will
output multiple formats suitable for downstream analysis. New GWAS and GS
methods will be developed that model both additive and dominance effects while
utilizing genotype probability distributions, and will build upon existing
software for GWAS and GS. Diploid and tetraploid populations of the bioenergy
grass Miscanthus will be used for validating and improving the new
methodologies. GBS and phenotyping have already been performed or are underway
on these populations. Software produced as a result of this project will be
hosted at https://github.com/lvclark/polyRAD and
https://github.com/lvclark/GAPITdom .