* 1661699
* Nanofabrication of Three-Dimensional Graphene with Controlled Shape
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Yun Hu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2021
* USD 367,052.00

Graphene is a very promising material for many applications. The current mass
production of graphene is focused on two-dimensional graphene sheets. However,
the attractive forces between graphene sheets can cause two-dimensional graphene
to restack into graphite-like powders, decreasing their specific surface area
and deteriorating graphene's unique properties. Three-dimensional graphene,
which is a graphene sheet that possesses a curved non-planar shape can inhibit
the restacking. This award advances knowledge in scalable nano-scale processing
of three-dimensional shape-controlled graphene. In this process, three-
dimensional graphene sheets are produced from the exothermic reaction of carbon
monoxide and alkali metal oxides, followed by an acid treatment. The three-
dimensional graphene are explored as materials for energy devices. Project plans
are to have a strong impact on education and outreach by inspiring to engage
Native American students in science and engineering. Graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project receive advanced training, which will build a
firm foundation for their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
techniques for three-dimensional (3D) graphene synthesis are limited by the
difficulty of controlling graphene shapes and the requirement for high energy
need. To overcome these limits, a scalable process is investigated based on a
previously invented method involving a reaction between CO and alkali metal
oxides. In this approach, graphene sheets are formed simultaneously with alkali
metal carbonate nano-particles. Consequently, the generated carbonate nano-
particles do not only play a role in determining the locally curved shape of the
3D graphene sheets, but also isolate the graphene sheets from each other to
prevent graphite formation during synthesis. After removing the carbonate nano-
particles with acid, 3D shape-controlled graphene sheets are obtained. The
specific aims of this research are to synthesize various controlled shapes,
understand the kinetics of reactions for 3D graphene production, evaluate
structure-property relationships, and explore the 3D graphene sheets as
electrode materials for solar cells, ion batteries, and supercapacitors. This
research advances a new concept in the synthesis of 3D graphene. It involves the
understanding of fundamental chemistry, physics, and material science at
nanoscale. Furthermore, the resulting kinetic relationships provide a scientific
and engineering basis to scale-up the manufacturing process for
commercialization.