* 1661406
* The behavioral and institutional determinants of public value knowledge outcomes in conservation science
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Leah Gerber, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 291,520.00

Conservation scientists acknowledge the importance of partnering with
stakeholders in business, government, and non-governmental organizations to
manage biodiversity. This research seeks to identify factors that increase the
public value outcomes from these partnerships, which represent a form of
knowledge transfer that advances scientific contributions to society. By
identifying the individual behaviors and institutional designs that foster
higher public value outcomes, this project advances understanding of how
publicly supported science can be directed to optimize public benefits and
social significance, building a foundation for advancing public value outcomes
in other fields of science. The findings translate research into practice
through connections with the practitioner communities and by sharing findings on
effective partnership strategies. The project creates general guidelines and
indicators to assist with knowledge partnership design and new models for
institutional partnerships that cultivate practical outcomes in sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Public value theory is a conceptual framework that has
been examined empirically in science and technology cases. Much of this research
has focused on developing typologies of public value failures and characterizing
instances according to these typologies. This project extends this line of
research by recognizing public value outcomes in biodiversity research as a
product of both individual behaviors and institutional arrangements, moving
towards establishing a causal basis for public value outcomes in a single,
specific domain of scientific research. Using field study methods including
semi-structured interviews, this project examines the behaviors and attitudes of
biodiversity researchers relative to scientific productivity. The project
examines how networks of researchers, including those from universities,
government, and think tanks work together in affecting different types of
scientific outcomes.