* 1661157
* Emerging Researchers on the Path to Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Alexandra Graddy-Reed, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 10/31/2021
* USD 349,869.00

This research project will examine the impact of federal research and
development (R&D) funding on research productivity. Whereas prior research on
this general topic has focused on outcomes of senior researchers and teams, this
project will direct attention to emerging researchers, specifically U.S.
graduate students in the science and engineering academic disciplines. By
focusing attention on this overlooked population, this project will expand
knowledge about the role of R&D investment on research productivity and enhance
understanding of graduate education and training within science and engineering
disciplines. The project will minimize the burden of reporting by the
individuals and groups on which the project focuses by using public records of
grant outcomes and third-party databases. This approach will provide access to
more complete and timely data for assessing R&D outcomes, and it will expand
knowledge about how research production varies not only by institutional context
and academic discipline but also by social factors like gender. This project
will provide education and training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. In addition to conducting the research project and disseminating
findings through scholarly journals, the investigators will develop and make
available online tutorials regarding data-building activities that will leverage
data from third-party sources so that other researchers can expand their own
research capabilities. The project also will provide new information and
insights that can inform policy making with respect to R&D investments to the
management of S&E graduate education and training programs.

This research project will draw on random samples of high quality S&E graduate
students who receive awards or who are designated for honorable mention in the
prestigious U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship
Program (GRFP). In contrast to the set of other NSF funding mechanisms, GRFP-
eligible applicants are at an earlier point in their professional and research
education and training as graduate students. The investigators conducting this
project will use the two samples of awardees and honorable mentions to evaluate
the impact of federal funding on research productivity and quality. Public
metrics on individual- and organizational-level variables will serve as added
controls to enable the investigators to address unobservable measures of
research quality. This investigators will employ a series of third-party
databases that provide information about degree completion, publication
activity, and professional placement. Once data from different sources are
integrated, the researchers will use econometric techniques to empirically
examine the impact of the R&D investment on research-related outcomes. More
specifically, they will examine the impact of R&D investment for emerging
researchers on publication productivity, research quality, leadership, and
independence. The latter two measures of research leadership and independence
will offer insights as to how a graduate student uses the R&D resources to
develop her/his own research record over time.