* 1661568
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Harnessing Complex Dynamics of Coupled Mechanical-Electrical System for an Improved Vibration Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kon-Well Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2021
* USD 374,206.00

The goal of this project is to acquire a fundamental understanding of physics in
energy capturing devices where vibrational energy is converted into electrical
power. The focus of the research will be on maximizing energy capture in these
devices by formulating an integrated approach to leverage complex dynamics of
vibration energy harvesting mechanisms and nonlinear electrical circuitry needed
to capture the energy. The state-of-the-art formulations exploit the
nonlinearities in dynamics of either mechanical side (with unrealistic circuits)
or electrical side (with simple linear devices) but do not exploit them in an
integrated manner. By providing accurate guidelines to design and deploy
multimodal, nonlinear energy harvesting systems, this research will
significantly promote the development of sustainable microelectronics, such as
for wireless sensors in structural, mechanical, and biological monitoring
applications in various industries. The outreach activities will utilize, in
coordination will diversity-serving organizations, the interactive energy
harvesting system demonstrators developed in this project to capture local
students' interest in science and engineering subjects and higher education
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While vibration energy harvesting is becoming
more feasible, recent research outcomes show that it is critical that basic
research issues be addressed before a high performance, high efficiency energy
harvesting system can be realized and deployed for myriad applications. Through
new, insightful analytical formulations supported by experimental
investigations, these research outcomes will guide development of energy
harvesting systems that empower future generations of self-sufficient
microelectronics, such as the prolific wireless structural health monitoring
sensor networks that are otherwise reliant on unsustainable energy resources.
The research efforts will bridge the two research bases of device platform
dynamics and electrical circuitry formulation to establish new analytical
formulations that accommodate the collective device and electrical
nonlinearities and multimodal dynamics. This will facilitate rich insight into
their ideal integration. Experimental studies will validate the analytical
findings and will investigate new piezoelectric energy harvesting systems
identified by the theory that set electrical energy-capture benchmarks.