* 1661206
* Connecting nuances of foreign status, professional networks, and higher education outcomes in STEM disciplines over time
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Eric Welch, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2023
* USD 912,513.00

A team of researchers from Arizona State University, Georgia Institute of
Technology, and the University of Arkansas will investigate factors affecting
the retention of foreign STEM higher education faculty in the US and those
factors leading to their being more productive members of the workforce and
advancing STEM in this country. In an era of global competition for academic
STEM talent, and despite the high representation of foreign STEM faculty in US
post-secondary institutions, significant research and data gaps have limited our
understanding of how multiple dimensions of foreign background and experience,
professional and collaborative networks, and key faculty outcomes are related.
This project will help to address gaps through syntheses and new analyses of
existing datasets and the piloting of a novel survey. The project is funded by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will advance research on foreign
faculty by conceptualizing a broader notion of foreign status that goes beyond
nationality of birth and education to include cultural characteristics, family
composition and location, local community engagement, and international
professional experience.Â  The project scope will focus on the analysis and
integration of extant data, and in so doing make clearer the value and
limitations of those datasets. Methodologically, the project will use an
innovative social network design to collect and integrate various national
datasets to capture and analyze the relationships among a) dimension of foreign
status; b) professional network structure, cultural composition and resources;
and c) work history, satisfaction, mobility, mentoring, and productivity, among
others. The study will be conducted in three integrated parts: 1) expanded
analysis of existing NSF-sponsored survey datasets to investigate how foreign
status and network structure and outcomes are related; 2) collection, merging
and analysis of extant scientist data to determine gaps and complementarities
critical for longer-term data collection; and 3) initial data collection to
develop new survey designs and validate new metrics. Study findings will be
relevant for the design of interventions to improve the integration,
satisfaction, retention, and productivity of foreign faculty for the long term
competitiveness of the nation.