* 1661621
* RCN: Research Network in Hybrid Simulation for Multi-Hazard Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Shirley Dyke, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Hybrid simulation is a powerful cyber-physical research methodology that
integrates physical experimentation with computational simulation to observe and
evaluate the performance of engineering systems under realistic conditions.
Originally pioneered in the field of earthquake engineering, hybrid simulation
includes a suite of efficient and cost-effective techniques that has potential
for broad application across many science and engineering disciplines. For
example, such experimental evaluation of new design concepts and devices is
intended to examine the performance of civil infrastructure, such as buildings
and lifelines, when exposed to natural hazards, such as earthquakes and
windstorms. Thus, these experiments enable knowledge generation and innovations
that will reduce fatalities, maintain business continuity, and minimize economic
losses resulting from natural hazards. A growing interdisciplinary and
international community of researchers is using hybrid simulation to address
societal grand challenge problems related to multi-hazard engineering. However,
existing technical barriers have limited advancements in hybrid simulation. This
research coordination network will be established to accelerate progress in
advanced hybrid simulation methodologies to address societal grand challenges,
build capacity in a range of laboratories, and build partnerships among
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research coordination
network aims to facilitate the scientific advances needed to establish the
theory of and expand the capacity for hybrid simulation as it applies to multi-
hazard engineering. The specific objectives are to: (1) diversify, broaden, and
expand the community of researchers in hybrid simulation, (2) foster peer-to-
peer and institute-to-institute partnerships that will be able to tackle the
scientific challenges that lie ahead, (3) develop the common research agenda for
hybrid simulation, (4) share digital artifacts, such as open-source data,
models, lectures, techniques, and tools, across laboratories and disciplinary
boundaries, (5) build the capacity for hybrid simulation in a greater number of
existing laboratories, and (6) cultivate international collaborations to share
knowledge and enable access to resources. These objectives will be achieved
through activities such as focused workshops, online networking, sharing of
resources, peer-to-peer communications, international partnerships, research
agenda development, and dissemination activities. Digital artifacts, such as
computational models, experimental data, and learning materials, will be
gathered and shared through the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure Designsafe-ci.org web portal. A diverse, core group of
junior faculty and graduate students will be engaged, while senior and mid-
career faculty also will participate and share expertise. By breaking down the
existing technical barriers that have limited the advancement of hybrid
simulation methods, this broader community of researchers will be prepared to
solve societal grand challenge problems related to natural hazard events.