* 1661532
* Renewal: SFS @ Northeastern - a multi-disciplinary approach
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Agnes Chan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,600,000.00

Northeastern University, one of the sixteen National Centers of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Operations, proposes to continue and expand its
participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. The students supported by this grant will develop the
necessary skillset to serve the nation in securing its cyber infrastructure. The
project will have an immediate impact on the information assurance and forensics
capabilities of the federal workforce by developing well-trained cybersecurity
professionals. The University has received all three designations available for
Centers of Academic Excellence, in Information Assurance Education, Research and
Cyber Operations. Together with its nationally-recognized Cooperative Education,
Northeastern University is well-positioned to attract and educate strong
students in multi-disciplinary programs in Information Assurance. The University
has established a well-designed infrastructure to manage and to support the SFS
program on campus and continues to recruit a diverse group of under-represented
students to this program. The University also works with a variety of local
community colleges to plan pathways for adult learners to go into the field of
cybersecurity. Northeastern will continue to build a community among SFS
students through activities, such as Capture-the-Flag, Collegiate Cyber Defense
Competition, Hackathon and the Speaker Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern
University is committed to advancing the nation's cybersecurity capability by
recruiting and educating strong students for the next generation of
cybersecurity professionals, and engaging faculty and students in the forefront
of research in related areas. The University's education and research programs
in cybersecurity are fundamentally multi-disciplinary. They provide students
with theoretical foundations in the principles of information assurance, but
they also focus on developing ethical behavior, practical skill sets through
team-based projects, hands-on activities, and security-related cooperative
education assignments. Many of these students come from various backgrounds,
ranging from Political Science and Criminal Justice to Computer Science,
Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Physics. Since cybersecurity
involves both the technical and behavioral sciences, the fact that each student
brings a different perspective to the discipline contributes to a better
understanding of the issues and their solutions. The George J. Kostas Research
Institute for Homeland Security, established through alumni donation, fosters
collaborative, use-inspired, research aimed at expanding the capacity of
communities, critical systems, and infrastructure to withstand, respond to, and
recover from man-made and natural catastrophes. Activities associated with the
Institute will further facilitate exchanges between government and academia
regarding recruitment, education, and academic research in cybersecurity.