* 1661987
* BD Spokes: Spoke: NORTHEAST: Collaborative: Grand Challenges for Data-Driven Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ryan Baker, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,999.00

This project will support teachers, administrators and researchers to
collaborate around online education resources and big data. It will increase the
capacity of participants in Educational Big Data in the Northeast to analyze
data from schools, students and administrators and to improve teaching and
learning. However, as more refined data comes from online instructional systems
and the use of data mining techniques, participants will learn to search for
patterns and associations and to draw conclusions about student knowledge,
performance and behavior. This research addresses several grand challenges in
education: 1) Predict future student events, e.g., college attendance, college
major, from existing large-scale longitudinal educational data sets involving
the same thousands of students. 2) Help teachers to make sense of dense online
data to influence their teaching, e.g., what should they say or do in response
to student activity. 3) Provide personal instruction to each student based on
using big data that represents student skills and behavior and infers students'
cognitive, motivational, and metacognitive factors in learning. The project will
improve the capacity in data-driven education by sharing educational databases,
managing yearly data competitions, and conducting educational data science
workshops and hackathons. Measurable results include studying gigabytes of data
to: create actionable recommendations for classroom teachers; make effective and
successful predictions about students; develop new AI methods for education; and
create new data science tool sets. Key outcomes include introducing many
researchers to educational big data, learning analytics and models of teaching
interventions. The team intends to improve classroom learning and leverage the
unique types of data available from digital education to better understand
students, groups and the settings in which they
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computers have been in classrooms for decades and
yet educators have not identified the most effective ways of using them. Despite
advances in evaluation methods to measure human learning, most researchers still
use measures available 50 years ago. This project will leverage and extend
state-of-the-art big data bases and technologies to measure online learning,
especially features of student engagement and learning associated with improved
student outcome. This project has the potential to reach millions of students
(while learning), hundreds of researchers while measuring human learning (from
education, cognitive science, learning sciences, psychology, and computer
science) and a dozen other organizations (publishers, testing organizations,
non-profit organizations, teachers, parents, and stakeholders). The team brings
together a unique blend of researchers from data science (Baker, Heffernan);
adaptive education technology and computer science (Woolf, Arroyo); and learning
sciences (Arroyo, Heffernan). It includes women and minorities (Woolf, Arroyo),
people who helped develop the largest educational database in the world (Baker),
developers of data science teaching materials (Arroyo, Baker), and others who
have developed online tutoring systems that achieve significant student success
in learning (e.g., Heffernan, Arroyo, Woolf).