* 1661100
* Collaborative Research: EHR Core: Exploring the Emotional and Motivational Lives of Undergraduate Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Idalis Villanueva, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2021
* USD 230,235.00

A strong engineering workforce is critical to maintaining a dynamic and
innovative United States economy. Engineering programs present considerable
challenges, including the need to motivate students and the need for students to
have positive attitudes toward learning. Prior research demonstrates that high
motivation and positive attitudes towards learning occur when students feel in
control of their own learning, place a high value on what they are studying, can
regulate their anxiety, and recover from setbacks. While asking students
questions about these issues is useful, there is a more direct way to study them
- by measuring students' physical responses in real time. A unique element of
this study is that in addition to surveys, the investigators will monitor
students' body stress responses through sweat and saliva to capture students'
anxiety during an exam. The intellectual merit of this ECR project is to broaden
understanding of factors related to success using physical signs that a student
cannot consciously control and of which they may not even be aware. The broader
impacts of this research will come from integrating students' reported
perceptions with their unconscious responses to better understand students'
emotional and motivational responses to learning, especially those of
underrepresented students, who face even greater challenges. This ECR project
will support innovative learning environments that promote student success and
entrance into the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
intellectual merit of this project is to extend theories of motivation and
emotion by integrating physiological responses of students with more traditional
measures to better predict student beliefs and behaviors, as well as performance
on accepted metrics of success in engineering programs. In addition to surveys,
we will use physiological markers based on sweat on the skin (electrodermal
activity) and saliva (particularly hormonal markers) to capture students'
emotion and anxiety during an authentic exam setting associated with a
foundational engineering course. The project will also be integrative in drawing
upon theoretical and practical knowledge from engineering education, psychology,
physiology, and the learning sciences. It will also broaden understanding of
factors related to student emotion, motivation and self-regulation using
physical signals that a student cannot self-report as they cannot consciously
control and may not even be aware of. The broader impact will come from applying
these findings to improving student outcomes, especially those of
underrepresented students, who are trying to succeed in an especially
challenging environment.