* 1661900
* Multi-Scale Models for Membrane Fission Catalyzed by the Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Qiang Cui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Membranes adopt a broad range of shapes to facilitate specific and central
functions at the level of cells and organelles. Proteins and lipids play a key
role in this process, but their molecular choreography is still emerging and
their impact on altering membrane shape in vivo remains controversial and
obscure. A central challenge in cell biology is to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which intracellular membranes are shaped by proteins. Deciphering
these mechanisms, through mathematical modeling and analysis, molecular
simulations, and integration with new experimental efforts, will revolutionize
our view of biology and provide opportunities for engineering that extend the
limitations of natural biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
tightly integrates mathematical theory (Spagnolie), molecular simulations at
atomistic and coarse-grained levels (Cui), and biochemical and functional
experimental approaches (Audhya) to decipher the mechanism of membrane fission
catalyzed by the ESCRT complexes. The mathematical analysis and modeling at the
continuum level goes beyond previous continuum models to explicitly include the
energetic and dynamic features of ESCRT-III filaments and their interactions
with the multi-component membrane and nearby solvent. Molecular simulations at
atomic and coarse-grained levels provide realistic estimates of mechanical and
dynamic properties of proteins and membrane required in the mathematical
analysis. Numerical simulations and asymptotic analysis will identify the
physical properties of ESCRT-III subunits and their interactions with the
membrane that drive membrane vesiculation, leading to specific predictions
(mutations) that will be tested in the Audhya lab. Results of experimental tests
feed back to the calibration and refinement of the mathematical models and
molecular simulations. The iterative process that integrates multi-scale
computations and experimental investigation will establish a powerful paradigm
to advance our mechanistic understanding of complex biological processes.