* 1661734
* I-Corps: Biomanufacturing of Advanced Porous Carbon Materials
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Se-Hee Lee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project deals with the
development of porous carbon materials made from fungal-derived precursors. The
demand for porous carbon materials, like activated carbon (AC), is expected to
surpass supply capabilities by 2020. Since AC is used in applications such as
water filtration, air purification, and energy storage, it is imperative to
develop new and higher performing versions of AC. This new technology takes
advantage of sustainable carbon sources present in wastewater, such as municipal
and industrial, to grow tunable biotemplates for AC which have the potential to
outperform traditional AC. By treating wastewater during manufacturing, marginal
cost is reduced and production occurs near end consumers.

This NSF I-Corps project will help determine a potential product-market fit for
fungal derived activated carbons. This is a platform technology using
filamentous fungus to capture renewable and sustainable carbon from wastewater
as a base for a variety of synthetic carbons. Organic carbon, present in
wastewater, provide a nutrient source for potential cost savings and large scale
production. By taking advantage of facile and rapid fungal growth, and
controlling the carbonization conditions, it may be possible to produce
commercial carbons at a fraction of the cost of current products. Tunability in
the growth stage unlocks a series of advantageous product developments such as
microstructure, dopants, and chemistry. The main advantages of the newly derived
activated carbon include monolithic structures, nano-metal integration, high
surface area, high purity, potential for renewable labeling, and low production
cost.