* 1661732
* Optimization in the Small-Data Regime
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Vishal Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2021
* USD 221,592.00

Modern decision making under uncertainty frequently involves the need to make
many simultaneous decisions at a highly granular level, often in a time varying
environment. As a result, the amount of relevant data per decision is often
quite small. Conventional techniques in data-driven optimization have provably
poor performance under these conditions. This project aims to develop a new
class of data-driven methods specifically tailored for the "small-data" regime,
offering a new perspective on data-driven methods. The prevalence of the small-
data regime in applications ranging from epidemiology to inventory management to
new product launches underscores the potential of a successful research program
to have cross-disciplinary impact. On the educational side, the project will
create web-based educational tools that highlight the unique challenges of the
small-data regime, and foster project collaborations between graduate students
and local government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach will blend
large-scale linear programming, robust optimization and empirical Bayes
estimation. These key ideas exploit the large-scale structure of these
optimization problems to attempt to overcome the challenges of insufficient
data. The research will focus on: 1) formulating a general framework for the
"small-data" decision regime, 2) developing methods that are provably best
possible as the size of the optimization problem grows large for a fixed amount
of data, and 3) illustrating the techniques through case-studies of high-impact
applications. The award will support the PI's ongoing collaborations with
decision makers in both the public and private sectors who will make use of
these decision tools.