* 1661306
* The Faculty Hiring Process for Women and Men in Academic STEM: Assessing Fairness in Evaluation Ratings and the Interview Experience
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Stephanie Fraley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 04/30/2023
* USD 512,500.00

The underrepresentation of women faculty in STEM limits the potential for
scientific creativity and reduces available role models for female undergraduate
and graduate students pursuing STEM careers. Research on implicit bias indicates
that women candidates for faculty positions are less likely to be selected than
men. It is critical to understand the experiences of hiring committee members,
and of candidates for faculty positions, in order to advance STEM academic
hiring practices. Having a more diverse STEM academic workforce contributes to
promoting the progress of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
investigate whether and, if so, how bias against women creeps into the process
of selecting and interviewing tenure-track faculty candidates at a highly ranked
public research university. There are three studies: Study 1 analyzes the
deployment and outcomes of faculty using evaluation rubrics in the processes of
rating candidates and recommending them for interviews and for hire. The
research team will compare rubric ratings and outcomes to its own assessment of
scholarly production, impact and teaching quality, extracted from candidates'
CVs. Also, video-recordings of the candidates' formal job talks will be analyzed
to determine social interactions, such as the number and tone of questions and
interruptions, which may vary depending on whether the candidate is male or
female. Study 2 surveys advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
newly hired faculty to examine if men and women self-report being treated
differently during academic STEM interviews, and to determine if men and women
react differently to similar interview events such as interrupting. Study 3
surveys early career scholars to determine their perceptions of discipline-
specific understandings and stereotypes about merit and how these perceptions
may or may not affect how they navigate their own interview
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education,
learning and participation.