* 1661148
* Collaborative Partnership to Improve STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Alfred Hall, Le Moyne-Owen College
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2018
* USD 76,507.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This conference proposal will
build on the current knowledge base and guidance from research studies about
ways to improve the quality of STEM education and research for students who
attend three Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and one urban-
based non-HBCU university. The conference will focus on ways to increase the
number of African American students who are interested in and motivated to enter
STEM fields. It will also simultaneously explore approaches aimed at retaining
students in the current pipeline to persist to degree completion across the
multiple campuses. Thus, the main objectives of the conference will be to:
develop a replicable process for evaluating the status of STEM education
programs individually and collectively regarding the use of research-based
effective strategies; examine current strategies utilized by the four
institutions to identify needs required for improvement of STEM education; and
access the expertise of respected researchers to determine next steps in
improving STEM education for African American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
four institutions will use relevant research, national and local experts, and
institutional knowledge to inform and transform current STEM practices. Along
with STEM educators, faculties from the arts and sciences, engineering, and
computer science will serve as strategic partners in facilitating change
institution-wide. This combined strategy of knowledge and expertise will move
the institutions beyond meetings and planning to building the capacity for
delivering higher quality STEM learning at all levels. As a result, outcomes
from this conference will include future research opportunities, processes,
strategies, and pathways for increasing and retaining African American students
in STEM fields and careers. Outcomes will also include strategies for
maintaining the extant collaborative environment while promoting a national
network for learning about and sharing innovative and potentially transformative
STEM programs shown to broaden participation in STEM by a larger number of
African American students.