* 1661124
* Exploring Biological Evidence: Helping Students Understand the Richness and Complexity of Evidentiary Constructs in Biology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ala Samarapungavan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,336,062.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation. The proposed study will
explore trajectories of development in high school and undergraduate students'
understanding of evidence in the context of biology teaching and learning. One
of the difficulties experienced by many science learners is that they do not
fully understand the evidence base that underpins contemporary science. This
study will examine students' developing understanding of evidence in the context
of biology learning. This research will contribute to fundamental knowledge on
STEM learning and STEM learning environments by providing information on
trajectories of development in students' understanding and use of evidence as a
central part of their learning in biology through the secondary and post-
secondary years. The project will also provide information on how variations in
how teachers and instructional materials support students' understanding and
reasoning about evidence influence this development. The instructional resources
developed as part of this project (e.g., grade band appropriate teacher guides
and exemplars of supported assignments and assessments) will be of direct value
to biology educators. The outcomes of this study will help educators better
prepare students who want to pursue careers in science, including research
careers. Furthermore, knowledge developed by the project may support the
development of scientific literacy and participation in evidence-based decision
making around public policy on scientific issues among
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a design-based research
approach to achieve the following objectives: a) Develop a conceptual analysis
of varied facets of disciplinary evidence that are important to evolutionary
thinking in biology learning; b) Describe trajectories of learning in high
school and undergraduate students' understanding and use of biological evidence
for evolution; c) Examine how variations in instructional scaffolding relate to
patterns of student learning within each grade band; and d) Develop design
knowledge to facilitate integration of disciplinary evidence scaffolding in high
school and undergraduate biology instruction. First, data will be collected on
what students know and learn about biological evidence in the context of routine
biology instruction. Subsequently the team will integrate instructional
scaffolds that foster more nuanced and multifaceted understandings of biological
evidence. Two variations will be examined: 1) Generic evidence scaffolds will
remind students of different aspects of using evidence in science (e.g. "refer
to all the evidence when constructing an explanation"), but without explicit
links to relevant disciplinary knowledge for each aspect. 2) disciplinary
evidence scaffolds will explicitly remind students of key disciplinary knowledge
related to each aspect of evidence. The project will use a mixed method
approach, combining qualitative and quantitative cognitive science techniques to
collect and analyze data from a) student learning artifacts, b) pre and
posttests of biology content knowledge, and their understanding and use of
evidence in biology, c) videotaped classroom lessons, and d) interviews with
teachers and students. These methods will allow for quantitative comparisons of
group performance across the two instructional conditions and supplement these
comparisons with rich descriptive data about how students learn in varied
instructional contexts.