* 1661052
* Collaborative Research: Wave, Surge, and Tsunami Overland Hazard, Loading and Structural Response for Developed Shorelines
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Roger Ghanem, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 382,403.00

Inundation from storms like Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy, and the 2011 East
Japan tsunami, has caused catastrophic damage to coastal communities. With
increasing coastal population, and trillions of dollars of infrastructure at
risk, storms and tsunamis will continue to be threats to coastal communities.
Improving community resilience to these Inundation Events (IEs) requires an
understanding of how they damage buildings. Prediction of structural damage in
IEs can be quite difficult along developed shorelines, where some structures may
partially shield buildings behind them, reducing damage in ways that are not
easily predictable using the existing state-of-the-art. This project will create
new tools to predict structural damage from IEs along developed shorelines. The
team from the University of Notre Dame, Oregon State University, and the
University of Southern California will develop computer-based predictive methods
for detailed building damage using laboratory tests and field data to guide
development and validate accuracy. These new models will provide increased
inundation and damage prediction accuracy, resulting in improved community
resilience efforts and more efficient building design. Input from industry and
professional standards committees will ensure that these results reach
engineering practitioners. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Prediction of surge, wave, and
tsunami flow transformation over the built and natural environment is essential
in determining survival and failure of near-coast structures during Inundation
Events. However, unlike earthquake and wind hazards, IE loading and damage often
vary strongly at a parcel scale in built-up coastal regions due to the influence
of nearby structures on hydrodynamic transformation. Additionally, IE
hydrodynamics and loading are presently treated using a variety of simplified
methods (e.g. bare earth method) which introduce significant uncertainty and/or
bias. Furthermore, existing evaluations of structural damage during IEs do not
employ standard structural techniques, in large part because of uncertainties in
the hydrodynamics and loading. This collaborative project will examine
probabilistic structural vulnerability to storm waves and tsunamis in developed
regions, where structures are most concentrated but existing models perform
poorly due to complex flow transformation around these structures. The
laboratory and computational methodologies developed here will employ
deterministic and stochastic models with scales able to resolve local
transformation, and that directly represent relevant processes. Resolving the
local transformation at fine scales will provide improved accuracy in the
prediction of structural vulnerability during IEs, enabling improved design,
mitigation, and risk-informed decision making. Results of the detailed
methodology, which will be computationally intensive, will be used where
appropriate to develop more tractable methodologies for the probabilistic
prediction of hydrodynamic transformation, loading, and structural response by
engineering practitioners.