* 1661166
* Improving STEM Outcomes for Young Children with Language Learning Disabilities by Intervening at the Intersection of Language and Scientific Thought
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Susan Cook, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 10/31/2017
* USD 353,890.00

The sophisticated language of science can be a barrier to the learning of
science, and this is especially true for children whose abilities to produce and
comprehend language are deficient, including children at risk for dyslexia. The
purpose of this project is to test interventions that have the potential to
ameliorate language as a barrier to science learning. To isolate the active
ingredient, two separate interventions - one addressing grammar and the other
addressing vocabulary - will be compared to a science only control condition.
The participants will be preschoolers and kindergarteners who have specific
language impairment (SLI), a prevalent condition that impedes the development of
vocabulary and grammar. Early intervention could be key to preparing future
secondary and post-secondary students with SLI for the successful acquisition of
STEM knowledge and the pursuit of STEM careers. The project goals are intended
to better understand how to improve these students' learning trajectories before
significant gaps in scientific knowledge have developed. Integration of supports
for science-relevant grammar and vocabulary into early science curricula may be
a viable approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves randomized
controlled trial with assignment of participants to one of three intervention
conditions: science only, science + vocabulary supports, and science + grammar
supports. Small-group inquiry-based science instruction will occur in all three
conditions. The science + vocabulary condition will include instruction on
science-related vocabulary words whereas the science + grammar condition will
include a focus on complex grammatical constructions relevant to scientific
inquiry. Weekly measures during the intervention and withdrawal phases will
target participants' mastery and maintenance of taught science concepts.
Additional measures administered before and after the intervention phase will
target participants' generalization to untaught science concepts and practices.
Comparisons of outcomes between conditions are intended to assess whether
supports for vocabulary and grammar improve science learning. Statistical
analysis will involve binomial mixed models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.