* 1661272
* Understanding PhD Career Pathways in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Engler, Council of Graduate Schools
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,726,465.00

The Council of Graduate Schools will collect and analyze detailed quantitative
data of STEM doctoral students and alumni at different phases of their careers
to determine if those who pursue academic positions have fundamentally different
career progression, values, or work responsibilities compared to those who seek
and hold nonacademic jobs. The project will track career pathways for alumni
cohorts three, eight, and 15 years from PhD degree award from 15 STEM doctoral
granting institutions to trace changing employment within academic sector,
transitions from academic to nonacademic jobs, and vice versa. The study also
will examine differences by institutional context, field of study, and
sociodemographic characteristics such as race, gender, and parental educational
attainment. The research will provide a better understanding of the relationship
among STEM doctoral training, professional development opportunities, and
subsequent careers. The findings will inform STEM workforce development policy
and practice while building the capacity for institutions to systematically
collect their own data that can inform continuous program improvement,
particularly for underrepresented students who are more likely to choose
nonacademic careers. This project is supported by the Education and Human
Resources Core Research Program, which funds fundamental research in STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the career anchors theory,
the researchers will analyze the data to define the full scope of occupational
outcomes and career progression of STEM doctoral alumni. The study will focus on
two major research questions and test the hypothesis that the boundaries between
academic and nonacademic jobs are less significant or more fluid than is often
assumed: (1) Are there substantial differences between academic and nonacademic
careers for STEM PhD holders? 2) Is the academic/nonacademic distinction a
meaningful one in a 21st century STEM professional workforce? The approximately
6,000 student and alumni surveys will be administered in three waves and capture
information on employment and occupational preferences, employment and
occupational outcomes, participation in STEM professional development programs,
and other observable characteristics, including gender, race/ethnicity, age,
employment and education history, and parental education level. Analyses of
variance (ANOVA) and t-tests will be performed for differences by student
characteristics as well as institutional and program contexts.