* 1661686
* Computational and Experimental Characterization of Twin-twin Interactions in Hexagonal Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Jian Wang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2021
* USD 388,037.00

Hexagonal metals, such as magnesium and titanium with hexagonal close packed
structure, have the potential for increasing the efficiency of fuel consumption
because of their superior strength-to-density ratio. In particular, magnesium
with a density low enough to make it 35 percent lighter than aluminum and 78
percent lighter than steel is perhaps the most appealing of these lightweight
materials. Replacing steel structural materials with magnesium-based materials
in automotive applications would boost fuel efficiency by more than 50 percent.
However, magnesium's use remains fairly limited because of a gap in the
knowledge of a phenomenon called twin-twin interactions. Twins are specific
features in hexagonal materials that can occur from the nanoscale to microscale
and responsible for what is called deformation twinning, which is a major mode
of plasticity in magnesium and responsible for its low strength and poor
deformability. This research will focus on understanding the effect of twin-twin
interactions on the mechanisms of deformation in magnesium by performing
modeling at multiple scales supported by experimental observations. The outcome
will be a predictive model that would allow engineers and scientists to optimize
the processing routes of hexagonal metals for specific structural and
environmental applications. As part of this research, students will be provided
an opportunity to be trained at a national laboratory. Undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups will be hired as part of the research team, and
K-12 students will be exposed to the research through outreach events.

The long-term goal of this research is to establish a research framework for
quantitatively characterizing and predicting the twinning induced
microstructures and mechanical properties of hexagonal materials. It will link
the macroscopic plastic responses to the crystallographic mechanisms causing
them, while also accounting for microstructure evolution. To do so, the research
team will characterize microstructures of twin-twin boundaries at the atomic
level through atomistic simulations and transmission electron microscopes;
identify twin-twin boundaries dominated deformation mechanisms at the
atomic-/micro-scales by using atomistic simulations and in situ nanomechanical
testing in scanning electron microscopies; establish twin-twin interaction
models at the meso-scale by combining in situ mechanical testing and finite
element analysis, and implement the meso-scale models into macro-scale
effective-medium polycrystal plasticity models. The numerical and experimental
tools developed through this project will eventually enable design of
manufacturing processes for specific structural and environmental applications.