* 1661518
* Stable synthetic equivalents of the monophosphorus anion (P-): a clean substitute for PCl3
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2020
* USD 520,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Guy Bertrand of the Chemistry and Biochemistry Department at
the University of California - San Diego, will prepare environmentally benign
building blocks for the synthesis of phosphorus derivatives. Phosphorus is vital
not only for food production but also for other agricultural commodities such as
ethanol, biofuels, and any biorenewable chemicals. Phosphorus availability is a
looming crisis even more severe than dwindling supplies of fossil fuels, simply
because no alternative for this element exists. The ultimate goal of this
project is to induce a shift in current phosphorus research, and hopefully
industry, toward more sustainable practices. The aim is to circumvent
traditional phosphorus starting materials, such as PCl3, whose transformation
into the desired chemicals produces an enormous amount of waste as well as being
extremely energy-inefficient. The laboratory of the PI is a joint venture
between UCSD and the French CNRS. It serves to promote the exchange of
undergraduates and graduates between UCSD and European
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCl3 features a phosphorus center, which can
be viewed as a P3+ synthetic equivalent. The aim of this project is to develop
stable sustainable "P¯" building blocks, including PN2¯ and P3¯, phosphorus-
containing analogues of the azide anion (N3¯). Through reaction with
electrophiles (E+), these building blocks will lead to highly reactive
phosphinidenes (E-P), including their room temperature stable version. This
monocoordinated phosphorus species, isoelectronic with carbenes, will readily be
transformed into a broad range of phosphorus compounds, including artificial
allotropes of phosphorus. The "P¯" synthetic equivalents will also be used for
the preparation of RNP2 and RP3, which are di- and tri-phosphorus analogues of
azido derivatives, as well as R2C=P2 which are diphosphorus analogues of diazo
derivatives. These compounds will not only act as 1,3-dipoles allowing for the
preparation of a variety of phosphorus heterocycles, but will also be generators
of the highly reactive dinuclear P2, which will be chemically trapped. The
broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits, and since this
project is at the interface between physical, organic, inorganic and
organometallic chemistry, it is well suited to the education of chemists at all
levels. This project will contribute to the education of four Graduate Students,
three of whom are minorities, and the first of their family to earn an
undergraduate degree.