* 1661926
* GOALI: Mechanics and Dynamics of Machining with Applied Chip Tension
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Urmaze Naterwalla, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2021
* USD 362,119.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research on enhancement of material shearing mechanisms in machining
processes, using an approach that also controls friction. The chip in metal
cutting is treated as a by-product, typically as waste. However, this new
approach attempts to use the chip by applying tension and thereby reduce and
cancel friction forces in machining. By attenuating friction forces, this new
turning process assisted by chip-pulling can enable material removal with much
lower cutting effort and energy; provide greater stability margins, longer tool-
life, and facilitate high-throughput energy efficient precision manufacturing. A
potential mechanism of suppressing the chip-jam with tailored cutting tool
geometries is also likely with the new approach. Collaboration with a partner
from US aerospace industry will help ensure the technology transfer.

The research focus is to investigate how tension applied on the cut chip during
machining processes affects cutting mechanics and dynamics. Effective use of the
cut chip requires robust control of its flow. Micro-textured tools will be
designed to control and navigate the chip flow to realize application of
tension. Analytical models will be developed to understand the link between
micro-grooved tool geometry to the chip flow mechanics and chip flow
controllability. The effect of applying tension on the cut chip will be
investigated. Tension applied to the chip cancels the friction force on the rake
face and reduces the cutting effort while improving cutting mechanics.
Analytical models and experimental characterization will be performed to
understand the effect of pulling the chip on resultant cutting forces, cutting
energy, the dynamic relation amongst them, and the limitations. Based on this
understanding, chip tension will be introduced as an innovative process control
parameter to improve static and dynamic characteristics of the machining
process. Machining of precision parts can be realized with lower form errors by
minimizing overall cutting forces through chip tension and force control.
Reduced machining cycle times and increased material removal rates can be
achieved through greater chatter stability margins that can be attained by
modulating the chip tension jointly with process parameters.