* 1661004
* A Belonging Intervention to Improve STEM Outcomes for Women and Underrepresented Students: A Randomized Controlled Trial at 22 Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Mary Murphy, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,743,557.00

This project consists of a large randomized-controlled trial (RCT) of a social
psychological intervention with college students. The social-belonging
intervention seeks to normalize the students' experience of struggle in the
transition to college and provides productive strategies to help students
perceive initial challenges with adjustment as relatively commonplace and not
indicative of a lack of belonging. The project examines the experimental effects
of the belonging intervention on the achievement and retention of
underrepresented students in STEM courses and majors with more than 40,000
students across 22 colleges and universities. The project will explore how the
effects of the belonging intervention vary based on the situational cues in
students? local STEM settings and the visibility of those cues. It examines the
experimental effects of the intervention on STEM persistence and performance
(e.g., STEM grades, majoring, retention and graduation) among several
stigmatized and underrepresented groups: women, underrepresented students of
color, first-generation students, students with disabilities, and English-
language learners. STEM majors and courses appear to constitute more threatening
contexts for underrepresented groups than do other majors; yet they also offer
opportunities for higher-paying jobs and contributions to the U.S. STEM
workforce. Therefore, this project will focus on enhancing STEM persistence and
performance among underrepresented groups through examination of the situational
cues that engender identity threat and the experimental investigation of an
identity-threat reducing intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a randomized
controlled trial with over 40,000 first-year students at 22 colleges, this
project will investigate how students from STEM-underrepresented groups (i.e.,
women, racial/ethnic minorities, first-generation college students, students
with disabilities, and English-language learners) are affected by situational
cues that signal their group may not be valued or expected to succeed in STEM
settings. These feelings of social identity threat have been shown in decades of
past research to negatively shape students' experiences of college, depress
academic performance and persistence, and cause students to question their
belonging in STEM and in college more generally. The researchers will assess the
effectiveness of a large-scale pre-matriculation belonging intervention in
improving the academic persistence and performance of students in STEM classes
and fields. The treatment communicates that adversity and feelings of non-
belonging are normative and temporary experiences in the transition to college
that can improve by adopting productive social and academic strategies. The
project will also investigate the boundary conditions of cue-induced identity
threat by examining how STEM academic success is moderated by situational cues
(e.g., numerical representation among students and faculty), and the visibility
of the cues (e.g., whether such representation is easily assessed, as among
women, or more difficult to assess, as among students with learning
disabilities). The researchers will investigate how these effects play out in
both broad-access and more selective colleges and among groups that past
research has shown are affected by identity-threatening situational cues in STEM
and who have shown improved outcomes from social-psychological interventions in
STEM and non-STEM contexts.