* 1661565
* GOALI: Electrochemistry-based Atomic Layer Etching of Metals for Integrated Circuits
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Rohan Akolkar, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

Microprocessors and memory devices are central to electronic gadgets used in
virtually every aspect of modern life. At the heart of a microprocessor is a
complex integrated circuitry, which consists of billions of intricately
fabricated nanostructures. Miniaturization of micro-circuit structures and
ensuing exponential increase in computing speed and processing power has
followed the predictions of "Moore's Law". Such aggressive miniaturization
necessitates a paradigm shift from traditional manufacturing approaches to newer
nanomanufacturing technologies for atomically precise manipulation, deposition
and etching of materials. In spite of numerous efforts, a versatile technology
for atomically precise etching that meets the requirements of cost and atomic-
level control is presently unavailable. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project advances knowledge in scalable, low-cost
electrochemical processes with the creation of pathways for tailoring and
etching of metals with atomic precision. The project bridges various disciplines
in science and engineering, including chemistry, electrochemical engineering,
process design, and materials characterization. The research provides
educational experiences, industrial traineeships and fellowships to graduate and
undergraduate students including students from underrepresented groups.
Engagement with industry helps develop a model platform for industry-university
collaboration on cutting-edge electrochemical technologies for next generation
integrated circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, much progress has been made
in the atomic layer etching of semiconductors. However, atomic layer etching of
metals is still in its infancy. Plasma-assisted approaches to etch metals have
encountered many technical hurdles including surface contamination by volatile
byproducts and lack of atomic-level precision. The project investigates a new
liquid-phase electrochemical approach for the atomic layer etching of metals.
Through the use of novel self-limiting electrochemical reactions and selective
etching chemistries, this research advances knowledge in atomically precise
etching of metals such as copper. Fundamental aspects of the chemistry of atomic
layer etching are investigated leading to the identification of process
parameters for precision etching of integrated circuits. To assess the scale-up
potential of the atomic layer etching process, nano-patterned geometries on
large area silicon wafers are created with in situ diagnostics and process
monitoring and studied. The resulting process could become an enabler of
atomically precise manufacturing of structures in future nanoelectronics
circuits.