* 1661029
* ABI Innovation: Posterior Predictive Checks of Evolutionary Models.
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Bryan Carstens, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2021
* USD 403,649.00

With support from the Advances in Biological Informatics in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure, Professor Bryan Carstens and his research group at
the Ohio State University will further develop the P2M2 software package, so
that it can better estimate how multiple events may shape population genetics.
Most of the differences among living organisms ultimately can be traced to
genetic variation, including humans. Patterns of genetic differences in a
species appear across different groups, due to events such as changes in
population size, migration between populations, or long periods of isolation.
Understanding, for example, how beneficial mutations can be established in a
natural population of a certain size that has migration limits is important for
understanding aspects of human health, conservation genetics, breeding in
agriculture and many other research areas. Recent technological advances have
made it fast and inexpensive to obtain genetic sequences from many individuals,
assuming samples can be collected. A number of software packages provide models
that estimate what prior events looked like from current genetic data, including
biological parameters such as population size or migration rate. However, each
assumes a particular mathematic model of population demography and are limited
to estimating parameters from a subset of the biological processes that may
influence genetic variation. A poor match between the assumptions of the
analytical model and the true population history will produce inaccurate
parameter estimates that are likely to mislead the biological inference. This
project will develop software that enables biologists to assess how appropriate
a particular software package is to a given set of genetic data. Therefore, it
will benefit society by improving the quality of biological inferences drawn
from genetic data, ranging from efforts to protect endangered species to
investigations into the history of viral pathogens.

Bayesian inference is commonly used to analyze genetic data because it provides
a computationally efficient approach to identifying highly-probable regions of
parameter space, but all such inference is conditional on the models chosen to
use in the analysis. While analytical models exist that can estimate parameters
associated with all population-level biological processes, such as genetic
drift, phylogenetic divergence, gene flow, population size change, etc.,
computational limitations prevent any given analytical model of incorporating
more than a handful of these processes. Biologists typically choose which
analytical method to use intuitively, and generally lack approaches for
assessing the absolute statistical fit of a model given the genetic data.
Consequently, the inferences that result from the analysis of genetic data are
effectively conditional on the appropriateness of the model used to analyze the
data, although they are rarely presented in such terms. The proposed work will
develop and implement a considerable expansion of the P2C2M R package, which
currently implements posterior predictive simulation to assess the statistical
fit of a single model - the multispecies coalescent model. The work will expand
P2C2M such that the statistical fit of additional coalescent methods can be
evaluated. By expanding P2C2M, the work promotes the consideration of model fit
as an important step within the overall process of making biological inferences
from genetic data. Biologists have devoted a great deal of energy to justify the
models that they use to analyze their data using verbal reasoning and
qualitative arguments, but have generally lacked the tools and statistical
framework to do so in a direct quantitative manner. P2C2M will provide these
tools by the time of project completion. As a direct consequence of the expanded
P2C2M R package, the inferences made by evolutionary geneticists will be more
insightful and because researchers and their audiences will have enhanced
confidence in the choice of analytical models from which these inferences are
derived. The work will enhance biological inferences with important societal
benefit, such as the identification of cryptic species, understanding the
demography of invasive species and disease vectors, and the movement of alleles
across the landscape in endangered species. Updated project code will be
available at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/P2C2M/index.html and other
supplemental information distributed at https://carstenslab.osu.edu/.