* 1661877
* Characterization and Modeling of Novel Dielectrophoretic Electropolymerization Micromanufacturing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Lawrence Kulinsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2021
* USD 359,999.00

Three-dimensional micro-electrodes have a wide range of current and emerging
applications in electronics, power conversion and storage, in various lab-on-a-
chip (LOC) applications, and in various sensors. Presently there is no
fabrication technique that can offer scalable mass production of three
dimensional micro-electrodes. In these processes, a cutting tool, a collimated
light source or a heat source needs to scan over all the micro-features to be
created, a long and time consuming process that compromises production rates and
cost. This project presents an integrated research plan to study, characterize,
and model the newly developed Dielectrophoretic Electropolymerization (DEP EP)
process for scalable manufacturing technology. The process combines
dielectrophoresis (DEP) and sequential electropolymerization. DEP selectively
attracts micro- and nano-particles suspended in solution to microelectrodes;
sequential electropolymerization captures particles on the surface of the
electrodes. The resulting polypyrrole (PPy) layer is conductive, thus enabling
the mass production of inexpensive microelectrodes for scientific and
engineering applications in the areas of biotechnology, life sciences, energy
production and storage, organic electronics, and chemical engineering. It is
expected that the process can also be used to create new photonic devices and
superior whole cell biosensor platforms for study of water quality and drug
discovery. This project will involve graduate and undergraduate students from
the University of California, Irvine as well as community college students from
Saddleback College and Mt. St. Antonio College. The outreach activities include
close mentoring of one middle school and one high school science teachers from
public schools with predominantly underrepresented minority student populations
from the Los Angeles Unified School District. Monthly visits of the PI and
graduate students to these schools, as well as school visits to the PI's
university lab are planned. The results and insights gained during the research
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PI as
well as disseminated in articles, conferences, and postings on the group?s
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will result in a validated model of the
Dielectrophoretic Electropolymerization (DEP EP) process, allowing process
control of scalable mass-production of three-dimensional electrodes patterned
with micro-particles or aligned nano-tubes. The objectives of the project are:
1) to characterize and model the dielectrophoretic electropolymerization
micromanufacturing process for attraction and attachment of micro- and nano-
particles to electrodes to include interplay between electroosmotic forces,
dielectrophoretic forces, and dynamic polymerization process; 2) to develop
validated models for creation of three specific types of patterned
microelectrodes: (a) micro- and nano-particles positioned at specific locations
on electrodes (for example, evenly distributed particles); (b) creation of
hierarchical (fractal) microelectrodes; and (c) alignment across microelectrodes
and creation of fuzed carbon Ohmic contacts for nano-fibers and nano-tubes.