* 1661597
* Generalization of Non-Uniform Rational Bezier Splines: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Krishnan Suresh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 314,186.00

Computer models today can accurately capture a wide variety shapes, ranging from
aerodynamic wings, to automotive components. This versatility stems from a
particular modeling technique called non-uniform rational Bezier-splines (i.e.,
NURBS). Indeed, NURBS are the most popular curve and surface modeling technique
today, and is the de facto standard in computer aided design. However, an
inherent short-coming of NURBS is its inability to capture sharp
discontinuities. This shortcoming reveals itself in several applications
including manufacturing planning, failure analysis, fluid flow modeling, etc.
This project will address this long-standing deficiency by pursuing a
generalization of NURBS, and establishing its effectiveness through targeted
applications. The project will have a wide societal impact by allowing engineers
to create and simulate much more complex models than possible today. The
research team will disseminate the research findings and software to the
scientific community. Teaching modules will be created to excite young students
about computer modeling, scientific computing, and engineering. These modules
will target K-12 students, including underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to a novel generalization
of NURBS that is obtained by decoupling the basis functions in NURBS along
different directions. This simple, yet unexplored, concept can help resolve many
of the fundamental challenges in NURBS, specifically, its inability to capture
discontinuities. The team will first establish the theoretical foundations of
the generalization. Next, using the decoupled weights as extra design variables,
new applications in modeling of "as additively manufactured" parts, and iso-
geometric analysis, will be pursued. To accelerate dissemination of knowledge,
the team will also develop a tool-kit to demonstrate the potential benefits, and
highlight possible drawbacks, of the generalization.