* 1661523
* Research Data Management Implementations: Impact on Science
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Hakizumwami B. Runesha, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 04/30/2018
* USD 69,859.00

The pace and scale of modern research requires researchers to navigate a large
number of complex data management activities to collect, organize, analyze,
share, store, and preserve their data, while also working to make their data
more open, discoverable, and reproducible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These data
management activities are critical for modern research and collaborative science
initiatives and maximize the utility of government funded research.
Unfortunately, researchers often lack the time, resources, and expertise to
perfectly execute all of these activities. While requirements for data
management have been in place for six years, many researchers are still not
entirely clear on what a good implementation strategy should look like or what
their specific responsibilities are with respect to data management. There are
few good Research Data Implementations (RDMI) exemplars and a lack of common
standards and practices. Data remains difficult to manage and reproduce
throughout its lifecycle, and solutions are still carried out and implemented in
a piecemeal fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In March of 2013, an NSF-funded
workshop on RDMI brought together 109 data management experts, with an
additional 73 experts attending online, to discuss RDMI implementations as they
relate to domain specific workflows and deployments. These discussions were very
helpful to the scientific community. There is a broad community of researchers
that would benefit from RDMI, but RDMI availability is currently limited to
institutions and domains with the resources and specialized personnel to develop
them. After 4 years, the scientific community would greatly benefit from an
opportunity to come together again to reflect on what has been accomplished to
date related to Data Management, share achievements and assess gaps and
opportunities for further contributions, and contribute with suggestions for a
future roadmap. We propose to organize a second RDMI workshop to be held in
2017. This new workshop will focus on:(a)the impact that RDMI have on science,
(b) developing RDMI in partnership with research communities, and (c) increasing
access to RDMI for the broader research community. Workshop organizers will
invite submission of position and experience papers and encourage dialogue on
these focus areas through talks, panel discussions, and breakout sessions.
Individual case studies will be discussed and workshop participants, through
breakout sessions, will offer feedback and suggestions that will aid in refining
future RDMI implementations.