* 1661937
* I-Corps: From Soybean Oil to Commodity Biobased Fatty Alcohols and Vinyl Monomers
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Chuanbing Tang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is across
applications in the areas of surfactants, detergents, personal cares,
lubricants, adhesives and coatings. The success of this project is directly
related with the reduction of carbon footprint in commodity products to
complement or replace petrochemical-based counterparts. The utilization of
soybean oil as raw materials would promote the industry application of soybean
oil and directly benefit U.S. agriculture and farmers. The project will impact
the markets of specialty chemicals and polymer emulsion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project addresses a long lasting goal of
converting soybean oil into sustainable, green fatty alcohols and vinyl
monomers. The key technological advance is the use of a base-catalyzed amidation
reaction to transform triglycerides into fatty amide alcohols under an
environmentally friendly, one-pot wet chemistry process, circumventing the use
of hydrogenation at high pressure with hydrogen gas that is usually practiced in
the current manufacturing of industry. Further derivatization into vinyl
monomers also warrants the use of solvent-free and high conversion processes
that are competitive with petrochemical-based vinyl monomers in terms of cost
and environmental concerns as well as add-on unique properties. This project
will be exploring the needs from industry and seeking feedback for re-designing
chemistry and compositions of fatty alcohol and vinyl monomers toward large-
scale production and business success.