* 1661815
* Transient Intermediates of Electron and Proton Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Frantisek Turecek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 504,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Frantisek Turecek of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Washington, Seattle, is developing new methods of
investigating transient intermediates of chemical reactions involving
biologically relevant compounds such as proteins and DNA. Transient
intermediates such as ions or chemical radicals occur when proteins and DNA are
damaged. Understanding of the chemical processes, their mechanisms, and nature
of reactive intermediates associated with ionization and chemical radical damage
to proteins and DNA helps to develop improved means for DNA and protein
protection and repair. The project lies at the interface of organic, physical,
and bioanalytical chemistry, and has a proven record of providing all-round
education to scientists at all levels. This research group welcomes students
currently or historically underrepresented in science and is well-positioned to
provide the highest level of education and training. In addition, the group is
active both nation-wide and internationally in fostering collaborations with
other research groups and institutes.

The research consists of three main aims. In Aim 1, the group combines two
techniques, gas-phase electron transfer and UV photodissociation action
spectroscopy, to achieve insight into the electronic structure of transient
radical intermediates of biological reactions of proteins and nucleic acids.
Studying these biomolecules with model systems of limited size, such as peptides
and DNA fragments, makes them amenable to computational analysis. Aim 2 concerns
the structure and dynamics of non-covalent biomolecular complexes. The approach,
which combines experimental mass spectrometry studies with Born-Oppenheimer
molecular dynamics calculations, is likely to produce valuable information on
the character and magnitude of non-covalent bonding in biomolecular complexes.
Aim 3 utilizes a new synthetic coupling reaction for solid-phase peptide
derivatization and improves mass-spectrometric analysis with the aim of
achieving de novo sequencing of unknown peptides.