* 1661586
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Control and Separation of Microparticles in Fluids using Optical Whispering Gallery Mode Resonant Forces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kamil Ekinci, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 339,970.00

The objective of this project is to create a new method for selective motion
control of micrometer-sized particles suspended in liquids. The method is based
on an optical counterpart to "whispering gallery" resonance observed in certain
structures, in which a sound made at one point may be heard clearly in certain
other special spots, even though it may be inaudible everywhere else. In this
project, a suspended spherical particle plays the role of the whispering
gallery, with the resonance determined by its diameter and optical properties
relative to the surrounding liquid. Laser light with wavelength matched to the
whispering gallery resonance will apply significant optical forces to the
particle, while particles of even slightly different diameters will feel no
effect. This allows extremely selective particle manipulation and separation
based on size and optical characteristics, enabling compact and robust micro-
opto-fluidic devices for use in industry, healthcare, and environmental
applications. The project will engage students from Gordon College, an
undergraduate institution, in state-of-the-art collaborative research and
advance the growth of an undergraduate-focused research infrastructure. Gordon
College undergraduates will develop hands-on expertise in optics,
microfabrication, microfluidics, and control. The project will also engage
graduate students from Boston University, a major research university, who will
obtain valuable teaching and research mentoring
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a method of
separation using evanescent optical fields around an optical waveguide to exert
forces on microparticles that are being carried in a flow field. These
microparticles possess whispering gallery mode resonances that are known to be
strongly dependent on the shape and size of the particles, ensuring an
unprecedented selectivity of particles with narrowly defined geometric
characteristics. Careful control of the forces and flow velocities allows for
the design of particle trajectories, directing the selected ones into reservoirs
to accomplish separation. To increase throughput, a networked control system
model will be leveraged and communication and control policies designed that
leverage the single actuation channel to simultaneously steer particles of
different specific sizes. The project's approach has several desirable aspects:
it has exquisite and tunable selectivity; it is applicable to solid particles as
well as suspended liquid droplets; and it can be used in a compact and robust
micro-opto-fluidic device. This work will advance fundamental science and
engineering in several directions. It will provide detailed parametric study of
the light propelling forces due to whispering gallery mode resonances and help
to develop a fundamental understanding of the phenomenon. The particle
separation application allows for the development of technology useful across
various fields while also providing a setting to develop the field of networked
control theory. Because a single actuator is employed to control the movement of
multiple particles, this work requires a novel application of networked control
theory and a new domain for exploring and resolving challenges in this field.
The research will also push the boundaries in experimental fluid dynamics and
optical science leading to the fabrication and test of a micro-opto-fluidic
device.