* 1661340
* Diversifying the US Physics Community through Application of Best Practices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2020
* USD 110,543.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Despite recent advances, women remain significantly
underrepresented in physics. This award seeks to address this issue by
identifying best practices across the globe in recruiting and retaining female
physicists. To launch this effort, a U.S. delegation is attending the 6th
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics International Conference on
Women in Physics (ICWIP 2017) in the UK (July 2017). Strategies and insights
shared during the ICWIP 2017 meeting are expected to be useful in the retention
of women in physics and other physical science fields. In addition,
participation in this conference seeds international research and educational
partnerships, which are also important in advancing the careers of women in
science. The key benefits for U.S. scientists are maximized through the
conference proceedings; effective dissemination plans; follow-up sessions at
numerous U.S. venues; papers, talks, and networking by the delegates; and the
development of an extensive website on gender bias. The U.S. delegation includes
a few members from fields other than physics where women are scarce (e.g.,
engineering and computer science), thus laying the groundwork for those fields
to benefit from the knowledge disseminated at this
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This series of international
conferences on women in physics is proving to be an effective mechanism for
sharing best practices internationally, empowering new approaches and actions in
the U.S., nucleating networking in research, and increasing the numbers,
advancement and retention of women in the field. Members of the U.S. Delegation
learn about and take advantage of successful initiatives piloted in ~ 50-70
other countries. Moreover, by including non-physicists as a part of those
attending the conference, this model is being used to catalyze the transfer of
knowledge to other fields where similar strategies could improve women's
participation. Finally, the body of knowledge shared during the conference is
being published in proceedings which will be freely available online.