* 1661822
* Nanomanufacturing of Three-Dimensional Nanofiber-Nanoparticle Electrodes for Ultra-low Platinum Fuel Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Today, electric vehicles are the only zero-emission vehicle option. They are
either fuel cell and battery-powered. Fuel cells have key advantages over
batteries for vehicles with 300-mile driving range, e.g., 6-times higher
specific energies (i.e., lower weight-to-power ratio), 6-times lower energy
storage (i.e., lower fuel weight), and rapid re-fueling times (i.e., shorter
recharge times). Although automakers have engineered solutions to many of the
major hurdles to bringing the fuel cell vehicle to the market place, the high
cost due to the required precious metal platinum electrodes is a major factor
that has limited their mass commercialization. This award investigates the
manufacturing of unique nanofiber-nanoparticle fuel cell electrodes, the
nanomaterial-electrochemical relationships in these electrodes and their
subsequent impact on fuel cell performance. This project establishes a
fundamental understanding of designing optimal advanced nanostructured
electrodes for fuel cells that significantly lowers the required platinum and
therefore lowers their cost. This research provides pathways to mass
commercialization of efficient low-cost fuel cells, which can have significant
impact on society, where fuel cells will provide alternative energy at a lower
environmental cost not only for automobiles, but for stationary power as well.
The project's comprehensive experimental and modeling approach to understand the
design and functioning of nanostructured electrodes has a significant impact on
nanomanufacturing and electrochemical engineering. Outreach and education
activities consist of involving K-12 students in fuel cell module technology and
recruiting and training underrepresented undergraduate students in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
manufacture electrodes with advanced nanoscale morphologies and understand the
impact of morphology on multiple simultaneous reaction/transport phenomena to
generate fuel cell energy at higher efficiencies and lower costs. The specific
objective is to nanomanufacture new controllable, well-organized three-
dimensional (3D) nanofiber-nanoparticle electrodes that exhibit optimal fuel
cell performance at ultra-low platinum contents. These new three-dimensional
nanostructured electrodes are manufactured via a new process, needleless
electrospinning/electrospraying with template-assisted nanofiber collection. A
new three-dimensional fuel cell model is also developed to predict fuel cell
performance with three-dimensional nanofiber-nanoparticle electrodes to guide in
electrode nanomanufacturing. Accurate model parameters are obtained through a
comprehensive set of advanced in situ and ex situ experimental techniques that
are utilized to carefully characterize and analyze the 3D electrode morphology,
electrochemical reaction rates, and transport properties. The new process
produces fuel cell electrodes with advanced nanoscale morphologies that overcome
previous shortcomings of severe transport and reaction limitations in low
platinum loaded conventional fuel cell electrodes.