* 1661730
* Mechanobiology of Engineered Heart Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Nathan Sniadecki, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2021
* USD 459,122.00

The overall goal of this project is to examine whether mechanical cues can
improve the contractile function of engineered heart tissue (EHT) constructs.
EHT constructs are made by tissue engineering approaches that use human cell
derived cardiomyocytes. These constructs can serve as an ethical testbed for
cardiology and pharmacology studies and can reduce the reliance on animal
studies in some cases. EHT constructs are functional tissues for they produce
muscle contractions that are visible in vitro. However, in the current state-of-
the-art for EHT constructs, their contractility and physiology does not fully
resemble that of adult heart tissue. As such, this project will subject EHT
constructs to dynamically changing external loads in a novel bioreactor in order
to build stronger muscle tissue through cardiac exercise. If successful, this
project would achieve a "hearts-in-a-dish" platform for assessing new
pharmacological treatments for heart disease, understanding inheritable
myopathies, or studying the progression of cardiac pathologies. Research
opportunities with this project will be provided to undergraduates and
underrepresented minority groups. We will publicize our research to K-12
students at outreach events at the University of Washington to educate them on
the innovations that are possible at the intersection of engineering and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a transformative
approach to cardiac tissue engineering by magnetically measuring the
biomechanical performance of EHT constructs and providing mechanobiological cues
that drive their maturation towards adult levels. Real-time measurements of the
contractile force and twitch frequency of EHT constructs will be achieved by
growing the constructs on magnetic silicone posts, which deflect in portion to
the applied force of the constructs. The motion of the magnetic posts will be
measured using a novel array of magnetometers underneath a multi-well plate,
which enable the EHT constructs to be monitored continually over a long period
of time and in a parallel manner. Application of magnetic fields that pull on
the magnetic posts will impart external forces on the EHT constructs to forcibly
stretch the constructs before their contraction (preload) and forcibly restrain
the constructs during a contraction (afterload). Application of fetal loading
patterns of preload and afterload using magnetic forces will improve the
myofibril structure, maturation markers, and contractile output of hPSC-CM in
the EHT constructs through mechanobiological cues that replicate the increasing
loads that the human heart experiences during fetal development. In broader
terms, the approaches in this project are intended to mimic to the developmental
loading patterns of preload and afterload in a developing human heart in order
to improve the maturation of hPSC-CM grown in EHT constructs and assess the
improvements by monitoring the contractile function of the cells.