* 1661105
* Meta-Analysis of Effectiveness of Simulation and Adaptive Learning Systems in STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Nicole Else-Quest, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,773.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulation and adaptive learning systems are
widely used instructional technologies in STEM education from K-12 to graduate
levels. Their use was endorsed by the U.S. Department of Education in its 2016
national technology plan. Using simulation to provide rich learning experiences
and timely formative assessment is aligned with the trend towards competency-
based education and the NSF's work in advancing cyberlearning. However,
evidence-based practices for using the two technologies to engage learners and
enhance learning outcomes are lacking. To address this urgent need, this project
will synthesize existing knowledge on the effectiveness of two technologies in
STEM education and identify evidence-based practices of technology use. These
efforts will generate new knowledge about how to use technology effectively to
transform STEM education, build a larger and stronger STEM workforce for the
U.S., and ultimately ensure the nation's future prosperity, innovation
potential, and global economic competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will conduct two separate meta-analyses to quantify the effects of
simulation and adaptive learning systems on STEM learning and engagement. Meta-
analysis is a powerful method to synthesize findings from multiple research
studies and produce robust and accumulative evidence to inform future research
and practice. This project will focus on research studies that evaluated the
effectiveness of simulation and adaptive learning systems in STEM education. For
each study included in meta-analyses, effect sizes of technology use on
learners' engagement (e.g., participation, enjoyment, interest) and achievement
(e.g., grades) will be calculated. Effect size is a standardized statistical
measure that quantifies the magnitude of effects and allows comparison of
effects across research studies. Effect sizes from all included studies will be
pooled to estimate an overall effect size for each technology and the degree to
which effect sizes vary from one study to another. Analyses will also be
conducted to determine the extent to which effect sizes are related to how
technology was used (i.e., pedagogy) and whether effect sizes vary by learner
characteristics (e.g., gender, age, ethnicity) and learning environments (e.g.,
delivery modes, courses, settings, institutions). This project will provide
timely and robust evidence regarding the effectiveness of each technology to
inform STEM learning, teaching, future research, and technology development