* 1661612
* New Approaches for Stereoselective Formation of Quaternary Carbon Stereocenters and Fragment Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Larry Overman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 540,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Overman. Professor Overman is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine. He proposes to develop new
ways to join complex molecular fragments to prepare high-value organic
molecules. By building complex pieces of a molecule independently and then
coupling them together at the end of a synthesis, inefficient linear sequences
that build the entire structure one step at a time can be avoided. The method
under development is particularly impressive in that it combines the complex
fragments in a one to one ratio. Thus, it avoids the more common need to waste
valuable material by using one of the complex fragments in excess. In these
studies, Professor Overman and his coworkers employ photoredox catalysis for the
coupling reactions. Such transformation are attractive because they use visible
light as the energy source for making new bonds. This use of sustainable energy
for the reactions help to minimize their environmental impact. The broad scope
of the research involving photocatalysis, mechanistic and target-directed
synthesis objectives is well suited for the education of scientists at all
levels. Professor Overman's group has a long established record of providing the
highest level of education and training for coworkers including those
underrepresented in science. Many of these students now hold leading positions
in both academics and the pharmaceutical industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bimolecular chemical reactions that combine complex
fragments in good yield, and, where important, with high stereocontrol, are
fundamental for implementing convergent synthetic strategies. When the atoms
joined in a fragment-coupling step are chiral, this union is particularly
challenging. Recent discoveries from Professor Overman's laboratories show that
bimolecular reactions of structurally elaborate tertiary carbon radicals and
electron-deficient alkenes can join complex fragments by forming new bonds in
high yields and high stereocontrol using equimolar (or nearly equimolar) amounts
of the two coupling partners. Such chemical transformations are not currently a
common part of the repertoire of organic synthesis, yet hold exciting potential
to solve formidable challenges in constructing complex organic molecules. The
proposed studies define the mechanism and optimize the generation and coupling
of tertiary radicals formed from tertiary alcohol hemioxalate precursors,
explore 1,6-additions of carbon radicals to electrophilic dienes and develop
multicomponent radical-anionic crossover reactions, and define the utility of
tertiary-radical fragment coupling strategies in the enantioselective total
synthesis of structurally elaborate diterpenoids harboring
dioxobicyclo[3.3.0]octanone fragments and ent-kaurene diterpenoids. These
organic reactions have important technical broader impacts on the pharmaceutical
industry.