* 1661604
* Molecular Electronic Structure Theory: Methods and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Henry Schaefer III, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 509,045.00

Henry (Fritz) Schaeffer is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Method program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
new computational and theoretical approaches for quantum chemistry. This project
contributes to the understanding of atoms, molecules, and molecular assemblies
in the gas, liquid, and solid phases. These are the elementary components of the
chemistry that underlies our understanding of materials from lasers to
superconductors and on to biochemical systems. The most important equation in
science, the Schrodinger Equation, is the key to new discoveries in science and
engineering, areas dedicated to advances of importance to humankind. While one
speaks of the Schrodinger Equation, in fact there is a different Schrodinger
Equation for every different molecular system. These equations are extremely
complicated for systems of broad, general interest. The practical solutions of
the Schrodinger Equation require a profound mastery of both mathematics and
physics to allow the derivation of important new methods. Dr. Schaefer and his
research team excel in the development and application of mathematical physics,
algorithm design, and computer science to achieve these goals. An important new
method being developed is density cumulant functional theory. The research group
also applies these new methods to the solution of important problems in the
chemical sciences. Their research on manganese CO2 reduction, palladium
catalysts, silicon chemistry, gallium nitride nanotubes, the CF3 substitutes SF5
and PF4, iodine clusters, and atmospheric chemistry, bears upon several areas of
technological concern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
development of new theoretical and computational methods for the understanding
and prediction of chemical phenomena. More specifically, the Schaefer group uses
electronic structure theory (quantum chemistry) to innovate, implement, and
apply new methods for the description of electron correlation in molecules, one
of the most challenging areas of chemical theory. A emphasis of this proposal is
the development of multi-reference density cumulant theory (MRDCT). The
establishment of MRDCT involves the outline of the new formalism, design of
effective algorithms, careful coding of the method, and assessment through
benchmarks. Applications of new and existing theoretical methods include
molecular architectures; spectroscopy (microwave, infrared, electronic, Raman);
potential energy surfaces; energetics; reactions via organometallic catalysts
(often involving the earth abundant metal manganese); palladium catalysis for
C-H bond activation and reductive elimination; examination of the biologically
important class of reactions between persulfides (R1SSR2) and sulfides (R2SR4);
and collaborations with experiment toward the synthesis of critically important
new main group chemistry targets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
research include the education of a significant number of gifted Ph.D. students
(16 in the group currently). Professor Schaefer aggressively and successfully
recruits women and underrepresented minorities for their Ph.D. studies. These
doctoral students (110 graduated to date, including 23 women) almost uniformly
go on to highly fruitful scientific careers in academia, government
laboratories, and industry. Schaefer's research group reaches out to local
students in elementary, middle, and high schools. The Schaefer group is active
in the development PSI4, a freely-available, open source, comprehensive, and
widely used suite of quantum chemistry computer programs. It is especially easy
for scientists to add new features to the PSI4 code.