* 1661785
* Collaborative Research:  Kinematic, Microphysical and Electrical Processes Leading to Extreme Lightning Flash Rates over Argentina Using RELAMPAGO Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Lawrence Carey, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 579,822.00

Some of the largest and most electrically active storms on earth occur in west-
central Argentina in the lee of the Andes Mountains. These storms initiate at
the foothills of the Andes Mountains as well as the Sierras de Córdoba (SDC) and
produce extreme lightning amounts, large hail, tornadoes and heavy rainfall. The
goal of this project is to advance the understanding of characteristics and
causes of lightning in this understudied region of uniquely intense storms and
differences in electrification between these storms and other convective storms
in different environments that lead to such high impact weather.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Towards these goals, researchers at the University of Colorado (CU)
and the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) will study atmospheric
conditions and physical processes that control storm electrification and lead to
extreme lightning flash rates in conjunction with other high impact weather.
Measurements of these severe storms will be taken during the planned RELAMPAGO
(Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale
Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) field campaign to be able to
address these goals. Such storms have a large economic impact as they pose a
hazard to people, property, agriculture and infrastructure. An improved
understanding of conditions and processes from the studied storms will lead to
better nowcasting and forecasting of severe weather. Furthermore, this project
will support educational training of graduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher. They will participate in the scientific research through independent
studies and participation in the RELAMPAGO field campaign and have the
opportunity to collaborate with the US and international researchers from a
multitude of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some fundamental relationships
between meteorology and electrification are not completely understood, including
a lack of knowledge of how microphysical and kinematic processes control the
development of charge regions inside deep convective storms. Recent studies in
the US suggest that regional differences between microphysical, dynamical and
electrical behavior exist. Thus, more research in different regions of the world
such as in Argentina is needed to understand the physical connections between
storm processes, electrification and lightning characteristics. The team of
researchers from CU and UAH will investigate the environmental conditions and
physical processes that control storm electrification and lead to extreme
lightning flash rates of severe storms in west-central Argentina. The goal of
the research is to advance understanding of storms producing extreme flash rates
and of differences in electrification among convective storm types and
environments that lead to high impact weather. This includes determining what
role various storm environmental, kinematic and microphysical processes play in
governing charge, charge region development and resultant flash rates and other
properties (e.g., type, size, polarity, current, charge neutralized) in these
extremely severe storms. Towards this goal, environmental, kinematic and
microphysical measurements will be taken during the 9-month Department of Energy
(DOE) CACTI (Clouds, Aerosols, and Complex Terrain Interactions) field campaign
and the planned NSF/NASA/NOAA RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification,
Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations)
field campaign. As part of RELAMPAGO, CU and UAH will deploy instrumentation to
measure lightning characteristics, electric fields, and inferred charge
structures of severe storms during the Intensive Observing Period
(11/1-12/15/2018). The CU/UAH team will use measurements from radars and
atmospheric soundings deployed during RELAMPAGO to obtain thermodynamic,
kinematic, and microphysical measurements. These will be used together with
lightning measurements from CU/UAH as well as NASA to analyze the environmental
conditions favoring extreme lightning production. They will also be used to
study the physical cloud processes leading to charge region creation and extreme
lightning flash rates.