* 1661357
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the Genetic Diversity of Viruses through Gene Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Catherine Putonti, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 821,559.00

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and can have a profound impact
on bacterial populations. These viruses are the most abundant and diverse
members of most ecosystems on Earth, having been found in every environment that
supports life. The majority of the DNA sequences of newly isolated bacteriophage
samples bears little or no resemblance to any sequences contained within current
databases. This means that identifying new samples by looking for similar
sequences is not an effective strategy. It is therefore crucial to find
different approaches to characterize these viruses, which will then help is
understand the critical roles that they have as members of microbial
communities. This research will develop a new network-based approach for
classifying viruses, thereby opening new avenues for exploring virus ecology as
well as providing genomic data for evolutionary studies. This new approach will
redefine how the genetic diversity of viruses is represented, making possible
direct analyses of complex viral communities at higher resolution than is
currently possible. Furthermore, the project will unite students from the
computational and biological sciences, creating interdisciplinary teams able to
carry out this research, with this training taking both in the classroom and
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a new graphical
framework for the investigation of viral metagenomes, specifically aimed at
putting novel viral sequences into a global context of viral genetic diversity.
Because virus genomes are mosaics of genes acquired over time from multiple
sources, a 'gene-centric' rather than a 'genome-centric' approach to classify
the sequences in viromes is taken. In addition to capturing the combinatorial
structure of virus genomes, this approach is robust to variation in genome and
contig size that can arise from diverse datasets. Through the development of
novel algorithms and metrics, evolutionary and ecological signals in the data
will be integrated to inform the network's structure. The network will also be
used to test hypotheses driven from the data, in particular the signals of viral
host-range. For more information about the project visit the PI's lab website at
http://www.putonti-lab.com.