* 1661016
* Brain-to-brain synchrony in STEM learning
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* David Poeppel, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,485,824.00

The STEM classroom is a highly dynamic social environment where students and
teachers interact face-to-face in real time. These interactions are fundamental
to the learning process. Yet our understanding of the brain basis of social
interactions in the classroom is very limited. This project will use novel
portable electroencephalogram (EEG) technology to record brain activity from a
teacher and a group of students in a high school science classroom. The goal is
to investigate whether similarities and differences in brain activity between
teachers and students predict STEM engagement and learning outcomes. The
proposed research will contribute to educational practice in a number of ways.
For example, the extent to which brainwaves exhibit similar patterns across
students can be used as an online, implicit measure of student engagement with
STEM content. As such, brainwave synchrony can prove useful in the future as an
objective measure of the effectiveness of teaching practices, providing insight
into the learning process in real time. In addition, as part of the proposed
research, an EEG-based neuroscience curriculum for high schools will be
developed and tested. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature
on STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a novel and
potentially transformative approach to studying classroom interactions using
cutting-edge portable electroencephalogram (EEG) technology. The project extends
previous NSF-funded work that enabled the development of the experimental setup
and analytical tools required to simultaneously record brain activity from a
teacher and a group of students. The project will advance our understanding of
naturalistic classroom interaction by: (a) using state-of-the-art wireless EEG
headsets that are expected to provide much more accurate and richer
neurophysiological data than the low-grade portable EEG headsets from prior
research; (b) recording brain activity not only from students, but also from
teachers; (c) collecting data from a sample of students and teachers in
different schools and school types; (d) investigating the relationship between
brain-to-brain synchrony across students and teachers, learning outcomes, and
objective measures of attention; and (e) exploring brain-to-brain synchrony in
the context of an unresolved issue in the STEM learning literature, the
effectiveness of virtual laboratory environments. This project will take
neuroscience research outside of the laboratory and into the classroom, taking
an important step in integrating neuroscience research and education practices.
By validating novel neuroscience methods and analytic approaches, this research
will pave the way for future cognitive neuroscience research on educational
practices. Further, the results of this study will illuminate classroom
interactions from a novel perspective and provide teachers with a deeper
understanding of the relationship between student engagement and learning
outcomes.