* 1661236
* Exploring the value of a digitized intervention on improving college readiness and interest in STEM for urban and rural secondary students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,297,419.00

The EHR Core Research (ECR) program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that will generate foundational knowledge in the field. To that end,
this project will extend the purpose of the College Ambition Program (CAP), a
school-wide intervention designed to encourage high school students to become
college applicants, particularly in STEM fields, and enroll in postsecondary
school. The CAP will serve predominantly minority and low-income high school
students and those with special needs in urban and rural areas where enrollment
in postsecondary institutions is below the state average. While the CAP has been
successful in raising postsecondary enrollment, a series of new digital
experiences will be created and added to the program to further students'
college readiness and increase their interest in STEM fields. CAP students will
be provided opportunities to access a variety of playlists on a digitized
platform that will monitor and rewards personalized learning. Tailored to
students' interests and strengths, playlists will be designed to inspire
motivation, advance college knowledge, and enhance particular skill sets.
Students who successfully complete their playlists will earn a badge, which is a
publicly shareable digital credential that will show evidence of a substantive
learning outcome. Badges will entitle students to participate in STEM
internships experiences in businesses and university programs that, when
completed, will indicate a set of competencies that can positively impact their
postsecondary acceptance when included on college applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboratively developed with CAP personnel, businesses,
and university partners, the playlists will be designed to ensure that the
badges and internships will provide clear paths to higher education and careers.
Consisting of a series of primers, the gamified playlists will enable students
to: set goals; pace their learning activities; receive embedded feedback; and
receive a tangible reward upon completion. Students will engage in unique,
customized knowledge and skill-building learning experiences not typically found
in high schools, but will be viewed as advantageous for admission and
persistence in higher education. The social and emotional experiences students
will have during these experiences will be measured using smartphone technology
synced to a technological playlist/badge platform. Data retrieved from the
smartphones will be analyzed using multivariate methods that account for
multiple differences between students. This empirical evaluation of the
effectiveness of the playlist experiences will allow for the collection of data
to support the inclusion of technological tracking and strategic planning in
programs that will improve college-going rates and enhance participation in STEM
for underrepresented students.