* 1661351
* ABI Sustaining: A Web-based Platform-independent Tool for Visualization and Analysis of Microbial Population Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Mark Welch, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 547,038.00

The rapid expansion of massively-parallel sequencing (MPS, or "next-generation
sequencing") technology has revolutionized molecular microbial ecology by making
the detailed analysis of complex communities over time and space a tractable
research pursuit for small research groups. While the advent of MPS methods has
allowed microbial ecologists to ask meaningful questions with ever-greater
precision, it brings significant challenges to individual small laboratories
struggling to manage megabytes or even gigabytes of data. This project will
sustain the web service VAMPS (Visualization and Analysis of Microbial
Population Structures, http://vamps.mbl.edu), which removes the need for
individual research groups to make the considerable investment in computational
infrastructure and bioinformatic support otherwise necessary to process,
analyze, and interpret MPS data for microbial ecology. VAMPS is a free, open-
source database-driven website that allows researchers using MPS data to analyze
the diversity of microbial communities and the relationships between
communities, to explore these analyses in an intuitive visual context, and to
download analyses and images for publication. Any web-capable device can be used
to upload, process, explore, and extract data and results from VAMPS, and the
VAMPS development team is available to assist in all aspects of data processing
and analysis. VAMPS encourages researchers to share sequence and metadata, and
fosters collaboration between researchers of disparate biomes who recognize
common patterns in shared data. VAMPS currently hosts more than 200 projects
encompassing more than 5000 datasets and over 250 million sequence tags, is used
by nearly 1000 investigators from around the world, and has supported at least
15 NSF-funded projects. VAMPS provides unique educational opportunities through
its combination of data from a variety of environments, its integration of
sequence cluster-based and taxonomy-based analytical and visualization tools,
and the instruction provided by project developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VAMPS
is designed for visualization, exploration, and analysis of amplicon tag data in
a comparative context. Sequence data and associated metadata can be uploaded
directly by users or by sending data to the VAMPS project team; MPS reads can be
automatically quality filtered and assigned to both taxonomic structures and to
taxonomic-independent clusters. These can then be linked to metadata and
compared using a wide variety of analytical and visualization tools. Each result
is extensively hyperlinked to other analysis and visualization options,
promoting data exploration and leading to a greater understanding of data
relationships. A major strength of VAMPS is that researchers can compare not
only datasets within their own projects but can compare these with datasets from
projects such as NSF-funded Long Term Ecological Research projects, the
International Census of Marine Microbes, the Human Microbiome Project, and
hundreds of other individual projects. The project will support: 1) Active
releases of QIIME, OTU clustering methods, oligotyping, and other methods as
authors release new versions. 2) A VAMPS administrator to support users in
uploading and trimming data and the use of the many VAMPS visualization and
analysis tools, exporting data for other analytical methods and images for
publication, and facilitating collaborations and adding new portals. 3)
Incorporation of new publicly available data. Projects of particular interest
include the Earth Microbiome Project, the American Gut Project, and Terra Oceans
that have or will have data that would benefit the research community if made
available through VAMPS. 4) Adapting analysis capabilities to other appropriate
genes as requested by the community. 5) Hardware and software maintenance and
data storage. All results of the project can be found at vamps.mbl.edu.