* 1661152
* ABI Development: systemPipeR - automated NGS workflow and report generation environment
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Thomas Girke, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 648,874.00

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized how research is carried out
in many areas of biology by allowing researchers to sequence genomes and
transcriptomes on a routine basis. However, the analysis of NGS data remains a
major obstacle to the efficient utilization of the technology. While substantial
effort has been invested on the development of software dedicated to the
individual analysis steps of NGS experiments, insufficient resources are
currently available for integrating the individual software components into
automated workflows capable of running the analysis of most types of NGS
applications from start-to-finish in a time-efficient and reproducible manner.
This Development project will address this need by enhancing systemPipeR, a
popular R/Bioconductor software package. The project will have significant
impact on a wide range of scientific communities and our society at large by
allowing to translate NGS data into biologically relevant knowledge in a time-
efficient and reproducible manner. This will accelerate many research and
discovery projects in academia and industry, where NGS technologies play an
important role. Extensive educational resources for interdisciplinary training
at the intersect of genome and computational biology will be provided. Training
will be offered to scientists, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students. Members of underrepresented groups will participate in
all aspects of this project while supporting diversity. Extensive online
tutorials will be provided to maximize the educational outreach of the
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this project are: (AIM 1)
Enhancements to systemPipeR?s user interface and the workflow design framework
will greatly simplify the process of running workflows, generating automated
reports and designing new workflows. It will also improve user-friendliness to
make systemPipeR equally useful for R and non-R users, as well as biologists
without any expert knowledge in bioinformatics. The execution plan of this aim
includes the design of a central workflow control user interface and the
adaptation of new community standards to further increase the reproducibility of
analysis workflows. (AIM 2) Automated analysis workflows will be developed for a
wide range of additional NGS applications. Most of these workflows will be
designed in collaboration with experts of the corresponding NGS application
areas. Suggestions from the community will be incorporated as well. Sample
templates will be provided for the supported NGS applications to create workflow
instances with a single command fully populated with all input data and
environment settings. (AIM 3) The project will also have a strong focus on
community integration and performance evaluations provided by its current and
future users. This includes options for users to contribute code or entire
workflows, and extensive training of the target audience to analyze NGS data
with systemPipeR and related resources. The URL of the systemPipeR project
website is: http://girke.bioinformatics.ucr.edu/systemPipeR.