* 1661324
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation:  Improving high performance super computer aquatic ecosystem models with the integration of real-time citizen science data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Christopher Lowry, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 125,334.00

This research is designed to engage public participation in data collection and
the development of a stream discharge, stream temperature, and aquatic species
habitat forecasting model. Through the use of citizen-based observations of
stream height and stream temperature, this approach will demonstrate how
citizen-derived observations can contribute to forecasts of stream discharge,
stream temperature, and identification of freshwater fish habitat. Freshwater
fishes have significant ecological, economic, and recreational importance across
the United States. However, freshwater species are among the most endangered
groups of organisms in North America, largely due to the impact of human
activities. Accurate representations of freshwater species habitat are needed to
develop approaches to balance the needs of society with the conservation of
freshwater resources. This can be accomplished through the collection of
observed data by government and research organizations or by computer modeling
of habitat, whereby the quality of the model depends upon the availability of
observed data. However, the amount of observed data for freshwater systems has
been declining due to decreases in funding. The data that do exist are generally
focused on large rivers that are important for urban communities (i.e.,
flooding, water supply), which are locations not always relevant to freshwater
species whose habitat often occurs in smaller headwater streams. Local
communities of recreational users and their mobile phones offer an opportunity
to close this data-availability gap through citizen science. As regular users of
shared resources, like streams and waterways, outdoor enthusiasts have valuable
knowledge of specific locations. This knowledge is vastly underutilized by
scientific communities. This project will harness information and data collected
by members of local communities and develop an approach for data collection,
storage, and integration with computer models that can predict streamflow,
stream temperature, and freshwater species habitat, which can then aid in
sustainable management of these resources. The Boyne River Basin in Michigan,
USA will be used as a test location, but the techniques can be used in
watersheds throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to develop techniques that integrate citizen science hydrology and stream
temperature data with eco-hydrological models. Specifically, this research is
designed to fully couple citizen participation in the development of a real-time
stream discharge, temperature, and aquatic species habitat forecasting model
framework. The project will install CrowdHydrology (a citizen science network
that collects hydrologic data) equipment throughout the Boyne River Basin. The
local community can then text (via cellphone) stream level and stream
temperature data to the CrowdHydrology platform. These citizen science data will
then be transformed and input into an eco-hydrological model for near real-time
simulations of streamflow, stream temperature, and aquatic species habitat. This
approach will demonstrate how citizen-derived observations can contribute to the
modeling of stream discharge, stream temperature, and aquatic species habitat.
The model simulations and forecasts (one week ahead), including stream flows,
temperatures, and habitat distributions, will be presented in tables and simple
spatial plots available for download on the CrowdHydrology website
(http://www.crowdhydrology.com)