* 1661609
* A Thermo-Kinetic Approach to Enhance the Use of Clays in Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Aditya Kumar, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 425,948.00

In response to the incessantly increasing demand for sustainable concretes for
the construction of infrastructure, past studies have identified carbon-
efficient materials (e.g., fly ash, slag) for partial replacement of cement in
concrete. High-volume use of these materials, however, is only beneficial when
they exhibit enhanced reactivity in concrete environments. As fundamental
composition-reactivity relationships for these materials are not well
established, their selection is based on trial-and-error based approaches, which
are unreliable and often lead to impoverished performance. Low quality and
limited availability of such materials further marginalizes their adoption as
construction materials. Therefore, to have a significant global impact,
abundant, inexpensive, carbon-efficient, and highly reactive materials need to
be identified and adapted for use in concrete. Clays, which are abundant in all
geological settings, meet all of these criteria. This research aims to formulate
binders for concrete by replacing up to 70% of cement with clays and other
readily available inorganic materials. A holistic approach, based on accurate
characterizations of reactivity, thermodynamic interactions and microstructural
development, is employed to develop cost- and energy-efficient strategies to
achieve enhanced reactivity of clays, including widely available low-grade
clays, thus promoting their use as cement replacement materials for concrete.
Overall, outcomes of this work will define a new paradigm in methods of
proportioning high volumes of clay in concretes without conceding performance,
thereby charting a path for widespread adoption of truly sustainable concretes.
Knowledge dissemination activities, including training of underrepresented
students and outreach activities to inform professionals and general audience of
the economic and societal impacts of designing clay-rich sustainable concretes,
will extend the impact of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
employs harmonized experimental and computational tasks to elucidate fundamental
composition-reactivity-microstructure-property correlations in sustainable
binder systems. Advanced structure characterization and novel microcalorimetry-
based reactivity-assessment techniques are used in tandem to link composition of
clays to their reactivity. This knowledge is used to develop energy-efficient
activation procedures that maximize the reactivity of clays, including
kaolinite-deficient clays. A thermodynamic model in conjunction with experiments
is used to bolster the binder?s reactivity through controlled additions of
inorganic additives that synergistically interact with cement and clay to
maximize the formation of space-filling reaction products. A suite of
microstructure and performance characterization techniques, including a
microstructure-based 3D lattice Boltzmann method, are employed to relate the
microstructural evolution to the development of engineering properties. This is
followed by rigorous evaluations of specification-based engineering properties
of concrete made with clay-rich sustainable binders. Knowledge gained from these
studies are consolidated to develop guidelines that enable selection and
regulation of physical/chemical properties of clays to design sustainable
concretes with enhanced properties.