* 1661489
* CSEDI Collab. Research: A joint mineral physics and nano-seismological study on high-pressure faulting in metastable olivine and harzburgite with implications to deep earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Yanbin Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 373,999.00

Worldwide, the number of earthquakes per year decreases rapidly with depth down
to ~300 km, then peaks around 550 - 600 km, before terminating abruptly near 700
km. Deep-focus earthquakes (DFEQs), i.e., those occurring at depths below 300
km, are particularly mysterious, as we know that rocks generally deform by creep
and flow, rather than by brittle fracture, at these depths, where pressures and
temperatures are both very high. Understanding the mechanisms of DFEQs is
important because these quakes occur in subduction zones and pose significant
seismic hazards in many regions around the globe. It also helps understand
properties and behaviors of rocks and how plate tectonics works in the Earth's
interior. The experimental capabilities developed in the project will find broad
applications in disciplines far beyond earth science, including materials
science, physics, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigators will combine advanced experimental techniques and state-of-the-art
seismological analytical tools to obtain information on the physical mechanisms
of fracturing under high pressure and high temperature. The materials to be
studied are (Mg,Fe)2SiO4 olivine (the dominant mineral in the oceanic
lithosphere and the upper mantle) and harzburgite (the dominant rock assemblage
of the oceanic lithosphere). Samples will be deformed in a new class of
deformation apparatus equipped with in-situ acoustic emission (AE) monitoring as
well as x-ray diffraction and imaging, under a wide range of conditions of
pressure, temperature, differential stress, strain, and strain rate. Controlled
deformation will be conducted on these materials at pressures up to 14 GPa. A
suite of state-of-the-art seismological methods of event detection, location,
and source characterization will be applied to the nanoseismograms of AE events
to determine rupture mechanisms. Our goal is to understand the physics that
connects earthquake mechanics and minerals/rocks at laboratory scales, to
provide fundamental insight as to how and under what conditions shear
localization occurs, affecting, and affected by, mineral reaction equilibrium
and kinetics, and triggers dynamic mechanical instability. Attention will be
paid to controlling oxygen fugacity and minimizing water content during the
experiments. It must be kept in mind the vast difference in scales between
laboratory and subduction zone processes. The team will conduct comparison
studies to examine AE source characteristics against those of DFEQs. Thermo-
chemo-mechanical models will then be developed and evaluated based on
experimental data and seismic observations, and large-scale subduction zone
processes. Combining these approaches, the investigators anticipate a
significant enhancement of our understanding of the mechanisms for DFEQs by
establishing physical models for DFEQs whose testability and scalability can be
further examined by computational simulations.