* 1661089
* Collaborative research: Neural and cognitive strengthening of conceptual knowledge and reasoning in classroom-based spatial education
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2020
* USD 193,111.00

Spatial thinking is a powerful driver of success in the STEM classroom and
spatial thinking is a major predictor of future STEM success in the workforce.
The brain systems that support spatial thinking have been well mapped by
neuroscience to allow clear interpretation of new brain-imaging data. Recent
advances in tools used to analyze brain activity allow detection of changes in
the brains of students that signify accurate learning of STEM concepts. This
advance may open a window onto biomarkers of precisely the type of learning that
is the goal of educators. Using these new brain analysis methods, this project,
a collaboration involving researchers from James Madison University, Georgetown
University, Northwestern University, and Dartmouth College, will investigate how
changes in the spatial thinking network support learning of specific STEM
concepts, and how changes in the classroom can facilitate changes in the brain
related to spatial thinking. This cross-disciplinary project brings together
experts in geoscience classroom education, spatial cognition, and the neural
bases of learning and reasoning. This team is committed to bridging the
conspicuous gap between the laboratory and the high school classroom. A
confluence of advances in neuroimaging, and the research team's partnership with
Virginia school systems make this effort timely and tractable. Identifying
possible effects of sex and STEM-related anxieties on conceptual learning in the
brain, and testing the effectiveness of spatial education for reducing
disparities, this research will point to critical targets for intervention. The
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work
that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand the neural
mechanisms of spatial learning, to advance of spatial education, and to identify
factors that affect disparities in STEM learning and participation. The research
team will collect functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and behavioral
data from students before and after learning in a high school geoscience course
that uses a novel spatially-based curriculum to teach STEM concepts and spatial
reasoning. Pilot data on this spatial curriculum have begun to characterize the
underlying cognitive and neural mechanisms at work, and show promising effects
of transfer to STEM problem solving and core measures of spatial ability.
Consistent with methods that have demonstrated success in the lab (but not yet
the classroom), the research team will use multivariate neural representations
of a group of highly experienced and specially trained teachers as an expert
standard to determine neural markers of students? conceptual knowledge and
spatial reasoning. Leveraging recent multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) and
machine-learning advances in brain imaging, the team will compare the neural
patterns of students before and after learning to test for a trajectory that
moves students closer to expert representations. This project will also test,
for the first time, whether it is possible to compare different curricula based
on how much they strengthen the representation of a concept in the brain.
Similarly, this work will test whether spatial education leads students to
engage spatial brain resources for STEM-related reasoning, and seek to compare
curricula on this basis. The project will test whether neural data add
predictive value to traditional testing (e.g. conventional unit tests) for
subsequent retention of conceptual knowledge and spatial reasoning. Assessments
of STEM-related anxieties (e.g., math and spatial anxiety) and analyses of sex-
related effects on cognitive and neural outcomes will newly characterize factors
that influence disparities in STEM learning and participation.