* 1661862
* Collaborative Research:  Using RELAMPAGO Observations to Understand the Thermodynamic, Kinematic, and Dynamic Processes Leading to Heavy Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Russ Schumacher, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 552,534.00

RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) will observe
convective storms in the lee of the Andes Mountains in central Argentina. Storms
in this region are poorly represented by weather and climate models and produce
high impact weather in the lee of the Andes mountains in Argentina near the
major cities of Cordoba and Mendoza. RELAMPAGO will be a 45-day project from 1
November - 15 December 2018. RELAMPAGO examines what are perhaps the "world's
most intense thunderstorms" per satellite observations, studying the processes
that generate intense convection and severe weather that accompanies them,
including heavy precipitation, severe hail and winds, and tornadoes. By
observing storms with new tools and techniques in detail in a region that has
some similarities and key differences with the US Great Plains, RELAMPAGO is
designed to make contributions to improve prediction of severe convective storms
globally, including in the US. In addition, RELAMPAGO's international
coordination is integrated to directly improve high impact weather prediction in
Latin America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a collaboration
between researchers at the University of Illinois and Colorado State University
to study the processes that generate intense convection and precipitation in
this region. The project includes a network of research-quality fixed and mobile
radars, atmospheric soundings, and storm process measurements in concert with
other RELAMPAGO measurements (including from the DOE ARM Mobile Facility-1) to
characterize the environment and internal structure of heavy-rain-producing
storms. These measurements, value-added products, analyses, and modeling
activities are focused on understanding the precursors and processes within and
external to the storms to address hypotheses on relevant to heavy rainfall
production in Argentinean convective storms in this poorly observed, yet
vulnerable region. Research activities also include developing forecast models
that are crucial for developing the field campaign operations and forecast
planning. Contributions include RELAMPAGO education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The region of the lee of the Andes mountains in
west-central Argentina generates some of the most intense and organized
convective systems on earth. These storms, initiated commonly near, and
interacting with the complex terrain of the Andes and Sierras de CÃ³rdoba,
produce frequent heavy rainfall that is known to lead to damaging flash floods.
The RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) field
campaign, from 1 November to 15 December 2018, is designed to provide a
comprehensive array of profiling, surface, and remote sensing datasets with
fixed and mobile platforms capable of characterizing the evolution of
thermodynamic, kinematic, and microphysical measurements in and near convective
storms on fine time and space scales. In this project, the NCAR S-PolKa dual-
frequency dual-polarization, dual-wavelength S- and Ka-band radar, a network of
Doppler on Wheels X-Band radars, frequent soundings, surface thermodynamic,
kinematic, and microphysical measurements, and continuous water vapor profiling
from the NCAR Water Vapor DIfferential Absorption Lidar (WVDIAL) platform, in
concert with other RELAMPAGO measurements are used to characterize the
environment and internal structure of heavy-rain-producing storms. These
measurements, value-added products, analyses, and modeling activities focus on
understanding the precursors and processes within and external to the convective
storms to address hypotheses on relevant to heavy rainfall production in
Argentinean convective storms in this poorly observed, yet vulnerable region.
Leadership in research activities and configure forecast models that are crucial
for developing the field campaign operations and forecast planning, as well as
contributions to the RELAMPAGO education and outreach activities during the
campaign are undertaken.