* 1661655
* Next Generation Metal-organic Framework Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Seth Cohen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 509,000.00

Catalysts are molecules that accelerate the rate of chemical reactions.
Catalysts are needed to produce pharmaceuticals, plastics, and agrochemicals,
among other important commodity products. The development of catalysts that can
accelerate important chemical reactions cheaply and efficiently is an important,
ongoing goal in the chemical sciences. One way to reduce cost is to enable the
reusability of catalysts by making them so that they can be readily separated
from the reaction mixture, recovered, and reused in a sustainable "green"
chemical process. In this research program, Prof. Seth Cohen of the University
of California, San Diego is seeking to prepare reusable catalysts using an
advanced class of porous materials known as metal-organic frameworks. This
proposal also includes teaching activities involving a Science Policy Internship
Program (SPIP). The SPIP supports undergraduate STEM (science, technology,
engineering, math) students at the University of California Center in Washington
D.C. (UCDC). This program educates STEM students on the importance of science in
public policy and is successfully recruiting both underrepresented and women
students, across the University of California system, to help to create a
generation of scientists that better appreciate their role in society and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical
Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Seth Cohen of the University
of California, San Diego is developing catalysts for organic transformations
using metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as supports. These materials are being
used to catalyze a wide range of organic reactions, where the advantages of a
heterogeneous MOF support can be realized. MOF-based catalysts employing
thiocatecholato metal sites, photoactive centers, and unique scorpionate metal
sites are being studied. Reactions ranging from olefin cross-metathesis to C-H
activation are being explored. The goal of this project is to obtain MOFs that
act in a biomimetic fashion with a high degree of activity, selectivity, and
stability. This proposal also includes teaching activities involving a Science
Policy Internship Program (SPIP). The SPIP supports undergraduate STEM (science,
technology, engineering, math) students at the University of California Center
in Washington D.C. (UCDC). This program is educating STEM students on the
importance of science in public policy and is successfully recruiting both
underrepresented and women students, across the University of California system,
to help to create a generation of scientists that better appreciate their role
in society and government.