* 1661861
* Understanding Measurements of Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Andrew Dessler, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2021
* USD 427,747.00

The mean temperature of the earth is determined by the balance of incoming and
outgoing radiant energy at the top of the atmosphere, and the outgoing energy
generally increases and decreases with mean temperature. The temperature
dependence of outgoing energy stabilizes earth's climate, as an increase in
temperature produces an increase in outgoing energy which cools the planet, and
a decrease in temperature has the opposite effect. The restoring effect of
temperature on outgoing energy can be quantified by a climate feedback parameter
which summarizes the net effect of a variety of mechanisms which together
determine the global effect. For internally generated climate variability such
as El Nino, which produces a temporary increase in global temperature, the
feedback parameter determines how quickly the temperature will return to its
long-term climatological value. For externally forced climate change, such as
the warming produced by an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2), the feedback
parameter determines the amount of warming that will ultimately occur as a
result of the radiative effect of the CO2 increase.

It is commonly assumed that the same feedback parameter applies very generally
to global temperature changes produced by internal climate variability (like the
temperature increase during El Nino events) and permanent climate change forced
by increases in carbon dioxide (CO2) and other external factors. But preliminary
work by the PI and others suggests a systematic difference between parameter
values calculated from internal variability and forced change simulations in
climate models, possibly due to differences in the spatial patterns of
temperature anomalies associated with internal variability and forced change,
and the fact that different feedback mechanisms are prominent in different
regions. A difference in feedback strength between forced response and internal
variability would complicate efforts to estimate the feedback parameter from
observations, as the necessary observations include satellite measurements of
the incoming and outgoing top-of-atmosphere radiative fluxes that are only
available for a 15-year period. Changes in radiative fluxes over such a short
period are dominated by internal variability, thus the feedback parameter value
derived from them would only be representative of internal variability and
should not be used to assess the sensitivity of climate to CO2 increases. A
further issue identified by the PI is that the feedback parameter may have
strong decade-to-decade variability, at least in long model simulations of
climate under present-day conditions. Such variability, likely also related to
the spatial patterns of temperature anomalies and their consequences for
specific feedback mechanisms (for instance the albedo feedback associated with
ice and snow which generally occur at higher latitudes), would also have to be
taken into account when attempting to estimate climate sensitivity from
observations.

This project considers possible differences in feedback parameter between
internal variability and forced change, as well as the possibility of decadal
variability in the feedback parameter, using a combination of observations and
model simulations. Much of the work focuses on an alternative feedback parameter
based on the mean temperature at a mid-tropospheric level (500mb), as parameter
values calculated at this level show greater agreement between observations and
simulations than their counterparts based on surface temperature. This agreement
motivates further examination of the processes contributing to differences in
feedback parameter in model simulations, which have the advantage of very long
periods of record and outputs which include detailed breakdowns of hard-to-
observe quantities such as the longwave and shortwave radiative effects of
clouds.

The work has broader impacts due to the desirability of constraints on how much
warming can result from increases in atmospheric CO2 and other greenhouse gases,
particularly given the large uncertainty in estimates from model simulations.
The project also supports two graduate students, thereby providing for the
future workforce in this research area.