* 1661627
* Designing Extremely Robust Soft Wet Adhesives by Exploiting Molecular-Scale Reversible Crosslinks and Macro-Scale Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Xuanhe Zhao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2020
* USD 370,000.00

This award supports fundamental research to provide the needed knowledge for the
development of soft wet adhesives to achieve extremely high mechanical strength
and toughness. In nature, soft wet materials can form extremely tough and strong
bonding to other materials. Examples include mussel plaques on rocks, tendons on
bones, and bonding between the epidermis and dermis. In contrast, the mechanical
properties of most synthetic soft wet adhesives are much inferior to their
natural counterparts, which severely hampers their potential applications and
innovations. Robust synthetic adhesives based on soft wet materials will find
diverse applications in healthcare, biomedical, chemical and marine industries.
For instance, tough bio-adhesives for suture-less surgical glues can avoid many
inherent complications and drawbacks in conventional suturing, and soft wet
adhesives can also be used as biocompatible coatings of various medical devices
such as neural probes, bio-sensors and metallic prosthesis. Therefore, results
from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research also
includes a coordinated effort to recruit students from underrepresented
populations in science and engineering to enter into the exciting new field of
mechanics of soft materials.

Soft wet adhesives are widely found in nature and have broad engineering and
technological applications. However, existing synthetic soft wet adhesives are
severely limited by their low mechanical strength and toughness. This research
is to design extremely tough and strong soft wet adhesives by exploiting the
molecular-scale reversible crosslinks and macro-scale mechanical instabilities
in soft wet materials. The research team will develop a multi-scale model to
understand the relationships between molecular-scale reversible crosslinks and
macro-scale energy dissipation, construct a phase diagram to elucidate the
formation and interaction among different modes of mechanical instabilities in
constrained soft adhesives, and develop a set of guidelines for the design of
the soft wet adhesives to achieve extraordinary interfacial properties by
exploiting reversible crosslinks and instabilities.