* 1661660
* Solvent-based Roll-to-Roll Nanoimprinting for Large Area Nanopatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Qiuming Yu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2020
* USD 316,562.00

Nanostructured materials exhibit extraordinary optical, electrical, mechanical
and chemical properties that enable novel devices with enhanced performance and
functionality. Nanostructures are frequently utilized in numerous applications
including photovoltaics, chemical and biological sensing, biotechnology, solid-
state lighting, hydrogen production via photocatalytic water splitting and other
uses. These various areas of nanotechnology demand nanofabrication techniques
that are cost effective and practical while maintaining quality control and
process flexibility. The nanofabrication techniques must also be scalable in
order to be seamlessly applied to real-world applications beyond the laboratory.
Despite progress having been made, a versatile nanofabrication technology that
can meets all necessary requirements is lacking. This research will open up a
new nanomanufacturing process pathway that can be applied to speed-up laboratory
and pilot-scale device development and also be scaled-up for large-area, high-
throughput product manufacturing. This research will make significant impacts on
the fields of nanotechnology, nanomanufacturing, plasmonics, optoelectronics and
nanophotonics. Plans are for graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to receive training, participate in this highly
interdisciplinary research and conduct experiments in the new Washington Clean
Energy Testbeds facility.

Nanoimprint lithography is a simple, low-cost, high-resolution and high-
throughput nanofabrication technique with compatibility for large-scale roll-to-
roll manufacturing. However, current roll-to-roll nanoimprint lithography
processes are all based on either thermal or ultraviolet-based curing techniques
that require either high temperature or special photopolymer resists. In
addition, roller molds are typically made by time-consuming and costly
fabrication processes. The research team aims to design and develop a new roll-
to-roll nanoimprint lithography process using environmentally friendly polymer
resists and a high-resolution composite belt mold. The research is accomplished
through fundamental understanding of mechanics and fluid dynamics of mold cavity
filling under solvent-assisted conditions to produce quality nanostructures on
large area flexible substrates with high resolution and high throughput.
Solvent-assisted nanoimprinting offers a low temperature and low pressure
process, which eliminates issues resulting from thermal expansion variations
between the mold, substrate and resist and reduces energy input costs while
increasing processing speed. New composite elastomeric belt molds are easily and
affordably replicated for rapid prototyping while providing high-resolution. The
high quality nanostructures on flexible substrates are fabricated using this
method and integrated in to novel flexible optoelectronic devices to demonstrate
its capabilities.