* 1661658
* Selmer groups and the arithmetic of modular symbols
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Romyar Sharifi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 12/31/2018
* USD 22,991.00

A remarkable aspect of algebraic number theory lies in the connections it finds
between objects that appear to be of entirely different natures. The overarching
principle of the research of the PI is that certain algebraic problems can be
reinterpreted directly as geometric problems in higher dimension, providing
fascinating connections between objects from different parts of mathematics. A
great wealth of such connections have been found indirectly through intermediate
objects of an analytic nature. The research outlined in the proposal aims to
provide a window through which well-known conjectures and statements of
arithmetic may be seen in a new and more direct light.

The PI has conjectured an intricate but explicit relationship between modular
symbols and the arithmetic of cyclotomic fields that may be viewed as refining
the Iwasawa main conjecture. Roughly speaking, this conjecture identifies class
groups of cyclotomic fields with quotients of homology groups of modular curves
by actions of Eisenstein ideals. The central project of the award is the
extension of this conjecture to higher dimensions and other global fields. The
expectation is that the geometry of locally symmetric spaces should explicitly
determine the arithmetic of lattices in Galois representations, which is to say
the structure of Selmer groups.