* 1661129
* ABI Sustaining: Maintenance of the XMA/ZMAPortal video data management systems and XMALab video motion analysis software for the comparative biomechanics community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Elizabeth Brainerd, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 339,872.00

Comparative biomechanics is the field that studies the fundamental engineering
rules governing how organisms move, frequently leading to practical applications
as well as basic understanding. For example, by comparing the biomechanics of
swimming in sharks, fish and whales, efficient swimming robots have been
developed for undersea exploration and search and rescue. A wide array of
instruments is used by different research groups to collect similar motion-
capture data, and a wide array of methods is used to store and document the
data, including both commercial software and locally-generated code as tools for
data analysis, creating technical barriers to sharing and reusing both data and
tools. Since progress in science is accelerated when scientists can share and
reuse data and software, these technical barriers have hindered wide data
sharing in the field of comparative biomechanics. The goal of this project is to
maintain online data management and software analysis tools to accelerate
research in comparative biomechanics. These tools, the Zoological Motion
Analysis Portal (zmaportal.org), X-ray Motion Analysis Portal (xmaportal.org)
and X-ray Motion Analysis Lab (XMALab client software) were developed with NSF
support, and this project will provide routine maintenance of the open-source
code base and server and storage space for hosting the online tools. These
biological informatics tools are accelerating research in comparative
biomechanics by enhancing data sharing and the ability to compare across
species. From such comparisons, fundamental engineering concepts are discovered,
that can then be applied to human engineering designs (biologically-inspired
design and biomimetics). These advances promote US economic competiveness
through technological innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
discoveries in the field of comparative biomechanics have often been driven by
the introduction of new technologies. High-speed video imaging, X-ray imaging,
XROMM and 3-D motion analysis are key components of this toolkit. A fundamental
goal of comparative biomechanics is to compare species in a phylogenetic
context, and thereby to extract robust relationships between phenotype (form)
and biomechanical function. The tools to be maintained through this resource
significantly increase the throughput of motion analysis, thereby increasing the
number of species available for comparison. The XMAPortal and ZMAPortal are
designed to standardize video data and metadata, thereby facilitating
reproducibility and comparison among many studies of multiple species from data
collected at multiple research sites. Together these products will increase the
quality, quantity, reusability, and comparability of animal motion data
available for comparative biomechanics research. This project will maintain
valuable cyberinfrastructure tools for the study of animals in motion for
comparative biomechanics research. It will support continued efforts to make
these tools accessible to as wide a range of scientists and students as
possible. Toward broad understanding and appreciation of science, animals in
motion are inherently beautiful and fascinating to the general public. XROMM
animations are visually compelling, and the xromm.org web site has received, and
continues to receive, substantial interest from the lay press and television
producers. The results of this project may be found at the following stable
URLs: [xromm.org; xmaportal.org; zmaportal.org; bitbucket.org/xromm/xmalab/].