* 1661666
* Producing Conductive Polymer Composites by Placing Graphene at the Interfaces of the Blended Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2021
* USD 350,117.00

Most conductive materials are made of metals but there is a special class of
plastics, conductive polymer composites (CPCs), made from a mixture of polymer
with conductive fillers. CPCs have the potential to exhibit unique mechanical
and electronic properties but are challenging and expensive to manufacture.
Currently, CPCs require a large amount of conductive fillers which greatly
increases the cost of the materials and seriously degrades their mechanical
strength, limiting implementation. This award will enable a new manufacturing
method for CPCs through the selective placement of graphene, a highly conductive
filler, in a polymer. By understanding how to locally control the filler
placement, much less filler is needed, reducing both cost and the risk of
degrading the strength of the composite material. The academic team has
established connections with industry partners who recognize the potential
impact of such a development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to create
CPCs with desired properties via engineering the morphology of co-continuous
polymer blends. The interface between two immiscible polymers of the co-
continuous blends provides a percolating scaffold for graphene. The sparse
percolating structure of the interface, as well as the large aspect ratio of
graphene, will significantly reduce the amount of conductive fillers needed in
CPCs and, therefore, cut the cost of manufacturing. Moreover, by choosing non-
conductive yet mechanically strong polymers for the co-continuous blends, the
approach can also greatly improve the mechanical properties of CPCs. The
research will deliver scientific insight into the effect of the interfacial
graphene on the morphology and properties of the CPCs.