* 1661153
* Collaborative Research: Using Educational Data Mining Techniques to Uncover How and Why Students Learn from Erroneous Examples
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Ryan Baker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2022
* USD 584,644.00

In this research project, a team from Carnegie Mellow University and a team from
the University of Pennsylvania will use data mining techniques to explore how
and why interactive erroneous examples can benefit mathematics learners. The
project team will iteratively refine existing, computer-based pedagogical
materials based on an analysis of log data of hundreds of students who have used
those materials to learn. The work will be done with middle school mathematics
students, specifically sixth grade students, and the target topic will be
decimals. Recent research and studies have indicated that learning from the
errors of others -- a prominent pedagogical approach used in medical education,
but less commonly used in other areas of education -- has considerable potential
to help students learn. Yet, erroneous examples are not used widely, in part
because it is not yet understood how and why they provide this benefit. The
broader impact of the project is that it will provide improved mathematics
lessons, infused with erroneous examples, vetted with empirical evidence of
their effectiveness, which can be deployed on the world-wide web to the
significant number of U.S. students who are at risk of poor mathematics
achievement due to poor understanding of core STEM concepts. The project will
also provide a blueprint that can be used widely in other projects and systems,
supported by both theory and empirical evidence, for how to help students learn
from erroneous examples. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature
on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ an iterative
research plan in which log data from online learning of erroneous examples will
be datamined and analyzed. The project team will start with log data from over
600 middle school mathematics students who have used erroneous examples to learn
in online instructional technology and games. The team will then collect data
from approximately two thousand more students over the course of the three-year
project to explore whether enhancements to the erroneous examples materials
based on revised theory improves student learning. Moment-by-moment learning
models will be used to understand whether students learn immediately from
erroneous examples, or whether erroneous examples lead to future learning. The
project team will also study whether confusion and other forms of affect mediate
successful learning from erroneous examples, using previously validated
automated detectors of confusion and other affective states. The project team
will also investigate how each of the steps of the student interaction with the
erroneous examples -- for example, identifying errors, fixing errors, and
explaining errors -- promote learning and positive affect. By the end of the
third year of the project, the project team anticipates having a comprehensive
theoretical model of how learning with erroneous examples works and how
erroneous examples should be integrated into instruction more generally.