* 1661679
* Collaborative Research:  An Integrated Understanding of the Initiation and Subsequent Dynamical and Microphysical Characteristics of Deep Convective Storms during RELAMPAGO
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Matthew Kumjian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 367,691.00

RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) is a study of
extreme thunderstorms. It includes a field program to be conducted from 1 Nov to
15 Dec 2018 in west central Argentina, which is regarded as perhaps the world?s
best natural laboratory for thunderstorm research. Cutting edge observations
from mobile Doppler radar and other instruments will be collected and then
analyzed to answer the very basic question of why the thunderstorms in this
region are among the most intense in the world. RELAMPAGO will identify the
mechanisms that trigger these thunderstorms and contribute to their violence.
RELAMPAGO will also determine why these extreme storms are such prolific hail
producers, but do not appear to generate many tornadoes. Understanding the
initiation and evolution of thunderstorms and how they generate severe weather
in Argentina will enable scientists to create better, and more general, theories
about thunderstorms in the U.S. This will lead to better forecasts of U.S.
thunderstorms and their severe impacts, including hail and tornadoes, and reduce
losses of life and property in the U.S. RELAMPAGO is a collaborative project
with critical involvement from the University of Illinois, the Pennsylvania
State University, University of Colorado, and the Center for Severe Weather
Research. Student participation will help shape the careers of the future
generation of scientists, engineers and forecasters by equipping them with
cutting edge skills and knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RELAMPAGO is a study of
extreme thunderstorms. It includes a field program to be conducted from 1 Nov to
15 Dec 2018 in west central Argentina. RELAMPAGO is motivated by satellite
observations showing that the thunderstorms in this region are arguably the
deepest and most intense in the world. The scarcity of available ground-based
observations has kept open the question of why these thunderstorms are so
intense. Thus, a novel set of targeted, integrated ground-based instrumentation,
including mobile Doppler radars, radiosonde systems, and deployable
meteorological sensors will be used to investigate the local environment in
which these storms initiate and organize, and the internal storm processes that
generate severe weather. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the extensive suite
of RELAMPAGO observations and complementary numerical simulations will be used
to determine the convective triggering mechanisms in this environment, and the
properties of the regional orography and circulations that contribute to the
extreme nature of these storms. Orographically modified environments will be
related to the frequency of supercellular convection and its transition to
mesoscale convective systems. A new understanding of how such environmental
modifications enhance hail production will also be gained, as will an
understanding of how (and when) the environments support severe-wind production
but reduce the likelihood of tornadogenesis through stronger cold pool
generation and reduction of low-level vertical wind shear. This research on
extreme thunderstorms outside the U.S. will leverage the results from past U.S.
projects, permitting a more general, and geographically unconstrained,
understanding of such storms. This will aid the development of conceptual and
predictive models that can be used by forecasters in the U.S. and worldwide,
mitigating future loss of life and property.