* 1661414
* ABI Innovation: Computational Methods to Study Gene Transcription Initiation Patterns
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Haiyan Hu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 577,733.00

This project aims to develop computational methods and tools to discover how
gene transcription initiation mechanisms vary, and their resulting functional
consequences on gene transcriptional regulation. Gene transcriptional regulation
refers to any process by which a cell regulates its genes expression. Properly
regulated expression of genes is crucial for ensuring that biological processes
are accurately carried out, for genes contributing to development,
proliferation, programmed cell death (apoptosis), aging, and differentiation.
Gene expression begins when mRNA molecules start to be synthesized, at the point
on the gene where they initiate. To understand the regulation of gene
expression, it is essential to discover the transcription initiation mechanisms
under various conditions, and how these varied mechanisms lead to different
outcomes, or phenotypes. High throughput sequencing of complete RNA sets
synthesized in cells has produced large datasets, but matching large-scale
computational studies, to understand phenotype-relevant transcription initiation
mechanisms are still at its early stage. This project will study transcription
initiation and gene regulation, with the goal of generating computational
algorithms that capture the rules and conditions for selection of the
transcription initiation site on a gene; the algorithms will then be converted
into software tools. These tools will be released as open-source and freely
available software packages to the scientific community and interested public.
The research will be communicated in ways expected to have a great impact on
education at many levels: it will be incorporated into lectures, labs, and
research opportunities geared towards graduate, undergraduate and K-12
education. The research will also be disseminated to the research community and
the public to enhance scientific understanding, through freely distributed
computational tools and various modes of web dissemination. In addition,
mentoring and outreach efforts targeted towards women and girls will help
attract more women into engaging in research experiences in interdisciplinary
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the underlying mechanisms and
functional consequences of gene transcription initiation is important to
understand gene regulation. The project seeks to create a set of computational
algorithms and statistical methods to discover the associations between
transcription initiation and gene regulation mechanisms towards advancing our
understanding of gene transcriptional regulation. The advanced graph theory-
based algorithms and probabilistic models of gene transcription initiation and
regulation through large-scale high-throughput transcriptomics, genomics and
epigenomics data integration have the promise to unveil various transcription
initiation mechanisms and their functional roles in gene transcriptional
regulation and phenotype formulation. The research is expected to not only
advance scientific understanding of global gene regulation and phenotype
development, but also stimulate interest in developing and advancing efficient
computational modeling and data integration methods in the informatics research
field. The research information and products will be made available through the
project website (http://hulab.ucf.edu/research/projects/TransInitiation/).