* 1661180
* Secondary Mathematics, in-the-moment, Longitudinal Engagement Study
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* James Middleton, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,463,636.00

The EHR Core Research program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that will generate foundational knowledge in the field. This study will
investigate high school students' experiences of engagement with mathematics and
their motivation to learn, and the ways that classroom instructional climates do
or do not support productive engagement with mathematics. As an important effort
to help improve student achievement in mathematics nationally, this study will
be grounded in three critical areas (motivation, affect, and social
interactions), which are essential to both student performance in mathematics
and to their success in other STEM fields. Since few studies have investigated
these critical areas at the high school level, this study will initiate long-
term, large-scale, experience-level analysis that will advance knowledge in the
field. The research will build on prior studies that suggest that students are
more motivated and engaged with learning mathematics when: (1) mathematics makes
sense and when students believe that they are capable of making sense of
mathematics; (2) mathematics and situations in which the mathematics is set are
interesting to students; (3) students feel safe and supported to take
intellectual risks; (4) effort and understanding are promoted over a performance
culture; and (5) students feel that they matter, their ideas and themselves as
people, to their teacher and their peers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish
these goals, the study will develop profiles of climate characteristics that are
more (or less) engaging based on observations of classroom instruction and
students' behavior. Both quantitative and qualitative analysis of students'
perceptions of their classroom climates and day-to-day experiences will be done.
This will allow researchers to map growth in student motivation and engagement
as well as how a series of in-the-moment experiences, situated within classroom
climate profiles, contribute to students' tendencies to engage and perform
productively in mathematics. The project will develop a mobile app to study
students' experiences in the moment, building Experience Sampling Methodology
(EMS.) Qualitative interviews and observations of case studies will also be used
to capture students' engaged behaviors and perceptions of opportunities to
become absorbed in the moment experiences. Data from these sources will
complement and validate the larger-scale longitudinal analyses. Outcomes from
this research will advance understanding about high school students' motivation
and engagement toward mathematics. The mobile application will be supplemented
by prompts, scales, and observational protocols to guide researchers in further
study of in-the-moment engagement. Profiles of engaging instructional climates
and profiles of high school students' growth in motivation will be used to pilot
professional development for teachers of diverse student populations. This
research will also develop modules for teacher professional development and will
be delivered to online for use by the at-large education community.