* 1661443
* ABI Development: Increasing concurrency for improved performance of the BEAGLE library
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Michael Cummings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,010,255.00

Estimating the evolutionary history of organisms, phylogenetic inference, is
often a critical step for understanding how organisms adapt in complex
biological systems. Modern phylogenetic analyses involve obtaining DNA sequence
data from a set of organisms, and using model-based methods to infer a binary
tree that reflects how closely the organisms are related to one another. This
tree represents the evolutionary history of the organisms going back to their
most recent common ancestor and is, in essence, a subset of the overall tree of
life. In addition to providing a basic understanding of the evolution of life,
these phylogenetic relationships are very important in understanding the
evolutionary dynamics, timing, and spread of many disease-causing organisms,
such as viruses (e.g., hiv, flu, and Ebola). The most effective phylogenetic
inferences involve statistical methods, either maximum likelihood or Bayesian
analysis. Both of these methods share the same computational bottleneck, which
is the calculation of the likelihood of proposed trees. These likelihood
calculations are extremely computationally intensive, and hence accurate
phylogenetic analyses become a bottleneck in many studies of the tree of life.
Therefore, accelerating phylogenetic analyses is critical to produce timely
results that can inform public health and disease containment actions, as well
as to understand fundamental problems in evolutionary biology more broadly. This
project increases the performance and capabilities of software that will in
crease the speed of analyses, and thus decrease the time to scientific
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broad-platform Evolutionary Analysis General
Likelihood Evaluator (BEAGLE) library and Application Programming Interface
(API) is a high-performance likelihood-calculation platform for evolutionary
models. It defines a uniform API and includes a collection of efficient
implementations for calculating a variety of likelihood-based models on
different hardware devices, such as graphics processing units (GPUs) and
multicore cpus. The project provides new thinking to the problem of computing
the likelihood function in evolutionary analyses through configuring concurrent
communication by moving computation that previously required multiple BEAGLE
instances into a single instance. Operating under a single beagle instance
allows better coordination of concurrent communication, by, for example,
reducing memory transfers as well as by load-balancing the computation across
potentially heterogeneous devices. The emphasis on concurrency originates from a
deep understanding of the specific characteristics of the computational problem
- computing the likelihood function - and how it is used for analyses within the
domain sciences - phylogenetics and population genetics, and recognizing the
opportunities presented by trends in processor design for increasing
concurrency. The overarching theme comprises the following recurring sub-themes:
i) reformulation - identifying and decomposing computation into practical
independent operations; ii) minimization - reducing operations, such as memory
transfers and execution overhead; and iii) control - configuring flow and
communication to maximize concurrency, including across devices. The research
project reformulates the library and its api, and focuses on consolidating more
capabilities into a single library instance through the following research
initiatives: 1. exploiting additional concurrency within a library instance,
thus improving concurrent communication by reformulation and minimization; 2.
developing the library to fully leverage multi-device systems, thus improving
concurrent communication by controlling load-balancing; 3. exploring numerical
precision and scaling in parallel computing context; and 4. extending the
capabilities of the library with new models for statistical phylogenetics and
population genetics.