* 1661400
* Investigating Relationships between STEM Teacher Preparation, Instructional Quality, and Teacher Persistence
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Courtney Preston, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,399,709.00

This Noyce Track 4 project will investigate how features of STEM teacher
preparation programs contribute to instructional quality and teacher persistence
of beginning STEM teachers in high-need schools. Teachers are inequitably
distributed across schools, where high-need schools have higher teacher turnover
rates, teachers with fewer educational credentials, and teachers with less
experience. Skilled STEM teachers are more important than ever because of the
increased rigor of new standards in science and mathematics, and the growing
need for a well-prepared STEM workforce. Although teacher effectiveness
increases over time, because high-need schools tend to have more inexperienced
teachers, it is imperative that new STEM teachers enter the classroom prepared
to deliver quality instruction, and that they persist in those schools as they
improve. Findings from this study have the potential to: a) identify program
features that are essential to the production of effective, rigorous STEM
teachers that persist in high-need settings; and b) provide schools with
specific coursework and field experiences to look for as they hire new teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish correlations
between features of STEM teacher preparation and induction programs and
beginning STEM teachers' instructional quality and persistence over the first
three years of their teaching careers. The sample for the study consists of over
100 first year teachers prepared across seven geographically dispersed (CA, CO,
FL, NC, NJ, NY) Noyce Scholarship programs who are teaching in high-need
schools. Data from 6 task assignments and associated student work samples in
science and mathematics will be used to assess the quality of teachers'
instruction, specifically the academic rigor and clear expectations they present
to their students. Using both linear regression and HLM, the project will
investigate the relationships between teacher preparation program coursework,
field experiences, induction supports, and quality of instruction. Additionally,
using logistic regression, the investigators will examine the relationships
between these features of preparation and induction and the likelihood of
teachers persisting past their Noyce commitment into their third year of
teaching. Finally, also using logistic regression, the project will investigate
whether the quality of teachers' instruction is associated with their likelihood
of persisting past their Noyce commitment. There is a substantial gap in the
research literature regarding the relationships between teacher preparation and
induction and the quality of teachers' instruction. This study aims to
contribute research-based knowledge to this issue, as well as to provide
guidance on specific areas where teacher preparation programs can focus program
improvement efforts. This project will also form the foundation for future
quasi-experimental research that focuses on significant features of preparation
and induction.