* 1661510
* ABI Innovation: Wallace: a flexible platform for reproducible modeling of species niches and distributions built for community expansion
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert Anderson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 593,352.00

The software to be produced in this project aims to provide analyses that
estimate a species' environmental requirements (habitat) and geographic
distribution (range). Scientific progress calls for software with several
qualities rarely found together. Ideally, scientific software: 1) is open-source
(providing the underlying code); 2) gives conceptual and methodological guidance
(orienting the user and helping them make decisions); 3) is flexible (allowing
many options); 4) is interactive (showing the results of each stage of the
analysis as it is completed); 5) can be expanded/updated easily and quickly; and
6) provides explicit documentation of the analyses run (making it easy to
reproduce the results). The software to be produced in this project responds
directly to these needs. It will be an example of an innovative way to make new
scientific methods accessible to a broad audience of researchers, far beyond the
specialists of a particular subfield. It targets a large user base of biologists
and natural resource managers, and also will be of interest to programmers,
educators, and students. This software should lead to better estimates of
species ranges, important to interests as diverse as conservation biology, the
study of invasive species and diseases passed to humans from insects and
wildlife. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in computer
coding. In addition to the software itself, the researchers will produce
scientific publications and online webinars that document and explain its
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will greatly expand the
software Wallace for the burgeoning field of niche/distributional modeling and
related fields. Such models estimate environmental suitability for a species,
indicating their potential geographic distribution for a wide variety of
scientific studies. Currently, researchers struggle to follow advances and
achieve a nimble uptake of new ideas and techniques. To improve this situation,
the Wallace software provides a modular platform offering customizable workflows
through a Graphical User Interface (GUI). Taking advantage of the modular nature
of Wallace, the researchers will coordinate with many external partners to add
diverse cutting-edge functionalities. The project will: 1) produce a
comprehensive framework for modeling based on occurrence data that document the
presence of a species; 2) include techniques that take advantage of repeated
sampling; 3) allow seamless user up/download and customizable workflows via
online and local implementations; and 4) grow the user community. Eventually,
this approach could be scaled-up, allowing high-quality modeling for thousands
of species. Wallace also will serve as an example for the development of
scientific software in other disciplines. The results of the project will be
made available at: https://wallaceecomod.github.io/