* 1661342
* ABI Development: An Open-Access Global Repository of Plant and Animal Demographic Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Judy Che-Castaldo, Lincoln Park Zoo
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 615,858.00

This project will create a comprehensive, open-access database of plant and
animal demographic information that will be useful to researchers, educators,
and conservation managers. No such centralized repository currently exists,
although biologists have been collecting data on the rates with which
individuals survive, grow, and reproduce for many decades, and from tens of
thousands of populations around the world. These fundamental biological data can
inform a range of scientific research within and outside of the field of
biology, including understanding why certain populations go extinct or become
invasive, and predicting how species may respond to anthropogenic pressures and
global change. By developing a single, standardized platform for storing and
analyzing these demographic data, this project will yield an important resource
for a range of users. For example, researchers will be able to directly
contribute their datasets into the repository, as well as to link these
demographic data with other databases (e.g. on species distributions, genetic
sequences, climate projections) to conduct large-scale comparative studies.
Teachers and students will be able to explore variations in life cycles and
carry out basic analyses by following the exercises and tutorials that will
accompany the database. Finally, managers of threatened species can use these
demographic data to better understand the needs of their populations and compare
the impacts of different management strategies (e.g., increasing breeding
compared to increasing offspring survival). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
demographic rates of survival, growth, and reproduction are the basic units for
measuring how populations change in size and structure through time and space.
As such, these demographic data serve as key resources for a range of biological
research, from understanding the evolution of life histories to predicting
species responses to global change. Moreover, demographic studies tend to follow
a standardized protocol for data collection and presentation in the form of
matrix population models (MPMs). This standardization provides a rare
opportunity to conduct large-scale comparative analyses across the tree of life.
The scientific literature currently contains MPMs for &gt;1,500 plant species
and &gt;2,000 animal species worldwide, often with several populations for each
species. The distinctive data structure and standardized analyses for MPMs
necessitate a uniform, centralized repository to maximize the utility of these
valuable data. This project aims to develop an open-access repository of MPMs,
which will allow researchers to leverage decades of demographic monitoring to
conduct comparative analyses at global, regional, and local scales. The proposed
work involves developing a robust relational database management system for
MPMs, building upon existing efforts by an international team of demographic
experts and data users on the COMPADRE Plant Matrix Database and COMADRE Animal
Matrix Database. The team will create a publicly accessible interface to
facilitate data usage and enable researchers to directly contribute their MPM
datasets through a standardized data entry portal. Additionally, the project's
senior personnel will develop tutorials and teaching materials, and conduct a
series of workshops to engage current and potential users of the repository
including researchers, educators, and conservation managers. The results of this
project can be found at http://www.compadre-db.org/.