* 1661068
* Young children's beliefs about causal systems: Learning about belief revision in the lab and in museums
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Sobel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 08/31/2021
* USD 817,795.00

One of the most important processes in scientific thinking is belief revision:
the ability to change an initial hypothesis in light of new evidence. In order
to do this, children must be able to do two things. First, they must be able to
reason about how the world works so that they can understand the causal systems
they encounter, such as what causes earthquakes. Second, children must be able
to think about their own knowledge and the process of learning so that they will
know whether and how to change their beliefs about causal systems. This project
seeks to (1) discover how the capacity for belief revision develops in the early
elementary-school years, (2) explore how this capacity relates to children's
awareness of their own learning, and (3) describe how both of these processes
relate to children's interactions with museum exhibits. The research team
involves developmental laboratories at the University of Pennsylvania and Brown
University and informal STEM learning partners at the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia and the Providence Children's Museum. The project is
funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program which funds fundamental research
that seeks to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest interventions
(and innovations) to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education,
learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves two lines
of research, which study children's responses to different kinds of science
puzzles. The first series of experiments are lab-based and vary the information
that children observe and the types of exploratory actions that they can take.
Children are also interviewed to find out how they think about science and
learning. This design is intended to determine how different sets of evidence
and different exploratory actions affect children's learning. It also addresses
how children's abilities for belief revision may differ between abstract and
contextualized causal systems. This line of work additionally investigates when
children gain the capacity to revise their beliefs explicitly in the face of
counterevidence, linking their scientific thinking capacities to their
developing metacognitive abilities. The second series of experiments observes
and records children's explorations of and interactions in museum exhibits.
Parents and children are interviewed and asked to comment on video clips of
their museum explorations. This allows the researchers to examine how naturally
occurring behavior in informal learning settings affects children's learning and
views about learning. Findings can illuminate how children learn to integrate
evidence with their beliefs, which can inform educational policies and practices
around the teaching of science. These studies can also advance researchers and
museum practitioners' understanding of how museum environments foster children's
growth into healthy, independent thinkers and how to support caregivers' efforts
to assist children's learning.