* 1661264
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Visuospatial thinking in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Steven Franconeri, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2022
* USD 498,679.00

A team of researchers from Northwestern University, the University of Illinois
at Chicago, and the University of California - Santa Barbara will investigate
spatial thinking in STEM fields. Students and scientists who are talented in
STEM fields also tend to a high capacity for spatial imagination -- they score
highly on tasks that ask them to imagine rotations of shapes, or predict how
shapes will look when they are folded. But attempts to train these abilities
have not translated to substantial improvement in STEM talents. This may be
because current training focuses on rote practice, assuming that it is possible
to improve the capacity of someone's spatial imagination. In contrast, this may
be not possible -- even STEM experts may not have a substantially higher raw
capacity for spatial imagination, compared to the average person. The research
will test the exciting possibility that their available imagination 'machinery'
is similar, but that experts have learned a set of strategies for using that
same capacity far more efficiently. The studies will focus on the domain of
chemistry, and will ask novices and experts to remember and transform objects
that are both unfamiliar (abstract shapes) and familiar (molecules), in
experiments designed to unpack the contributions of raw capacity versus a set of
predicted strategies. If the studies can isolate the strategies that these STEM
experts use to move beyond their capacity limits, then those strategies could be
taught in chemistry classrooms. The same principles could extend to other
domains as well, such as physics, geoscience, and algebra. This discovery would
substantially enhance science and engineering education programs at all levels,
strengthening the scientific and engineering research potential of our students.
The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in STEM is correlated with spatial thinking
ability, yet attempts to train spatial ability (e.g., with mental rotation or
paper folding tasks) have led to little improvement in STEM outcomes. These
spatial training programs may be ineffective because they are based on an
impoverished model of the cognitive and visuospatial capacities processes
underlying spatial thinking, both generally and in discipline-based education
research. The present research will unpack spatial ability into three
hypothesized mechanisms, to isolate where training might be best focused, using
a set of controlled laboratory tasks that ask novices (undergraduates) and
experts to encode and transform both unfamiliar/abstract and molecular stimuli.
With chemistry as a case study, this project will unravel the relative
contribution of three potential mechanisms for visuospatial representation and
transformation: domain-specific chunking (using long-term memory representations
of frequently-encountered chunks), domain-general compression skills
(recognizing and leveraging redundancies such as repeated identities or planes
of symmetry), and raw visuospatial capacity (the ability to store and transform
any abstract set of points or shapes). A deeper understanding of the mechanisms
involved in spatial thinking would lead directly to better pedagogy and
curriculum design for teaching spatial thinking in kindergarten through
undergraduate STEM classrooms.