* 1661511
* Consortium for Materials Properties Research in Earth Sciences (COMPRES): National Facilities and Infrastructure Development for High-Pressure Geosciences Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Carl Agee, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 13,736,962.00

COMPRES is a national, community-based consortium, with a mission to support
research in the properties of materials that comprise the interiors of Earth and
other planetary bodies, with particular emphasis on high-pressure science and
technology and related fields. It is charged with the oversight and guidance of
specialized laboratories at several national synchrotron facilities. COMPRES
laboratory scientists determine the basic material properties of the
inaccessible Earth and these measurements, in turn, shed light on questions of
direct societal impact, such as the causes of earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions. They can also help explain the formation of natural resources within
the Earth, and they can improve our quality of life through the discovery of new
advanced materials. As part of its mission, COMPRES continually develops new
infrastructure and technologies to advance U.S. geoscience
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from mineral physics measurements carried
out at COMPRES-supported facilities are critical for interpreting seismological
and volcanological phenomena as well as other geophysical processes operating in
the Earths interior. Synchrotron-based techniques have played an ever-increasing
role in experimental efforts to measure properties of geological materials at
high pressures and temperatures. COMPRES is perfectly positioned to take
advantage of the new generation of synchrotrons that offer great promise for the
coming decade and beyond. For example, our beam line facilities XPD and FIS will
be stationed at Brookhaven National Laboratory?s National Synchrotron Light
Source-II (NSLS-II), which is a recently completed, $900 million facility, that
produces X-rays over 10,000 times brighter than its predecessor NSLS, while
providing improved spatial and energy resolution as well as a world-leading
synchrotron-infrared (IR) radiation source. COMPRES also supports diamond anvil
cell (DAC) beam lines at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) Argonne National
Laboratory, at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, and a multi-anvil press project at Arizona State University. The new
or upgraded synchrotrons augmented by improvements in x-ray optics and detectors
will lead to dramatic advances in measurements at high pressure. Thus, the
upcoming period, spanned by the new 5-year cooperative agreement, offers
exciting opportunities as these synchrotron facilities will dramatically improve
experimental capabilities and allow for novel experiments needed to test
hypotheses and address yet-unanswered questions on the nature of deep planetary
interiors. Infrastructure and facility developments supported by COMPRES are at
the same time creating a new generation of tools and techniques for attaining
and measuring the deep interior environment in the laboratory.