* 1661086
* Improving children's ability to connect counting to cardinality through shared book reading
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Nicole McNeil, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2021
* USD 736,033.00

Individual differences in children's early math understanding are driven, in
part, by differences in children's early learning environments. However, it is
unclear exactly how early learning environments should be structured to support
the development of children's math understanding. Lack of such knowledge is a
critical problem because, without it, scientists cannot explain and predict
children's understanding of foundational math concepts, and parents and
educators are left to rely on their own, sometimes erroneous intuitions when
choosing learning materials for their children. In the current project,
researchers from the University of Notre Dame will study how the design of one
type of early learning material - children's counting books - affects children's
book reading behaviors and early math understanding. In this way, the project
will further the mission of EHR Core Research (ECR) program to advance knowledge
of children's math learning and the early learning environments that support it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis is that counting books with tactile
features (e.g., pop ups, textured graphics) will be less effective than those
without tactile features for supporting children's understanding of counting and
associated math concepts. Books with tactile features are expected to elicit at
least two behaviors that may hinder math learning: (a) attention focused on the
individual objects rather than on the set as a whole and (b) off-task utterances
and actions. The research team will work with a diverse sample of preschoolers
from Head Start, Title-I preschools, and private early childhood programs. The
research methods include a pretest-intervention-posttest randomized experiment
in which children will read assigned books with a trained tutor in school over
the course of several weeks, as well as a less structured experiment in which
children will read assigned books with their primary caregiver in a more
naturalistic shared book reading context. By combining these approaches, the
researchers will not only be able to determine how different types of books
affect pre-to-post changes in math understanding, but also be able to conduct
detailed observations and analyses of the language and behaviors that emerge
during shared book reading. The project will advance the science of early math
learning by testing theory-driven hypotheses. Findings will inform best-practice
guidelines for the design of counting books and, thus, will help parents and
early childhood educators make more informed decisions when selecting learning
materials for their homes and classrooms.