* 1661054
* Identity Development Evaluation of African American Studies (IDEAAS):  A Longitudinal Investigation
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Aryn Dotterer, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 05/31/2022
* USD 34,485.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. As such, this study will build on
an emerging body of research about ways to broaden the representation of the
African American undergraduate students in STEM fields. This type of research is
highly important since studies show that racial bias weaken scientific identity
in STEM by triggering and perpetuating threatening stereotypes that African
Americans do not have the capacity and skills to become scientists. To that end,
this project will employ a stereotype inoculation model to test whether
environments characterized by majorities of marginalized group members serve to
reduce the negative effects of stereotypes, protect identity development, and
facilitate self-efficacy and career-related motivation. The study will compare
perceptions of campus climate and academic mentoring relationships using
populations of undergraduate students from two universities. It will look at
specific factors that both exacerbate and buffer the negative effects of racial
stereotypes, as well as the implications that they, in turn, have for the
development of an adaptive science identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will test three conceptual models grounded in the stereotype inoculation
framework. The first model will portray an erosion process whereby scientific
disidentification increases as a function of racial bias and stereotype threat.
A second counteractive model will test the potentially facilitative effects of
racial identity on scientific self-efficacy through its spillover effect on
scientific identity. The third model will examine the unconditional latent
growth of implicit scientific identity, as well as the time-varying effects of
students? perceptions of their mentoring relationships on the identity outcomes.
Data will be collected from cohorts comprising more than 500 STEM majors
attending the two universities participating in the project. Outcomes from this
work will advance stereotype inoculation theory development through its
innovative contextual focus on the micro- and macro-level processes that
influence African American science students? STEM career attitudes. The study
will also (a) provide insights into the mediating role that multiple identities,
both racial and scientific identity, play in buffering these stereotypes, and
(b) identify the interpersonal ingredients that comprise effective faculty-
student relationships that give shape to multiculturally inclusive academic
climates