* 1661672
* Fiber-based Hydrogels using Flow-induced Gelation Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Janine Nunes, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 03/31/2021
* USD 370,000.00

Hydrogels, which are water-filled polymer networks, are important soft materials
with beneficial properties that are currently in demand for tissue engineering,
wound healing and various drug delivery applications. There are numerous methods
for producing hydrogels, however many of these methods are strongly dependent on
chemical composition and or chemical reactions. This award supports the
development of a novel family of hydrogel materials produced from long and
flexible fibers using a mechanical approach that does not rely on chemical
reactions. This phenomenon, where flowing a suspension of microfibers causes the
fibers to knot and entangle into a continuous network, is a largely unexplored
field but has the potential to contribute significantly to the scientific,
engineering, healthcare and industrial communities as it offers a simple and
novel alternative route to engineering porous hydrogels with well-controlled
properties. This study requires a multidisciplinary effort drawing upon concepts
from materials science, flow processing, fluid mechanics, chemistry and
bioengineering. The multidisciplinary nature of the research program will
provide a rich learning experience for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objectives of this project
are focused on building a fundamental understanding of the mechanism of gelation
of microfibers and the resultant properties of the fiber-based hydrogels when
subjected to various flow conditions, thus establishing the structure-property
relationships of flow-produced fiber-based hydrogels. These relationships will
guide the design and processing parameters for producing fiber-based hydrogels
for target applications, such as tissue engineering and surgical adhesives. This
research involves both experimental and computational approaches to optimize the
design and production of fiber-based hydrogels from flow processing. The
experimental component of this project involves microfluidic approaches for
fiber synthesis, rheological characterization of fiber suspensions and
hydrogels, and imaging analysis of hydrogel microstructure. The computational
component focuses on numerical simulation methods to model fiber knotting and
entanglements when the suspended fibers are subjected to diverse stress
conditions. In addition, the research can contribute meaningful insights to the
existing body of literature on the flow properties of suspensions of long and
slender objects, which is a very important theme in many industrial processes.
Another significant outcome is the development of a unique paradigm for
injectable hydrogels that utilizes micron-sized building blocks in a process
that is entirely mechanical as the suspension gels in situ during injection
without chemical reactions.