* 1661618
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Coupling and Relaxation Mechanisms in Micro-mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mark Dykman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 292,000.00

Micro-scale electro-mechanical-systems are at the cutting edge of modern
technology. They have small size and mass and allow the implementation of
various types of control. Many consumer, industrial, and military devices rely
on these systems for sensing and signal conditioning. Speed, precision,
stability, and reliability are important characteristics of their performance.
Vibrations are at the core of the operation of many of these micro-electro-
mechanical systems. This project involves a fundamental study of the vibrations
of these systems, with the goal to establish what properties limit their
performance and how this performance can be improved. The development of
physics-based models for these vibrations, using both theoretical and
experimental tools, will provide key understanding that will allow for new modes
of operation and enhanced capabilities. And, while the experimental aspects of
the project will focus on micro-electro-mechanical systems, the vibration and
noise models developed will be general and applicable to optical systems and to
even smaller mechanical devices that operate at the nanoscale, paving the way
for further progress in nanotechnology. The broader impacts of the project
include outreach, mentoring and training of undergraduate and graduate students,
inclusion of students from underrepresented groups, development of classroom
materials motivated by the research, and dissemination of results. The project
will result in multidisciplinary training of students at four universities who
will benefit from the combined analytical, computational, and experimental
research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their small size, micro-
electro-mechanical vibrational systems are intrinsically noisy. Another
consequence of the small size is that obtaining a sufficiently strong signal
requires operating in a regime where the vibration amplitudes are large, making
the vibrations nonlinear. The interplay of nonlinearity and noise leads to new
phenomena, and these must be understood in order to avoid them, or to utilize
them in applications. In this context, nonlinear resonant phenomena are
particularly interesting, rich, intellectually challenging, and promising for
implementation in micro-scale devices. The behavior of resonating nonlinear
modes in the presence of decay and noise, as well as the fundamental microscopic
mechanisms of noise, decay, and nonlinearity are poorly understood. Nor is it
understood how to detect and characterize fluctuations in nonlinear systems, as
they are intervened with the nonlinearity in a nontrivial way. The work will
address these issues both theoretically and in experiments. It will also develop
new techniques for experimental control and characterization of resonating modes
using optical and electrostatic methods. The principal investigators have an
established record of collaboration, which will strengthen a close connection
between the theoretical and experimental work.