* 1661648
* I-Corps: Surfactants Platform for Agrochemical and Enhanced Oil Recovery Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Paul Dauenhauer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is driven by the
development of a new plant-based surfactant technology, which has the potential
to transform the agrochemicals, oil recovery, and detergents/personal care
market toward health friendly and environmentally safe chemicals. A major
limitation of existing plant-based surfactant technologies is that they have
limited performance compared petrochemical-based surfactants. This entirely bio-
renewable surfactant technology provides a competitive advantage in that can be
customized toward a specific market, potentially outperform all existing
surfactants, and that it can potentially replace the function of numerous
existing chemicals in a particular formulation, providing substantially more
value and simplifying complex products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project aims to engage in targeted customer discovery research to evaluate the
commercial impact of the proposed surfactant technology and to align the
technical performance of the tunable technology with a distinct competitive
advantage in the target market. This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a patented process technology for combining plant-based natural oils and
sugars into highly functional surfactants that outperform all other surfactants.
Technical results from preliminary research have demonstrated the customizable
nature of the technology toward specific markets, providing strong multi-
functional performance to replace the need for complex blends of chemicals.