* 1661203
* Research Initiation Award: Central Configurations, New Variational Method and Periodic Solutions in Celestial Mechanics
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Zhifu Xie, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2017
* USD 33,051.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Virginia State University has potential broader impact in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to develop new variational methods to
investigate orbits of unusual star system, such as quadruple star systems. New
teaching materials with advanced mathematical tools, such as symbolic
computation, will be developed in the field of celestial mechanics. This project
will also enhance the research experience and training of undergraduate students
at Virginia State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
mathematical solutions to some questions on the central configurations, the new
variational method with Structural Prescribed Boundary Conditions (SPBC) and the
existence of some new periodic orbits in celestial mechanics. The Star Pentagon
choreography has been numerically discovered and theoretically proven by the
variational method in the Newtonian planar four-body problem. The project now
aims to build a complete mathematical and computational framework for the new
variational method with SPBC for this system. General criteria will be
established for SPBC which can generate classical solutions without
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal of this project is to use
the variational method with SPBC to search for new periodic solutions. The
application of the method to search for periodic or quasi-periodic solutions to
systems with three unequal masses was inspired by the 2011 discovery of the
existence of a planet with two stars. The numerical solutions may guide the
understanding of why such an unusual system exists. These computational
techniques can then be applied to search for periodic and quasi-periodic
solutions for any n-body problem. The results in developing and applying the new
methods promise exciting examples and practical techniques to advance the
understanding of the dynamical behavior in celestial mechanics.