* 1661044
* Collaborative research: Development of sliding laws for glacier-flow and landscape-evolution models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Lucas Zoet, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,058.00

With this project, mathematical relationships needed to predict the sliding
speeds of glaciers and ice sheets (that is, sliding laws) are developed.
Variability of the forms of existing sliding laws adds major uncertainty to the
results of computer models of glacier flow. These computer models are the
principal tools used to both assess glacier wastage and resultant sea-level rise
over the next century and to study rock erosion by glaciers. This work improves
sliding laws by deriving them from the actual topography of glacier beds and
incorporating the frictional resistance of debris within and underneath
glaciers. Thus, this study has the potential to improve predictions of glacier-
flow models and assessments of their uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field and
laboratory measurements are combined with 3D flow modeling, with the goal of
fully bracketing the range of sliding behavior possible. The topography of
glacier beds exposed by receding glaciers in Canada and Switzerland is measured
at high resolution and statistically described. Also, frictional resistance to
slip is measured in laboratory experiments in which ice containing debris is
slid over a rock bed. These two sets of measurements are used in numerical
simulations of glacier sliding that yield relationships among sliding speed,
stresses at the bed, bed topography, debris concentration in ice, and areal
extent of water-saturated sediment dividing ice from rock.