* 1661278
* Labor Market Outcomes of STEM PhDs: Measuring Career Earnings and Occupation Trajectories
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Gerald Marschke, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,452.00

The National Bureau of Economic Research will create a new database to measure
the labor market outcomes of STEM PhDs and postdocs. The research will measure
flows of STEM graduates into different economic sectors, estimate the returns on
educational investments for STEM PhDs and postdocs, and analyze the determinants
of STEM labor demand in industry. The study will formulate and estimate new
models of labor demand based on state-of-the-art econometric methods and
innovative identification strategies using the new longitudinal data created by
the project. The research results will produce a feedback mechanism for
educators and policymakers on the outcomes of STEM graduates as well as the
impact of STEM training on productivity in the economy, thus enhancing the
infrastructure to conduct workforce development research. This project is
supported by the Education and Human Resources Core Research Program, which
funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will construct a new panel data set of PhDs
and postdocs containing both detailed demographic and employment information as
well as employer information that will allow the researchers to track PhDs and
postdocs forward and backward relative to their university training. The project
aims to: (1) produce a new longitudinal data set on labor market outcomes of
STEM PhD graduates and postdocs; (2) measure the flows of STEM graduates into
different sectors of the economy; (3) estimate the returns to education for STEM
PhDs and postdocs; and (4) analyze the determinant of STEM labor demand in
industry. To achieve these goals researchers will link the Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database to American Community Survey data,
and use administrative data from universities to develop and validate machine
learning algorithms to identify STEM PhDs and postdocs in the LEHD-ACS. They
will also use a combination of databases, including firm and establishment
information, and estimating equations to examine the industry demand for STEM
workers. The analysis will provide an understanding of exogenous factors that
affect the demand for STEM workers. This work will enable researchers to uncover
labor market demands for specialized skills and increase the understanding of
how university research contributes to the diffusion of new ideas in the
economy. Finally, researchers will evaluate the relationship between wages and
university-based research training and investigate the extent to which the
R&amp;D expenditure and federal research funding intensity of the universities
where the STEM worker trained influences earnings and later career prospects.