* 1661164
* Collaborative Research: Community and Teacher Teams Investigate Equitable Noticing and Dispositions
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth van Es, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 946,738.00

The project will examine how teachers can engage a broad range of learners in
rigorous mathematical activity. A significant component of this work is
designing and investigating a process of mathematics teachers' learning to
attend to students' mathematical reasoning and participation in their learning.
A particular focus of the work will be investigating how teachers' pay attention
to student engagement in their classrooms from an equity perspective. The three
goals of the project include exploring the relation between teachers'
backgrounds, classroom noticing, and instruction; investigating a professional
development model for teachers; and designing tools to support other mathematics
teachers in learning to notice their students' strengths. The project will
involve community leaders as participants in the professional development in
order to relate student engagement in the mathematics classroom to students'
communities and cultures. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teacher
noticing is a central component of mathematics teaching. The study is situated
in sociocultural theories of learning and development that connect patterns of
noticing in the classroom to participation in social and cultural communities.
The goal of the study is to extend this framework to noticing for equity in the
mathematics classroom using a community-based design approach. The study
includes three research questions. (1) What is the relation between the
dispositions, noticing practices, and mathematics instruction of secondary
mathematics teachers? (2) What activities, tools and frameworks support teachers
in learning to notice for equity? (3) How can a community-based design model
enhance the conceptualization of noticing for equity and the development of
tools/frameworks for teacher learning? The project will include the design of a
professional development for two cohorts of secondary teachers in collaboration
with community leaders. The project will also develop tools for research that
can be used in other projects that investigate teacher noticing for equity in
mathematics. Data collected will include teacher interviews, video documentation
of teacher and community leader interactions in professional development
(including summer design charrettes), other documents and artifacts from the
design of tools and resources, and other qualitative data. Multiple frameworks
will be used for data analysis.