* 1661421
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fuel of Interest and Fire of Genius: Essays on the Timing, Direction, and Location of Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Nicolas Ziebarth, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 12/31/2017
* USD 30,500.00

Many argue that the promotion of innovation is one of the main social benefits
of institutions of higher education. Relatively little is known, however, about
the historic role of colleges in driving invention. This project creates unique
data based on digitizing college yearbooks from the 1870s to the 1940s. The
names of students from college yearbooks are matched to patent data, creating a
picture of the role of colleges in promoting American ingenuity. These data
show, for the first time, what share of patents come from college graduates and
faculty. The yearbooks are also matched to historical censuses, answering
questions about the mobility of college students. The yearbook data paints the
clearest picture yet available of college participation by different demographic
groups across time; the data reveal not only college attendance by women and
African Americans, but also the college majors for these individuals, the sports
and clubs in which they participate, and how their college experiences affect
future labor market outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important questions regarding
the impact of colleges cannot be adequately answered without the kind of
detailed student- and faculty-level data created in the project. Most notably,
the college yearbook data solves three major problems. First, it allows for the
estimation of knowledge spillovers from colleges by linking new inventions to
faculty and graduates and distinguishing them from individuals who have had only
indirect interactions with a particular college. Second, since the historical
yearbooks give student names and identifying information, it is possible to
track graduates across time and space rather than assuming they remain co-
located with their alma maters. Third, the college yearbooks include information
on students? majors, fraternity and sorority membership, and club and sports
participation, allowing for estimation of the returns to education by major over
a time period for which data has traditionally been very sparse, as well as an
examination of how social networks forged in college affect later labor market
outcomes