* 1661234
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Methodological tools for studying group productive disciplinary engagement
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,928.00

A team of researchers from Purdue University and Indiana University will look at
how students in group settings become engaged in learning the core ideas and
practices specific to STEM disciplines. The project team will develop theory and
measures for observing collaborative group engagement during complex and
meaningful learning tasks in middle school biology and math classes. The project
outcomes will be broadly available for examining engagement in science and
mathematics practices such as are being called for in national and local science
standards. Ultimately, these measures will support the identification of content
and disciplinary connections characteristic of high quality engagement in
science and math, as well as the group processes and instructional activities
that promote this engagement. This, in turn, can substantially inform curricular
design that promotes high quality engagement. The project is funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will draw on recent theoretical advances concerning the
construct of productive disciplinary engagement (PDE). PDE applies to learning
that is (1) joint, (2) dynamic, and (3) inextricable from its context, including
key STEM concepts and disciplinary practices. The project team will develop a
detailed model to guide the subsequent development of observational tools using
an evidence-centered design approach and then execute a validation plan to
support interpretation of group scores from a rubric designed to measure PDE.
The project team will develop theory and operationalize PDE in a rubric grounded
in extant measures and theoretical advances. Initial trials of a paper-format
rubric will be conducted using extant video data. To evaluate the rubric ratings
as group engagement measures, pre-specified validity evidence will be collected
and analyzed during trials of the rubric. Statistical models of engagement as
evolving within and across activities will be tested, as well as used to predict
occurrences of PDE. This research will address foundational theoretical
questions about how PDE progresses during disciplinary practices.