* 1661202
* Improving Science Problem Solving with Adaptive Game-Based Reflection Tools
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,300,000.00

The project is supported by the Education and Human Resources Core Research
program, which supports fundamental research in STEM learning and learning
environments. Reflection plays a critical role in student learning and
encompasses a broad range of cognitive and metacognitive processes enabling
students to (1) think critically about their learning processes, (2) integrate
new information with prior knowledge, (3) form and adapt learning strategies,
(4) view concepts and knowledge from multiple perspectives, (5) generate self-
explanations to enrich conceptual understanding, (6) compare learning processes
and artifacts to those created by experts and peers, and (7) make metacognitive
judgments about knowledge. The National Research Council recently concluded that
systematic reflection is essential for deep learning and effective educational
practice. This project investigates a suite of theoretically grounded, adaptive
game-based reflection tools to scaffold students' cognitive and metacognitive
reflection with the overarching objective of improving middle school students'
science problem-solving processes. These reflection tools are integrated as part
of the existing Crystal Island learning environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
studying middle school students' cognitive and metacognitive reflective
processes, three key research questions will be addressed: 1) How do embedded
and retrospective reflection scaffolds promote improved learning outcomes
including science problem-solving skills, science content knowledge,
metacognitive awareness, and reflection skills? 2) How can learning analytics be
leveraged to extend models of reflection and self-regulated learning for problem
solving within game-based learning environments? and 3) How can we create
adaptive scaffolding for game-based learning environments that best foster
reflection during and following science problem solving? The project builds upon
a theoretical framework of self-regulated learning to inform the development of
embedded and retrospective scaffold tools, gathering both process data (e.g.,
log data, eye tracking, think-aloud) and outcome data (e.g., pre- post-
learning, transfer, metacognition, self-efficacy) to inform design principles
and descriptive models of the role of reflection in students' problem-solving
processes. Key project outcomes include an empirically grounded theoretical
framework for reflection-enhanced learning and learning analytic techniques that
yield predictive models of reflection in science problem solving.