* 1661311
* Can crowd wisdom - and funding - enhance regional innovation and entrepreneurship? Evidence to inform policy.
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Lee Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 491,825.00

Innovative and entrepreneurial activity tends to be clustered in a few regions
due to founder locations, access to financing and venture capital networks, and
differences in regulatory environment. New forms of financing, such as
crowdfunding, combined with new financial regulations, have the potential to
encourage entrepreneurship outside of traditional clusters, thereby increasing
the spatial distribution of economic growth. In particular, aspiring
entrepreneurs that are overlooked by traditional sources of finance might be
more likely to receive support. Likewise, small investors that have not been
allowed to invest in risky ventures can now seek a small share of the profits of
successful startups. Furthermore, crowd feedback, in the form of a response to a
campaign, has the potential to highlight good ideas and winnow bad ideas more
quickly. After mapping and describing the distribution and characteristics of
crowdfunding, this research develops theory and (causally if possible) tests the
mechanisms for how crowdfunding could impact many phenomena including firm
formation and survival, venture capital investment, investment between (rich and
poor) regions, patenting, scientific research, employment, and industry
concentration. Policy makers have supported crowdfunding in the hope that it
will spread opportunity to a wider segment of society. TThis research ultimately
seeks to answer the question of whether crowdfunding can reduce regional
inequality in access to startup capital.

Internet platforms such as Kickstarter and Indiegogo, ask for support and advice
for campaigns and provide the data for this project. To establish the spread and
impact of crowdfunding, this research investigates its impact on regional
economies and demonstrates that crowdfunding is relatively higher outside of
traditional bastions of venture capital investment such as Silicon Valley,
Boston, and New York. Furthermore, regions with successful crowdfunding, where
campaigns reach their funding goals, subsequently draw in greater venture
capital funding. This effect is particularly strong for regions with successful
technology campaigns (as opposed to art and theatre campaigns). This research
considers the impact of crowdfunding on job creation, employment, venture start
up, and industry concentration and informs policy by providing insight into the
mechanisms, benefits, and distribution of returns from crowdfunding.