* 1661218
* ABI Development: Open-source, extensible, and cross-platform MEGA
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sergei Pond, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 998,419.00

Comparative analyses of DNA and amino acid sequences is a powerful paradigm in
biology, including evolution, ecology, development, and medicine. The Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software is a widely used tool to apply
state-of-the-art methods for sequence analysis in these biological disciplines.
MEGA provides an intuitive graphical user interface (GUI) to enable researchers
to explore their primary data and results interactively, along with an
integrated analytical engine that makes a large repertoire of evolutionary
analysis methods easily accessible. MEGA is used by thousands of researchers in
biology and has become a major teaching tool in universities worldwide. However,
MEGA is primarily for use on Windows operating systems, which limits its utility
and impact. The goal of this project is to (a) make MEGA cross-platform; (b)
ready MEGA for community contributions and third-party expansion of
functionalities; and (c) add a workflow GUI in MEGA to enable researchers to
assemble pipelines and workflows that are becoming essential for rigorous,
reproducible, and automated analytics in this era of big data. These
developments will lead to a major enhancement of software infrastructure in
biology and related interdisciplinary areas, all of which are critical in modern
biological research. They will advance education through the development of
tutorials, and benefit underserved populations through workshops and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative analyses of DNA and amino acid sequences, a
powerful paradigm in computational biology, have grown and adapted to the
changing needs of biological sciences. Due to its increasing analytical
complexity, successful application of the comparative paradigm requires
efficient, sophisticated, and intuitive software. The Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA, now in version 7) software is among the most widely
used tools for sequence analysis, as it provides a powerful and intuitive
graphical user interface (GUI), giving researchers tools for exploring their
data and visualizing results interactively, and placing a large repertoire of
state-of-the-art evolutionary analysis methods at their fingertips. This
"Development" proposal is to modernize and re-engineer MEGA using cutting edge
software libraries and development philosophies. It will ensure that this vital
community resource not only remains useful for the next decade, but also becomes
cross-platform and extensible for community integration of new methods and
tools. The project will leverage modern open source application development
stacks and libraries, drawing upon web technologies (JavaScript, HTML5, and CSS)
for a platform agnostic application, which will lead to an open source, cross-
platform MEGA GUI that is ready for community contributions and third-party
expansion of functionalities. It will also add a new workflow system (AppFlows)
to enable researchers to assemble pipelines and workflows that are becoming
essential for rigorous, reproducible, and automated analytics in this era of big
data. The new AppDepot in MEGA will host add-ins and extensions (small and
large) developed by community programmers by reusing MEGA-X components and core
libraries. AppDepot will bridge the gap between computational/statistical method
developers and biological users, as the large installed base of MEGA will
immediately make new methods available to many to test and use. All of these
results will be available from www.megasoftware.net .