* 1661985
* Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster for the Geophysics Group at New Mexico State University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Thomas Hearn, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 74,990.00

This award will support the acquisition of a High Performance Computer (HPC)
cluster for the Geophysics group at New Mexico State University (NMSU), and will
benefit a range of geophysical, material, and solar research. NMSU is identified
as a Hispanic Serving Institution, and approximately half of enrolled students
are of Hispanic origin. The cluster will add new teaching opportunities in
computational modeling, leading to better professional preparation of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as training the future generation
of geoscientists. The work supported by this project will also facilitate
redeveloping a new Geophysics curriculum. Research will model the structure,
composition, and processes of Earth's surface and interior; highly complex
problems requiring computationally intensive analysis. Planned projects include
inversions to obtain models of Earth structures, calculations for synthetic
data, and computational mineral physics calculations to explore the crystal
structure of Earth and geo-inspired materials. The research is well aligned with
the NSF mission to promote the progress of science via advancing our knowledge
of our planet and the sun. New models of Earth's structure inform regarding
potential earthquake hazard, and the novel ground motion modeling techniques
employed here also benefit nuclear monitoring. Geo-inspired materials design
will address technological solutions to societal challenges, with impact across
engineering and material science disciplines. Further research that will benefit
from the HPC includes the structure of the sun and other planets, providing
numerous multidisciplinary opportunities.

The seismic properties of Earth's interior are highly heterogeneous across
multiple length scales. The structures must be constrained as accurately as
possible in order to understand the underlying geodynamical processes and
material composition. This necessitates various geophysical methodologies which
require parallel computing, including waveform inversions for seismic velocity,
anisotropy, and attenuation structure, forward modeling of full seismic
waveforms using 3D Earth models, and calculations of earthquake and nuclear
explosion ground motion. The resultant highly detailed seismic models will
provide essential information for the next generation of geodynamical
simulations, and mineral physics studies, as well as implications for earthquake
hazard and nuclear monitoring. The massive quantities of seismic data utilized
in our projects also entail highly computationally intensive processing methods,
such as waveform correlations and modeling, stacking of real and synthetic array
data, and large error calculations. In addition to modeling crystal structures
within Earth, the computational mineral physics calculations will explore novel
geo-inspired technological materials with applications to material science,
engineering, and condensed matter physics. Solar physics research into interior
plasma flows that transport magnetic flux through the star is crucial for
understanding the solar dynamo. This new cluster facility will also benefit
studies of the solar atmosphere, especially the solar flare prediction, which
can drastically affect the communication satellites and electronics equipment on
Earth.