* 1661858
* Roles of Modeling- and Remodeling-based Bone Formation in Determining Trabecular Bone Mechanics at Multiple Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Xiaowei Sherry Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 374,908.00

The human skeleton is continuously renewed through the bone remodeling process
where mature bone tissue is removed by osteoclasts (a process called bone
resorption) and new bone tissue is formed by osteoblasts (a process called bone
formation). Remodeling-based bone formation (RBF) dominates in the healthy adult
skeleton, where bone formation is tightly coupled with prior activation of bone
resorption, resulting in no net changes in bone mass. Recent studies suggest a
more efficient bone tissue formation pathway, which stimulates modeling-based
bone formation (MBF), i.e., bone formation without prior activation of
osteoclast resorption in the adult skeleton. While targeting modeling-based bone
formation could maximize the capacity of net bone volume increase, the quality
of the new bone tissue generated through this cellular mechanism is unknown. It
is critical to understand (1) how MBF influences the structural organization and
mechanics of bone tissue, and (2) whether this is different from more naturally
occurring RBF. To answer these questions, a novel research platform integrating
advanced imaging, mechanical testing, and computational modeling will be
established. The goal of the project is to fill the critical knowledge gap on
the roles of two fundamental, but distinct cellular processes, MBF and RBF, in
determining the mechanical properties of trabecular bone at multiple length
scales. The education and outreach program includes designing lesson plans to
engage undergraduate students in long-term learning, teaching, and research in
musculoskeletal engineering and science.

This research program focuses on the mechanical aspects of MBF, a highly
efficient but often overlooked regenerative mechanism. Prior work in bone has
minimally addressed the properties of bone tissue derived from MBF, partially
due to the challenge of reliably differentiating it from RBF. A novel
microscopic imaging platform will be developed to incorporate bright field
imaging, fluorescence imaging, and second harmonic generation imaging for
visualizing the new bone formation and underlying collagen structure on a thick
bone section. This imaging method will overcome limitations of traditional
imaging methods based on thin sections, to allow further mechanical testing on
the same bone sample. Moreover, most studies on nano- and micro-mechanics of
bone tissue have focused on the cortical bone. This research program will fill
the critical knowledge gap regarding the contribution of MBF to structure-
function relationships of trabecular bone tissue. We expect that the outcomes of
this research program will provide fundamental knowledge and innovative research
tools for future investigations of therapeutic strategies that modulate MBF.