* 1661413
* Mechanically-facilitated Cochlear Fluid Homeostasis
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Douglas Kelley, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2021
* USD 405,044.00

Different types of hearing loss/difficulty are ascribed to imbalance of two
lymphatic fluids in the cochlea. Operating like an electrochemical battery, the
cochlea is partitioned into three compartments filled with the lymphatic fluids.
The separation of the two fluids provides an electric potential of approximately
80 mV that is crucial for hearing. To transduce sounds into neural impulses,
there exists constant leaking (depolarizing) currents between the two fluid
spaces through the sensory epithelium called the organ of Corti. Supporting
cells in the organ of Corti must transport ions to maintain the electric
potential. According to current theory, cochlear fluid homeostasis is
responsible for the loss of auditory receptor cells (hair cells). The PIs test
the converse of the current theory: they hypothesize that the mechanical
feedback of auditory receptor cells facilitates the maintenance of cochlear
fluid homeostasis. Successful demonstration of the research hypothesis will
significantly increase our understanding of the mechanics of hearing. The
investigators will include undergraduate students in their research project,
teaching how engineering principles are applied to biological systems. Course
projects for experimental fluid dynamics and a series of summer research
projects for undergraduates will be based on the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research challenges the assumption of diffusion-limited ionic transport in the
cochlear fluid. Recent observations show unique deformation patterns of the
organ of Corti due to active mechanical feedback of the hair cells. This project
aims to connect the active organ of Corti mechanics with cochlear fluid
homeostasis by demonstrating a different mode of ion transport?peristaltic fluid
mixing. Specifically, it will be shown that: 1) the electromotility of outer
hair cells generates peristaltic fluid motions in the organ of Corti, and 2) the
peristaltic fluid motions help to homogenize cochlear fluids. The results could
transform hearing science by integrating two research domains that have not been
considered together: mechanics and ion homeostasis of the cochlea. The
investigators will include undergraduate students in their research project,
teaching how engineering principles are applied to biological systems. Course
projects for experimental fluid dynamics and a series of summer research
projects for undergraduates will be based on the work.