* 1661378
* Application Characterization for Adaptive Computing Platform Determination for Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 449,921.00

Traditional high performance computing clusters (HPCC) and Hadoop clusters are
both important platforms in computational and data-enabled science and
engineering (CDS&E). Hadoop MapReduce is typically effective in large-scale data
analysis while traditional HPC is more commonly employed in computational
problems (petabytes vs. petaflops). HPCC can include a shim layer that allows
Hadoop MapReduce to access HPC storage (denoted by Hadoop+HPCC), local storage
(denoted by Hadoop), and a combination of both (denoted by Hadoop/HPCC). This
project aims to identify the characteristics of various CDS&E MapReduce
computational tasks, and adaptively determine the best platform (Hadoop,
Hadoop+HPCC and Hadoop/HPCC) for individual applications based on their
characteristics, and also optimally arrange data placement between local storage
and dedicated remote storage, given performance objectives and system cost
metrics.

Broader impacts include critical insights into the suitability of different
computing platforms to different CDS&E applications, and a more advanced HPC
system. Research results will be disseminated through technology transfer to
industry partners, via publication in peer review journals, and in software
releases. Results will also serve as catalyst for research in
cyberinfrastructure, which serves the CDS&E fields. This project will provide
thorough training of students and collaborative research opportunities for
participating Clemson graduates, undergraduates, faculty, and K-12 students.
Results will be integrated into courses taught by the PIs. The PIs will recruit
new students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, to undertake the
study of a STEM discipline.