* 1661097
* Assessing the Impact of Texas Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Academies on Students' Learning Environments, Educational Outcomes, and Career Path Decisions
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* David Carrejo, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 03/31/2020
* USD 589,407.00

Maintaining U.S. global competitiveness in science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) industries requires increasing participation among traditionally
underrepresented groups including people of color and women. Studies show
creating more equal educational opportunities in the K-12 education system is an
effective, socially just approach to expanding STEM participation. This study
examines the impact of Texas Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (T-STEM)
academies on (a) STEM teacher labor markets and (b) students' educational and
workforce outcomes. T-STEM academies are public high schools focused on
improving instruction and academic performance in science and mathematics-
related subjects and expanding the number of students entering STEM careers,
particularly students who are underrepresented in STEM fields. Analyses draw on
a statewide longitudinal student-level dataset covering all students in Texas
over a 20-year period. This project is supported by the Education and Human
Resources Core Research Program, which funds fundamental research in STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are three-
fold. First, the study documents whether students traditionally underrepresented
in STEM fields have equitable access to high-quality STEM teachers across
classrooms, schools, and districts. Although prior studies identify a teacher
quality gap where disadvantaged students are assigned to less qualified and less
effective teachers, no prior studies explore exposure to highly-qualified STEM
teachers for advantaged and disadvantaged youth. Second, the study analyzes
whether T-STEM academies reduce the STEM teacher quality gap. The third aim of
the study is to assess the impact of T-STEM academies on student achievement in
math, science, and reading, the likelihood of high school graduation,
postsecondary enrollment and completion, as well as students' labor market
earnings and the likelihood of employment in a STEM field.