* 1661502
* Collaborative Research: Large Hail Accumulations in Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Rebecca Haacker-Santos, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 43,988.00

Thunderstorms that produce deep hail accumulations pose a substantial risk to
life and property resulting in motor vehicle accidents, road closures, airport
delays, urban and river flooding, and water rescues. Data inhomogeneities and
inadequacies in monitoring hail characteristics in thunderstorms leads to low
confident in projecting future hail occurrence and evaluation of future climate
predictions. The overarching goal of the research is to analyze the
microphysical and dynamical conditions necessary for large amounts of in-cloud
hail production that lead to deep surface hail accumulations by developing and
validating a robust set of characteristic storm properties unique to significant
hail accumulation; determining the role of mechanisms enhancing hail production;
and determining temporal and spatial variation of hail accumulations in
observations and simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in its contribution to a
comprehensive understanding of the dual-polarization and lighting
characteristics in severe thunderstorms with significant hail accumulations; how
and why they are linked to environmental conditions, storm morphology, terrain,
and outflow boundaries; and if state-of-the-art regional climate and weather
forecasting models are capable of reproducing hail accumulation characteristics
derived from observations. The research will advance our understanding of
processes contributing to large hail/graupel production in thunderstorms,
improve the forecasting of extreme events that cause natural disasters, and
extend current capabilities to directly benefit society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are that
the studies will aid in better forecasting and nowcasting events with
significant hail accumulation and provide basis for evaluating forecasting and
regional climate simulations. Hailstorms have had large economical impacts
through damage to property and agriculture with livestock fatalities and human
injuries. This study will provide better insight if hail accumulation also
provides useful information to issue reliable warnings to the public and
assistance in severe weather management. Undergraduates and graduate students
will participate in the scientific research through independent studies,
internships, and a Ph.D. thesis. The project will promote the collaborations
between the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research's Significant
Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science program and the University of
Colorado's Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training program, which are
intended for underrepresented undergraduate students in science, math, and
engineering.