* 1661629
* Next Generation Electrochemistry (NGenE): A Summer Research Institute
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* George Crabtree, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;Next Generation Electrochemistry (NGenE)
are week-long student-centered summer intensive workshops that explore the
frontiers of electrochemical research, which is at the core of many modern
technologies. The event brings together a group graduate students with
demonstrated interest and research experience in the field of electrochemistry
with renowned electrochemists from across North America. The primary objective
of the activity is to present fundamental questions and research at the
frontiers of the field, and develop innovative strategies to address current
gaps through collaboration and critical thinking. The format of NGenE is
designed to accelerate advances at the frontier of electrochemistry in the
United States, while developing a close-knit community of collaborators intent
on tackling the most important fundamental questions with a direct impact on
society, for instance, through novel energy technologies. The fundamental
aspects presented by the instructors are broadly relevant, often applicable in
other sub-fields of electrochemical research. A salient feature of the structure
of NGenE is to contribute to the training of the next generation of
electrochemists, fostering their critical thinking, and providing the tools to
identify and tackle pioneering research priorities that produce meaningful
societal advances through economic and environmental
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Next Generation
Electrochemistry (NGenE) brings approximately 40 advanced graduate students and
10 distinguished lecturers together for five days to explore the frontiers of
our scientific knowledge in electrochemistry. They examine fundamental phenomena
that control the reactivity, transport and stability of electrochemical
processes at an advanced level, identifying critical gaps in our understanding
and innovative strategies to address them. NGenE explores these research
frontiers through lectures, discussions and demonstrations, including a site
visit to cutting-edge facilities at Argonne National Laboratory, as well as
research projects developed by students under the mentoring of NGenE faculty.
Faculty stimulate discussion by bringing unsolved challenges at the frontiers of
electrochemistry to the fore, while working with students to develop and design
innovative, forward-looking synthesis, characterization, theory, and simulation
to solve problems in electrochemical science. The activity assumes baseline
knowledge and prior experience in electrochemistry. As a result, NGenE does not
ask, "What is electrochemistry?" but instead "What will electrochemistry
become?" This focus on the fundamental knowledge gaps distinguishes NGenE from
other summer workshops in electrochemistry. The goal of the activity is to
stimulate a dialog between the current and the next generation of scientists in
electrochemistry that spurs, in the future, an accelerated development of
electrochemical science impacting applications in energy, medicine and
manufacturing. This outcome would provide a clear societal benefit and
contribute to the leadership of the US in this important discipline.