* 1661412
* Tip-based Nanochemistry for Printing Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Keith Brown, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 478,859.00

The ubiquitous utilization of integrated circuits shows that industry is
exceptionally capable of manufacturing ultra-high resolution arrangements of
semiconductors, metals and insulators. However, there is a vast disconnect
between the methods for patterning these sorts of hard materials and those that
exist for patterning soft materials such as chemicals, polymers or biological
materials. If it were possible to pattern soft materials with the same
reliability and resolution as hard materials, it would enable the manufacture of
myriad structures and devices including electronics with multiplexed biosensor
arrays or nanoscale organic electronic devices for applications in stretchable
electronics. While additive manufacturing strategies are very useful at the
macroscopic scale, these approaches have not achieved manufacturing-level
reproducibility when patterning soft materials at the nanoscale. This award will
enable nanoscale manufacturing of soft materials by providing the tools and
understanding needed to realize patterning with industry-required reliably and
nanoscale resolution. This interdisciplinary work spans fluid mechanics, control
theory, and nanoscience and contributes to the undergraduate and graduate level
education of engineering students. Furthermore, this work provides opportunities
for students from broad backgrounds to design and interact with materials at
previously inaccessible scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
research work is to develop the fundamental and technological foundation to
transition tip-based nanopatterning of soft materials into a manufacturing tool.
This approach is based on the transfer of material from an ink-coated scanning
probe to a surface. Despite over a decade of research, reproducibility and
controllability have remained key barriers for the adoption of this technique in
a manufacturing setting. This research work addresses a number of processing
issues that have not previously received attention. It investigates and develops
novel approaches, e.g., a method for precisely monitoring the quantity of ink
that is on a probe, an ink formulation that allows one to pattern and image with
the same probe, and a procedure for monitoring and controlling the concentration
of reagents in the ink during patterning. Equally important, these studies are
designed to provide deeper insight into the patterning process and answer open
questions about nanoscale capillarity and statistical mechanics in systems that
violate the continuum hypothesis. Additionally, these new approaches are
combined with advanced models of patterning to form an automated closed-loop
feedback system that iteratively improves the quality of patterning in situ.