* 1661146
* Ultrasound Based In-line Assessment of Porosity for Laser-Sintered Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Timothy Bigelow, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2021
* USD 320,408.00

Additive manufacturing is seen as a critical technology to promote light
weighting and design optimization, and to achieve the promise of reduced energy
consumption in a wide variety of applications. However, additive manufacturing
has been slow to use for production scale operations. Currently, the variability
in porosity, even for identical build parameters, is a significant technical
challenge facing additive manufacturing. This award supports fundamental
research into the detection and quantification of porosity in a selective laser
sintering (SLS) system during fabrication. The goal of this research is to
develop the theory of ultrasound scattering for pores and couple it with in-line
additive manufacturing quality control and metrology in a SLS testbed. The
theory will be developed by computer modelling and verified by both off-line and
in-line measurements of production quality. The computer models will be used to
develop simplifying assumptions to make the problem tractable in real-time. Once
the validity and limitations of the assumptions have been evaluated, the theory
will be validated experimentally using both standard ultrasound transducers as
well as a custom laser-system for in-line quality assessment. In the future,
this research could cause additive manufacturing to be more reliable and
predictable, resulting in more energy efficient and reliable mechanical systems.
While advancing the science of additive manufacturing, the research will also be
used as a catalyst to excite K-12 students. In the summer, teachers from small
high schools and rural schools, whose graduates have historically not studied
engineering, will join the research team. After assisting with the research and
receiving a course on nondestructive evaluation and additive manufacturing, the
teachers will conduct a project at their respective schools during the following
academic year with their students. In addition, the teachers will assist their
students in organizing an "Engineering Fair" for local elementary students in
their community to showcase their project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives of the project are to 1) Develop scattering theory to accurately
quantify porosity from backscattered ultrasound signals and 2) Develop a laser-
based ultrasound system for a new method of porosity assessment based on the
scattering theory. The scattering theory will be developed using numerical
simulations of scattering from pores of various sizes and densities imbedded in
steel, titanium, and cobalt-chrome microstructures. The simulations will be
utilized to explore the limitations of the approximations made as part of the
scattering theory, and will include both focused ultrasound waves from a
piezoelectric transducer and the backscattered echoes of longitudinal waves
generated and detected by lasers. The laser-based ultrasound signals will be
filtered to allow smaller defects to be characterized near the surface of the
part. The scattering theory will then be experimentally validated using both
finished and in-process parts. The validation on in-process parts will be
conducted on a custom made prototype laser-sintering system that will be
developed as part of the project. The developed theory may be applicable to
other manufacturing technologies such as composites and pressure die casting as
well as other additive manufacturing techniques.