* 1661332
* ABI Innovation: Annotation of cis-regulatory sequences using a large number of ChIP-seq datasets
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Zhengchang Su, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 808,396.00

Cis-regulatory sequences in animals and plants are as important as coding
sequences, but our understanding of them in most sequenced organisms is limited
due to the difficulty in characterizing them. Recent developments of powerful
functional genomic technologies, in particular, chromatin immunoprecipitation
coupled with sequencing (ChIP-seq) techniques, have provided an unprecedented
opportunity to decipher cis-regulatory sequences in a genome scale. However, it
remains a highly challenging task to derive cis-regulatory sequences from a
large number of very big ChIP-seq datasets. To tackle this challenge, this
project will develop a set of novel algorithms and tools and apply them to
annotate cis-regulatory sequences using a large number of ChIP-seq datasets in
animals and plants. These tools and predicted cis-regulatory sequences will
fundamentally change the ways that biologists study regulatory genomes and
transcriptional regulation in humans and model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project involves high school students, undergraduates, graduates
and a postdoctoral fellow from the very beginning, thereby exposing them to
algorithm and tool development, and helping them develop critical thinking
skills needed to solve complex biological problems. The PI will particularly
encourage traditionally underrepresented minority and/or female students to
participate in the project. Whenever appropriate, the resulting algorithms and
results will be incorporated into the PI's relevant courses taught at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte: undergraduate and graduate Molecular
Sequence Analysis, Computational Comparative Genomics, and Mathematical Systems
Biology. Thus, the project will also provide an ideal educational platform to
train the next generation of computational biologists who can use very big
datasets solving important biological problems. The tools and resources will be
publicly available at http://bioinfo.uncc.edu/mniu/pcrms/www/.