* 1661475
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: A Scalable Framework for Visual Exploration and Hypotheses Extraction of Phenomics Data using Topological Analytics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Patrick Schnable, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Understanding how gene by environment interactions result in specific phenotypes
is a core goal of modern biology and has real-world impacts on such things as
crop management. Developing and managing successful crop practices is a goal
that is fundamentally tied to our national food security. By applying novel
computational visual analytical methods, this project seeks to identify and
unravel the complex web of interactions linking genotypes, environments and
phenotypes. These methods will first need to be designed and developed into
usable software applications that can handle large volumes of crop phenomics
data. High-throughput sensing technologies collect large volumes of field data
for many plant traits, such as flowering time, related to crop development and
production. The maize cultivars used here come from multiple genotypes that have
been grown under a variety of environmental conditions, in order to give the
widest range of conditions for understanding the interactions. The resulting
data sets are growing quickly, both in size and complexity, but the analytical
tools needed to extract knowledge and catalyze scientific discoveries have
significantly lagged behind. The methodologies to be developed in this project
represent a systematic attempt at bridging this rapidly widening divide. The
project is inherently interdisciplinary, involving close research partnerships
among computer scientists, plant scientists, and mathematicians. The research
outcomes will be tightly integrated with education using a multipronged approach
that includes, among others, postdoctoral and student training (graduates and
undergraduates), curriculum development for a new campus-wide interdisciplinary
undergraduate degree in Data Analytics, conference tutorials for training
phenomics data practitioners, and contribution to the recruitment and retention
of underrepresented minorities (particularly women) in STEM fields through the
Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation.

This project will lead to the design and development of a new, scalable, visual
analytics platform suitable for hypothesis extraction and refinement from
complex phenomics data sets. Focus on hypothesis extraction is critical in the
context of phenomics data sets because much of the high-throughput sensing data
being generated in crop fields are generated in the absence of specifically
formulated hypotheses. Extracting plausible hypotheses from the data represents
an important but tedious task. To this end, this project will apply and develop
new capabilities using emerging advanced algorithmic principles, particularly
from the branch of mathematics called algebraic topology that studies shapes and
structure of complex data. The research objectives are three-fold. First, the
project will employ and extend emerging algorithmic techniques from algebraic
topology to decode the structure of large, complex phenomics data. Second, an
interactive visual analytic platform will be developed to facilitate knowledge
discovery using the extracted topological structures. Lastly, the quality and
validity of a new visual analytic platform designed by this team will be tested
using real-world maize data sets as well as simulated inputs as testbeds. The
developed framework will encode functions for scientists to delineate hypotheses
of three kinds: i) genetic characterization of single complex traits; ii)
genetic characterization of multiple traits that share potentially pleiotropic
effects; and iii) decoding and detailed characterization of genotype-by-
environmental interactions, in particular, through a collaborative pilot study
of maize flowering and growth traits. The expected significance of the proposed
work is that biologists will be able to extract different types of testable
hypotheses from plant phenomics data sets by employing a new class of visual
analytic tools, and thus obtain a deeper understanding of the interactions among
genotypes, environments and phenotypes. The project is potentially
transformative in two ways: i) it will introduce advanced mathematical and
computational principles into mainstream phenomic data analysis; and ii) it will
usher in a new era where biologists spearhead data-driven hypothesis extraction
and discovery with the aid of interactive, informative, and intuitive tools. The
project will have a direct impact on the state of software in phenomics for
fundamental data-driven discovery. To facilitate broader community adoption, the
project will integrate the tools into the CyVerse Institute, and to a community
phenomics software outlet. It will also lead to the development of automated
scientific workflows. Project website: http://tdaphenomics.eecs.wsu.edu/