* 1661564
* Lithographic Patterning of Co-Dispersed Nanomaterials for Device Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Richey Davis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2021
* USD 370,577.00

Hybrid inorganic nanoparticle-polymer matrix composite materials that are
fabricated into nanoscale pattern arrays on a flexible or rigid substrate offer
a wide range of novel optical and electronic properties. New devices can be
created from intermediate scale features where transitional properties between
molecular and bulk behaviors can be accessed and controlled. To realize
nanomanufacturing of such hybrid materials, low-cost, flexible, simple, and
scalable methods need to be developed to efficiently organize inorganic and
organic species into a large number of features with distinct functions. Self-
assembly is prone to defect formation and probe- and e-beam-based lithography
techniques are often too slow for mass production. This award investigates a
broadly applicable nanoimprint lithography process for patterning nanoparticle-
polymer hybrid composite materials and to use them to manufacture nano-scale
optical and electronic devices. This is accomplished by using nanoparticles
dispersed in organic solvents that can fill nanoimprinted polymer molds quickly
and then be consolidated to form patterned features with high nanoparticle
loadings. The project provides training to both graduate and undergraduate
students. Several outreach activities on the Virginia Tech campus and summer
camps at Science Museum of Western Virginia are planned to increase the
enrollment of females and minorities in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoimprint lithography can transfer nanoscale
patterns with high fidelity and repeatability in large scales. However, most of
the research has been focused on pure polymeric material systems. This project
explores nanoimprint lithography for nanoparticle-polymer hybrid patterning by
addressing the key scientific challenges of nanoparticle and polymer (monomer)
co-dispersion in organic solvents and patterning the nanoparticle and polymer
co-suspensions into nano-scale features using the evaporative nature of
dispersing solvents and the polymer chain transition from dispersed and soluble
state to solid state. The research work fully explores different methods of
nanoparticle dispersion in organic solvents in the presence of polymeric chains.
The understanding of nanoparticle-polymer co-dispersion and organic solvent
evaporation during lithographic molding promises to push the boundaries of novel
hybrid pattern formation. In contrast to traditional nanoimprint lithography,
which uses polymer materials only, a new class of hybrid materials with
intricate architectures and novel functionalities is expected. The hybrid
patterns can offer a wide range of feature arrangements for direct device uses.
This holds great scientific and application potentials by combining the
knowledge at the boundaries of the particle-solvent-polymer and liquid-solid
domains.