* 1662055
* Composite Silicon Anodes for Energy Storage, Sensing, and Actuation in Multifunctional Lithium Ion Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Mary Frecker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2021
* USD 567,353.00

This project explores the potential of composite silicon anodes for
multifunctional lithium ion (Li-ion) based devices. Li-ion batteries are widely
used for high power and energy density applications, such as electric vehicles,
cell phones, laptop computers, and unmanned aerial vehicles. Silicon anodes
promise even higher electrochemical energy densities, but their use is
complicated by the high volumetric expansion that silicon undergoes when fully
lithiated. Furthermore, open-circuit voltage in Li-ion cells with silicon anodes
is highly sensitive to mechanical stress. This project will harness these
effects to create novel multifunctional structures capable of integrated energy
storage, mechanical actuation, and inertial, vibration, and chemical sensing.
The fundamental capabilities and trade-offs of this new and novel class of
devices will be characterized through modeling, design optimization, and
experimental testing. Project outcomes will have broad impacts on a variety of
technologies, including medical microrobots, wearable electronic devices, and
electric vehicles. A diverse research team of graduate and undergraduate
students will work together on fundamental research tasks, as well as in
translational engineering workshops to learn skills crucial to converting
fundamental research into commercial products and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks a fundamental understanding of
the coupled electrochemical and mechanical dynamics of lithiated Si composite
structures, through theoretical, experimental, and device design research.
Fundamental equations of electrochemistry and mechanics will be combined to
predict the displacement and force provided by these active structures. The
governing partial differential equations will be simplified via supportable
engineering assumptions, linearization, and model order reduction, to produce
numerically efficient models providing an insightful understanding of the
underlying physics and chemistry. These models will be used in turn to design
the chemistry, morphology, and mesoscale structure of composite anodes,
including the Si, binder, and conductive additives, to explore the Pareto
frontier between electrical and mechanical power. For the first time, the large
volume change associated with lithiation of Si composites will be harnessed to
create actuated structures that move in a desired fashion when charged and
discharged. Also for the first time, the Larch√©-Cahn potential will be used to
make batteries that self-sense their stress state. Starting from novel, first
principle models and a notional mesostructure, the full governing equations will
be simplified to efficiently and accurately predict output voltage based on
applied loads and electrical current input. Chemical composition, morphology,
and structure will be varied to study the tradeoff between energy storage and
sensitivity to applied loads. The new actuating and self-sensing energy storage
structures will be paired with standard cathodes and electrolytes, and tested
for electrical, mechanical, and sensor performance. The results of the project
will be encapsulated in first-principles models, which will be experimentally
validated against measurements of voltage, current, displacement, and applied
load.