* 1662968
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Learning, Driving Simulator-Based Modeling, and Computationally Tractable Dynamic Traffic Assignment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Terry Friesz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 246,049.00

Congestion is familiar to anyone who relies on a privately owned or rented
automobile, taxi, or public transit for commuting, shopping and errand running.
Historically, engineers and scientists exploring traffic networks frequently
build mathematical models with the intent of coaxing from them insights
revealing how congestion may evolve over time. Unfortunately, such models may
easily become so large and complex that they are unwieldly, and simplifications
are needed in order to provide passengers and drivers with accurate and rapidly
computable information pertinent to route choice and departure time selection.
Toward that goal, this project will employ modern statistics, simulation
experiments, and notions of competition among traffic network users for
available road capacity to better depict and more efficiently compute the
behaviors of drivers who rely on road networks. The broader impacts of this
research will be substantial. In particular, the results of this research will
allow commuters and urban freight carriers to make more informed travel
decisions, and governmental organizations to better regulate travel decisions
within heavily congested major metropolitan regions. This study will also
provide system-level experiential learning opportunities for students entering
the transportation workforce.

Specifically, through a combination of experiments and machine learning and
model development, this project will aim to depict the noncooperative
exploration of available routes and departure times by drivers and passengers
seeking to fulfill their travel demands via metropolitan road networks. A key
goal of the intended research will be the efficient computation of solutions to
the most prevalent type of dynamic traffic assignment (DTA), namely so-called
dynamic user equilibrium (DUE). It is the lack of closed-form travel-delay
operators that makes DUE computation tedious and slow. The plan is to replace
the existing, differential algebraic equation (DAE) system representing travel
delay with closed-form, approximate delay operators based on a form of
statistical learning known as Kriging. Ad hoc experiments based on such an
approach show great promise for small networks, but are not definitive. The PIs
will develop the envisioned models and make developed software available as
free-ware or inexpensive apps.