* 1662903
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Building Enclosure Systems Using Cellular Solid-Solid Phase Change Materials with Variable Transparency
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Mingjiang Tao, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 348,922.00

Buildings are responsible for about 40 percent of US energy consumption; a
significant fraction of this energy is consumed to counter thermal losses or
gains occurring through building envelopes. Passive-solar-design seeks to
balance heat loss through the building envelope with solar energy input, while
also using thermal mass, shading, and/or ventilation to dampen daily thermal
swings. However, implementation of current passive-solar-design tends to be
highly context-specific and often entails use of costly mechanical devices and
controls. This project aims to study an innovative passive solar building
enclosure system that uses cellular solid-solid phase change materials (SS-PCM)
with variable transparency. The system relies on passive material-enabled
controls and has no mechanically moving parts or electrical components.
Successful implementation of SS-PCM foam-based building envelope materials can
result in low cost responsive building enclosure systems that self-regulate
building thermal comfort. The outcome of this study can lead to new technologies
that reduce energy use in buildings, decrease dependence on fossil fuels, and
improve the economic competitiveness of the United States. This study is also
expected to result in benefits to diverse industries such as building materials,
construction, and energy conservation. An innovative outreach plan will be
implemented in the form of a competition that engages students at various levels
of education in the topics of passive solar design, energy use, and thermal
comfort in buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
uncover the fundamental principles that govern the behavior of translucent
cellular SS-PCM systems used in realistic building envelopes. Fundamental
insights will be gained on (1) heat transfer phenomena occurring in SS-PCM foam
systems, (2) the synergistic effects occurring between three material-enabled
solar-light irradiation control mechanisms, and (3) structural features and
characteristics that lead to high energy-savings in buildings. This study will
create enabling knowledge on thermal and optical behavior of SS-PCMs such that
building temperatures can be passively regulated year-round under different
climate conditions. An integrated experimental and computational program,
consisting of multi-physics modeling, materials synthesis, system level
integration, and building level evaluation for energy saving, will be performed
to achieve the aforementioned goal. This project can transform the use of PCM by
relying on radiation energy transfer processes to deliver heat, thus bypassing
the low thermal conductivity problem inherent to PCMs. The low thermal
conductivity of the SS-PCM foam also delays heat-loss, thus enhancing the
ability of the system to remain at a desired temperature.