* 1662427
* Novel Bayesian Inference for Microbial Community Studies Using High-Throughput Sequencing Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ju Hee Lee, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 312,563.00

The main goal of this project is to develop computationally efficient
statistical methods for analyzing large complex metagenomics data and generate a
broad impact on future microbial community studies. In particular, by thoroughly
combining information across samples and species through a carefully constructed
Bayesian hierarchical model, better understanding of influences of environmental
and biological factors in microbial communities will be made possible. The PI's
findings will be integrated into biology through close collaboration with
researchers in Ocean Sciences at University of California Santa Cruz. The PI
will disseminate computational tools online via user-friendly software. The
developed models, although motivated and constructed to address the problems in
microbial community studies, are applicable in general to applications outside
the metagenomic field. The project will provide graduate students excellent
training opportunities in cutting-edge methods on Bayesian modeling to develop
methodological research motivated from practically important and scientifically
relevant application areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities interact
with the environments and host organisms. Scientific investigations of how
microbiome interacts with their host, with their environment, and with each
other are of great importance to better understanding of their functional roles
such as influences on disease risk susceptibility of the host. In microbial
community studies, recent breakthroughs in high-throughput sequencing technology
allow deep interrogation of microbiome taken from environmental samples and
generate statistically new and interesting challenges for analysis of complex
sequencing data. The three main objectives are: (1) to develop Bayesian
nonparametric (NP) approaches to probabilistically characterize distributions of
abundance levels of microbial species; (2) to develop Bayesian regression models
to investigate association between abundance of species and covariates; and (3)
to develop a Bayesian graphical method to model interaction of species. Instead
of treating individual species as separate outcomes, graphs will be used to
represent dependencies between species in a probabilistic model and to identify
important relationships between species. This will provide more improved
inference on the co-occurrence and co-exclusion of the species with honest
uncertainty quantification and lead to greater understanding of the microbial
interactions. In addition, the PI will develop scalable and efficient
computational algorithms to carry out posterior inference for large sequencing
data.