* 1662629
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and Algorithmic Advances in Sequential Adaptive Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Katehakis, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 428,293.00

A wide range of modern operational decisions can be modeled as data driven
optimization problems where a controller must act without full knowledge of
certain parameters of a model. The basic situation involves a controller who
must repeatedly choose an action, resulting in an outcome, from an existing set
of potentially different courses of actions. For instance, in adaptive clinical
trials, subjects must be sequentially assigned to a treatment or control group,
with the outcome being the health of the subject. In this problem context, the
controller would like to efficiently manage between "discovery" (exploration)
and "refinement" (exploitation) based on the revealed sequence of outcomes. Such
a strategy has the potential to gather information more efficiently and may lead
to improved decision making. This award will support fundamental research that
relaxes many of the restrictions of existing models. The results of this project
have applications in many different areas, including data driven operations
management, online learning and optimization, health care, and adaptive routing.
The award will support the participation of talented graduate students in this
research, and the PIs will create level course modules to integrate these
results in courses on stochastic processes.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
assumptions for this framework include independent and identically distributed
samples from independent populations, learning the outcome of a trial only upon
activation, and unlimited computational resources. The primary goal of this
project is to extend the frontiers of knowledge in the following directions: 1)
consideration of models constrained by some known relation or property, so that
data from one course of actions is potentially informative about any or all
other courses of action; 2) investigation of models where the optimization is
with respect to more general objectives such as the median, the quantile, or the
variability; 3) extension of the underlying theory to models where at each stage
a "context" is made known that modifies the value of the reward in a
predetermined fashion; and 4) consideration of models where the distribution of
rewards for each course of action may change over time. The research is expected
to lead to new theoretical results, efficient algorithms, and analytical tools
for collecting and utilizing data in optimal or near optimal ways.