* 1662431
* Mechanobiology of Epithelial Monolayers under Shear Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2018
* William Nelson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2018
* USD 598,343.00

Mechanical interactions between cells govern the basic processes of life. We
don't understand these mechanical effects enough, however, to explain many of
the important questions in multicellular biology, tissue development, and
disease progression that we already know are dependent on intercellular forces.
Maintenance and turnover of the attachments between cells (adhesions) is
critical to how cells can form a barrier between different parts of organs.
Adhesion is important to wound healing, and also disruption of cell-cell
adhesion is a precursor to cancer metastasis. Organ formation, wound healing and
cancer metastasis involve large deformations and force generation, yet the
mechanisms underlying the dynamic regulation of cell adhesions, how cells slide
or shear past one another, or how cell-cell adhesions function under mechanical
loading are not yet understood. The research goal is to understand how tissues
distribute and respond to shear force transmitted through cell-cell junctions.
The project will test how shear modifies collective cell behavior and
reorganization of cellular architecture. Such changes are coupled to the
biomechanical properties of cells and ultimately regulate tissue integrity,
barrier functions and homeostasis. The research results will be incorporated
into modules for teaching basic Engineering and Biology courses, and the
development of undergraduate research experiences within our laboratories. The
PIs actively participate in community outreach and research experiences for
teachers and under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
combines custom micro-fabricated cell culture platforms with force-sensing and
displacement-actuation with mechanical analyses and cell biological methods such
as pharmacological inhibitors and knockout cell lines. We study how externally
applied and cell-generated forces dynamically modify collective cell behavior in
response to shear disruption. Physiological development exhibits slow
deformations while injury occurs on a faster timescale, thus we test the idea
that collective cell mechanoresponse depends not only on load and tissue
rigidity, but also on the applied loading rate. We will test the idea that
dynamic cell-cell adhesion is governed by protein catch bonds with force- and
rate-dependence. This work will deliver new platform technologies for mechanical
manipulation and observation of epithelial tissues and test new models of force
transfer and cell-cell communications across cell-cell adhesions and the
cytoskeleton. Insights gained in this work will increase our understanding of
epithelial homeostasis which underlies normal barrier function in each organ
system.