* 1662146
* Collaborative Research: Infection Multiplicity and Virus Evolution, from Experiments to Large Scale Multi-Population Stochastic Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Natalia Komarova, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 405,994.00

To understand how organisms evolve with time requires the development of
predictive mathematical descriptions of evolutionary theories along with
experimental studies to test these predictions. Because incremental and
inheritable genetic changes happen over multiple generations evolutionary theory
is difficult to study. Viruses obey the same basic evolutionary rules as higher
organisms, but replicate and evolve much faster. Therefore they provide a near-
ideal model system for the test of evolutionary and selection theories. Viruses
are also capable of social interactions which can change their evolutionary
behaviors. Social interactions arise by a process called co-infection, whereby
multiple virus genomes infect and replicate in a single cell, and can result in
a number of poorly understood interactions. The research team will perform a
series of integrated experimental and mathematical analyses aimed at providing
insights into these complex processes. This research also has significance to
other epidemiological situations in which co-infection patterns are observed
when different pathogen species simultaneously infect the same host and impact
each others' ability to spread. Thus the novel numerical techniques being
developed have relevance and significance in more general health areas including
cancer studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA viruses are characterized by a high
mutation rate, allowing them to rapidly diversify and readily adapt to
environmental challenges. They provide, therefore, a near-ideal model system for
the testing of evolutionary and selection theories that are difficult to
approach in more complex organisms. Typically, virus genomes are considered as
isolated entities, however, multiple infection (coinfection) of cells is a
common occurrence and results in a series of poorly understood social
interactions that have the power to shape evolutionary trajectories. A highly
tractable experimental system for assessing the model is replication of the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) in vitro. HIV-1 multiple infection is
promoted by cell-to-cell contact and the formation of virological synapses, in
which multiple viruses are simultaneously transferred from one cell to another.
In contrast, spread via the release of free virus particles promotes single
infection. The relative occurrence of synaptic and free virus transmission, and
hence infection multiplicity, can be elegantly manipulated with innovative
experimental techniques. Several experimental techniques will be used to
generate data on virus growth and virus evolution at different infection
multiplicities. Transmission pathways (synaptic and free virus) will be
manipulated to change infection multiplicity during virus spread. Evolutionary
dynamics will be explored in the context of different mutant types that undergo
a variety of social interactions. New techniques will be introduced in order to
manipulate the relative importance of cell-free and synaptic transmission, and
thus infection multiplicity. Novel computational algorithms will be developed in
order to fully understand how multiple infection and social interactions impact
the dynamics. Mathematical models will be tested, parameterized, and employed to
explore the evolutionary dynamics at large population sizes. This research will
provide greater insights on the relative significance of mechanisms that impact
evolution of organisms.