* 1662963
* Collaborative Research: Resilient Seismic Retrofit by Integrating Selective Weakening and Self-Centering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Sriram Aaleti, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 136,000.00

The occurrence of a major seismic event, although low in probability, carries
high risk. Many reinforced concrete buildings in the United States and around
the world were built before the implementation of modern seismic design codes.
Based on seismic events of recent history outside the United States, significant
economic losses can be expected in the United States if similar events occur
near densely populated cities. Reducing economic losses, shortening time to
recovery, and returning to normal operation levels are essential and define
resiliency against seismic hazard. Existing seismic retrofit methods achieve
life safety through permanent damage. This project will investigate a new
seismic retrofit method which focuses on not only public safety but also on
resiliency by minimizing damage. The new retrofit system will be applicable to
buildings with sub-standard reinforced concrete shear walls as the lateral load
resisting system. Low damage ensures that buildings can remain operational and
habitable within a reasonable amount of time following an earthquake, while
keeping the socio-economic losses related to the building stock to a minimum
compared to systems retrofitted with traditional methods. The retrofit method
can also be architecturally advantageous for cases where the scope or budget for
additional lateral load resisting systems is not available. Education, outreach,
and technology transfer activities will focus on raising awareness about
resiliency, multiple hazards, and new building technologies, as well as
increasing participation of underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new seismic retrofit method,
integrating the concepts of selective weakening, hinged walls, and self-
centering, will be investigated to achieve low seismic damage. The method will
be targeted toward improving the performance of reinforced concrete shear walls
that have design deficiencies related to confinement, transverse reinforcement,
and reinforcement detailing, which have been associated with slender wall
failures in past earthquakes. The retrofit method will involve converting
traditional and deficient shear walls into self-centering walls by creating a
cold joint near the shear wall-foundation interface (weakening) and adding
unbonded external post-tensioning. The objective of this research is to
understand the change in fundamental response of deficient reinforced concrete
buildings when retrofitted with this method. Research methods to achieve this
objective will include element and system level structural testing and analysis.
Element level studies will include nonlinear analytical modeling and testing of
retrofitted shear walls under reverse cyclic loading. These studies will
identify viable retrofit details and target shear wall deficiencies. System
level investigations will include finite element and time-history analyses to
understand the interaction of retrofitted shear walls with other structural
elements to control damage to these elements. Performance enhancement that can
be achieved by this retrofit method will be quantified using reliability
concepts. This work will create a fundamental understanding of building systems
retrofitted with this method in terms of capacity, hysteretic response, and
self-centering capability through nonlinear analyses, testing, and fragility
studies. The findings of this research also will have the potential to advance
the state-of-the-art of self-centering structures that are newly constructed.
Project outcomes will produce new basic knowledge needed to retrofit deficient
concrete walls and develop more resilient buildings in seismic regions and thus
contribute to seismic hazard mitigation in the United States and around the
world. Project data will be made available in the NHERI Data Depot at
https://www.designsafe-ci.org/.