* 1662666
* Accelerated Molecular Dynamics Study of the Role of Crystalline Defects in Friction of 2-Dimensional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Woo Kyun Kim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2021
* USD 324,555.00

Graphene and other 2-dimensional materials are materials that have thickness on
the atomic scale, which makes them ideal solid lubricants for small length scale
devices such as micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS). Graphene is also known
to possess an extraordinary property called superlubricity, where friction
between two material layers becomes vanishingly small. Most of these superlubric
phenomena, however, have been observed in well-prepared laboratory conditions
for very small flakes. This award supports research on the mechanics of friction
mechanisms of 2-dimensional materials at the atomic scale using a novel
predictive computational method based on molecular dynamics called
hyperdynamics. This method will allow the researchers to study large
2-dimensional layers such as those grown with the chemical vapor deposition
method. An enhanced understanding about superlubricity achieved in this research
will pave the way for realization of frictionless sliding on macroscopic scales.
Since friction is one of the primary causes of energy dissipation or waste, the
research will potentially enhance sustainability and efficiency efforts in
transportation, manufacturing, and other sectors where moving parts consume a
lot of energy. All computer codes developed in this project will be made freely
available to the research community. The project will provide training to
graduate students as well as research opportunities to undergraduate students as
part of the University of Cincinnati's co-op program. An outreach program for
science and engineering education based on computer simulations will also be
organized for local high schools in the Greater Cincinnati area.

Graphene synthesized by the chemical vapor deposition method and other
2-dimensional materials are characterized by a multi-grain structure with
defects, which has been hypothesized to cause detrimental effects on their
mechanical and frictional properties. In this project, theoretical and
computational models which can reliably predict mechanical and frictional
properties of multi-grain graphene and other 2-dimensional materials such as
molybdenum disulfide and hexagonal boron nitride will be constructed. A novel
atomistic simulation method called hyperdynamics will be applied to overcome the
limitations of conventional methods enabling simulations under spatio-temporal
conditions close to actual experiments. Various sliding objects and defected
structures comprising grain boundaries, stacking, and surface steps will be
investigated under several chemical environments and externally applied
conditions, such as temperature, sliding velocity, normal force. This systematic
research will greatly enhance our understanding of the underlying atomic-level
frictional and energy dissipation mechanisms operative in 2-dimensional
materials, which is critical in developing efficient macroscopic devices.