* 1662606
* On-demand Generation of Diamond-like-carbon Layers for Efficient Lubrication of Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Qian Wang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2021
* USD 308,000.00

Transportation accounts for 70 percent of the oil consumption in the US.
Improving lubrication in transportation and other mechanical systems results in
better efficiency, reduced maintenance and cost associated with oil consumption.
Just as critical, mechanical systems such as automotive engines are prone to
wear during starts and stops. This is particularly important for hybrid
vehicles, whose engines start and stop each time the drivetrain switches from
and to the battery as the power source, and for many new conventional passenger
cars that are implementing such "start-stop" technology to reduce fuel
consumption by automatically shutting the engine off when the vehicle is idling
in traffic or at stoplights. There is a need for new lubricants designed for
these modern engine systems with frequent start-stop cycles. The research team
explores the introduction of new lubricant additives into regular engine oils
that readily decompose into lubricious and protective diamond-like-carbon layers
when subjected to conditions experienced in start-stop cycles. These layers
therefore provide friction reduction and wear protection when and where they are
needed. This multidisciplinary research involves surface chemistry, materials
science, and mechanical engineering; it provides broad-based graduate training
not only in subject areas, but also in communications, entrepreneurship,
international and multi-cultural exposure, and active participation in
professional activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to explore and develop a novel approach to in situ and on-demand deposition of
lubricious diamond-like-carbon films onto tribo-component surfaces. The approach
uses surface-active molecules (dissolved in base oil) that are functionalized
with strained metastable carbon rings. The surface-active group of these
molecules allows them to readily absorb onto tribo-component surfaces. Under
boundary conditions, thermal energy due to frictional heating at asperities
causes the metastable carbon rings of these molecules to decompose, resulting in
the formation of a lubricious diamond-like-carbon layer, thus providing in situ
and on-demand friction reduction and wear protection. The research team plans to
systematically modify the chemical structure of these additive molecules in two
aspects: the chemical nature of the surface-active group and the number of -CH2
spacers between the surface-active group and the strained metastable carbon
ring. Research investigations will explore the relationship among the chemical
structure of these additive molecules, decomposition kinetics, and the
tribological performance under different boundary lubrication conditions.