* 1662233
* Stability and Optimality Properties of Sequential Action Control for Nonlinear and Hybrid Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

This project will greatly extend a powerful new method for control of robots and
vehicles, called sequential action control (SAC). One widely used approach to
controlling complicated systems is to solve a real-time numerical optimization
problem for the magnitude of the next few control pulses, where the all the
pulses have a constant width. However even with powerful processors it can be
difficult to compute these values fast enough. SAC addresses this challenge by
instead computing the optimal width and relative start time of the next control
pulse. For many problems of interest, this change in control strategy greatly
simplifies computation, to the point that infeasible control problems become
tractable. SAC allows analytical solutions to some problems, and speeds
computations by up to eight orders of magnitude for others. SAC is naturally
compatible with common features of modern control design, including hybrid
systems that switch discretely between a collection of continuous dynamic
behaviors; quantized systems where inputs, states, and outputs may take only a
finite set of constant values; and systems with nonlinear dynamics. SAC can be
shown to recover the globally optimal control signal in a number of analytically
solvable cases. In other representative test cases, the computed SAC input
provides performance that is numerically indistinguishable from the optimum.
Optimal or near-optimal input signals are of no value if small disturbances
cause the system to rapidly diverge from the desired behavior. Therefore
practical controllers must also ensure that small disturbances to the controlled
system cause only small deviations in the system response -- a property known as
stability. This project seeks to rigorously derive SAC performance guarantees
for a broad class of systems, as well as to show conditions under which SAC
ensures stability. The Darwin humanoid robot will be used as a high-dimensional,
nonlinear, hybrid testbed for this research. Control of the Darwin robot may be
implemented in the open-source Robot Operating System (ROS), allowing a robust
and verifiable SAC distribution for dissemination. The results of this project
will enable greatly improved and verifiable control over systems such as
rehabilitation robots, assistive devices, rotor vehicles, and driverless cars,
using widely available and low-cost computing platforms such as mobile phones.
Benefits to society from this project include enhanced safety and performance of
these automated infrastructure systems. The project also includes classroom
innovation, international collaboration, outreach activities through the Museum
of Science and Industry in Chicago, and dissemination of open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twofold purpose of this project is to develop
sequential action control (SAC) into an actionable, near-universal method for
synthesizing embedded real-time control as well as to provide foundational
results on optimality, stability, and geometry. The method is computationally
efficient and scales to high dimensional problems. Moreover, SAC extends
naturally to Lie groups, common in applications such as robotics and automation.
The project will address three fundamental questions. First, it will identify
conditions under which SAC can be applied directly or iteratively to achieve
optimal control. Second, it will derive conditions for stability. Third, it will
adapt SAC to systems evolving on Lie groups, to achieve global performance for
multibody mechanical systems. The broader impacts for this work include
outreach, technology transfer to rehabilitation, the development of online
courses in dynamics and analysis, and international collaboration. The PI is
currently working with the Museum of Science and Industry, and as part of the
project the PI, and graduate and undergraduates involved in the PI's laboratory,
will participate in a National Robotics Week exhibit in the main rotunda of the
museum with an estimated viewership of over ten thousand on-site visitors.