* 1662587
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Multiscale Behavior of Triboelectric Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Gregory Batt, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 204,823.00

Triboelectricity is due to contact electrification, a phenomenon that occurs
when nearly any combination of metal (conductor), semiconductor, or dielectric
(insulator) materials come into contact. Previously, devices that utilize this
principle were developed without understanding the fundamental mechanisms behind
triboelectricity. The objective of this project is to fill in the knowledge gap
about the true nature of triboelectricity through a combination of analytical
models and experimental analysis. Potential transformative uses of this
technology are to provide power sources to sensors and devices used in smart or
intelligent packaging. Pharmaceutical packaging is predicted to be the fastest
growing intelligent packaging market, with opportunities driven by the health
care needs of the aging US population. Additionally, it is estimated that US
businesses lose up to $250 billion of profit due to the counterfeit drug trade
each year. "Smart" packaging solutions include printed electronics, smart labels
capable of illumination, temperature and humidity indicators, and radio
frequency identification tags used for tracking and quick package
identification. In addition, there is an array of sensors that can record forces
in the distribution environment. These devices share a need for power. The
project also includes educational outreach activities in the form of interactive
games based on triboelectric devices to engage K-12 students and to target
under-represented minorities into pursuing a graduate degree in a science and
technology and engineering and mathematics field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this project are to: develop predictive models of the
molecular scale mechanism of charge transfer due to the contact electrification
process, model the interplay of the macro and microscale properties of the
device that effect its performance, study the effect of environmental conditions
on the performance of these devices, and formulate multidimensional analytical
models on the macroscopic behavior of flexible triboelectric generators that
incorporate environmental effects, and microscale effects such as surface
topography, local charge distribution, and real area of contact. The outcomes of
this research will culminate in a test bed concept of a triboelectric foam
composite to be utilized in smart packaging for concurrent energy scavenging and
vibration suppression. The methodology in this project establishes a new
paradigm on the design of triboelectric devices and marks the first systematic
attempt to understand the behavior of triboelectric generators / sensors at
multiple spatial scales. The insights gained from this research will culminate
in system level understanding of these devices that will lead to a triboelectric
genome of dielectric materials, surface treatments and textures, and elastic
coupling elements to design a triboelectric device for a specific objective,
whether it be sensing, energy scavenging or as an input to electronic devices.
The project will also result in quantification of environmental condition on
triboelectric devices, and phenomenologically modeling their effect.