* 1662964
* Collaborative Research: Shear-Buckling Mechanics for Enhanced Performance of Thin Plates
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Spencer Quiel, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 352,483.00

Thin steel plates are commonly used as structural elements in buildings,
bridges, towers, aircrafts, etc. Due to their slenderness, these plates are
susceptible to buckling under shear loading, thus limiting their capacity. The
recent research shows that many existing models do not represent the true
mechanics of ultimate shear buckling. This project will investigate and advance
the knowledge of shear buckling response, thus leading to improved economy,
durability, and safety of structures that use thin plates. The focus of this
study is on steel plates, but it lays the foundation for other materials such as
aluminum and composites that can be considered in future work. This project also
addresses the grand challenges recently issued by the American Society of Civil
Engineers (ASCE): (a) significantly enhance the performance and value of
infrastructure projects over their life cycles by 2025, and (b) foster the
optimization of infrastructure investments for society. The results will
increase cost efficiency via decreased material usage; enhance robustness via
increased ultimate shear strength; and reduce occurrence of buckling and
increased resilience to unexpected loads (e.g. with fewer required repairs) via
increased buckling load capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of
this project is to comprehensively investigate the mechanics of shear buckling
behavior in steel plates, thus leading to (a) new predictive models that capture
the true mechanics, and (b) design modifications that increase economy,
robustness, and life-cycle performance. The research plan involves both
nonlinear finite element studies and experimental tests. A detailed examination
of the stress patterns and load redistribution from the elastic buckling stage
to the ultimate postbuckling capacity will be the primary focus. Physical tests
will explore new panel configurations, and potential material optimizations will
be identified based on finite element mechanics studies. Experiments will be
conducted using facilities at Lehigh University to examine the shear buckling
performance of steel plate girder specimens, both with and without bending
moment. The data from these tests will be used to directly validate the
computational modeling approaches.