* 1662791
* Flash Sintering of Multiphase Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Martha Mecartney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 349,422.00

Traditionally, the process to make a components from ceramic powders or clays
requires firing (sintering) in a furnace at high temperatures for a long time
(many hours or days), a costly process that consumes a large amount of energy. A
new process known as "flash sintering" involves running electrical current
directly through the piece, to densify the ceramic and produce a usable
component in a matter of seconds. Initial studies show that many types of
ceramics can be fired this way, but these studies have focused on single phase
materials, while practical applications often require multiple phases made of
different types of ceramics. This award supports fundamental research to
investigate how the electrical and thermal behavior of each component of a
multi-phase ceramic responds to flash sintering. This work will lead to new
understanding of the flash sintering process, which will allow for lower cost,
higher efficiency processing and manufacture of these critical materials. The
processing and the strength of these materials will be studied, to ensure that
the components made by this new process are comparable to or better than those
made by traditional methods. The scientific results of the project are
integrated into video modules for outreach to elementary and middle school
children, to demonstrate the ways that scientists and engineers are studying
methods to save energy while making new materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple phases are often required for ceramic components
in order to improve mechanical strength, enhance thermal conductivity, and
increase thermal shock resistance. In contrast to conventional sintering
approaches which expend significant energy heating the sample and furnace
cavity, a high applied electric field with current flowing through the sample
can be used to densify oxide ceramics in air and without applied pressure and at
much lower temperatures. This research program will evaluate how the direct
application of electric fields can be used to flash sinter multiphase ceramic
powder compacts. Multicomponent oxide systems with phases of varying
electrical/ionic and thermal conductivity are used to determine the role of
these material properties in promoting flash sintering. This information is used
to create compositional design parameters to optimize flash sintering via
incorporation of minor phases. Mechanical properties of flash sintered
multiphase ceramic composites are compared to conventional sintered materials to
evaluate any differences, with microstructural characterization by electron
microscopy.