* 1662875
* Developing Coordination Complexes with Redox-Active Ligands into Anti-Oxidants and MRI Contrast Agent Sensors for Reactive Oxygen Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Christian Goldsmith, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Christian R. Goldsmith of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Auburn University is developing new
transition metal complexes capable of detecting and/or degrading reactive oxygen
species. The goal of this research is to develop redox-responsive contrast
agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional mimics of superoxide
dismutase enzymes. Given the involvement of reactive oxygen species in
cardiovascular, neurological, and inflammatory disease, these complexes could
form the bases for improved diagnosis and treatment options for a wide range of
health conditions. The project is at the interface of inorganic chemistry,
organic chemistry, and biochemistry. As such, it provides excellent training for
undergraduate and graduate students. The project also sponsors research seminars
at primarily undergraduate institutions in the east Alabama area and enables
their students to participate in cutting-edge scientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mn(II) complexes with quinol-containing polydentate
ligands have recently been found to display both enhanced T1-weighted relaxivity
(r1) in response to H2O2 and the ability to catalytically degrade superoxide.
Upon reaction with H2O2, the metal-bound quinols are oxidized to para-quinones,
which bind less avidly to the metal centers. Oxidation therefore renders the
polydentate ligands less highly coordinating, allowing for increased aquation
and r1. The primary drawback is that much of the Mn(II) is likely released upon
oxidation, which both limits the r1 response and poses a hazard to cells. This
project attempts to address the stability issue in two different ways. First,
more tightly binding ligands that feature carboxylates instead of pyridines are
explored; these are anticipated to bind to the Mn(II) ions more tightly than the
first generation ligands while improving upon the spectroscopic response.
Second, Ni(II) and Co(II) complexes with both the first and second generation
ligands will be prepared and assessed as chemical exchange saturation transfer
(CEST)-derived MRI contrast agents. Ni(II) and Co(II) bind to ligands much more
strongly than Mn(II), and a CEST-based mechanism could allow greater sensitivity
to H2O2 than T1-weighted imaging. The project also explores the superoxide
dismutase (SOD) activity of the Mn(II) complexes as well as those of their
Ni(II), Co(II), and Zn(II) analogs. The Zn(II) complexes thus far appear to be
equivalent anti-oxidants to the Mn(II) compounds, and the proposed work will
determine whether and how SOD activity can be obtained using a redox-active
ligand, rather than a metal ion, as the relevant redox partner.