* 1662230
* Understanding Information Acquisition Decisions in Systems Design through Behavioral Experiments and Bayesian Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Karthik Kannan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 649,876.00

The primary research objective in this project is to understand how individuals
make information acquisition decisions in engineering systems design.
Information acquisition is a key activity within systems engineering and design.
It involves decisions such as whether or not to gain more information about a
design concept, whether to execute a simulation or to run a physical experiment,
and selecting from alternate ways to refine a behavioral model of a system.
Information acquisition decisions have a significant effect on the quality of
design outcomes and the resources needed to achieve the outcomes. While there
has been significant progress in understanding how such decisions should ideally
be made, there is a significant gap in knowledge about how humans actually make
such decisions. This gap is a barrier to improving systems engineering and
design practice. In this project, basic research towards addressing this gap
will be carried out. Through a combination of theories from psychological and
cognitive sciences, and empirical evidence from individual decisions within
different design situations, the project will provide fundamental understanding
of how humans make decisions in systems design, and result in explanatory models
for how those decisions deviate from ideal behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On
successful completion, the project will have three specific outcomes. First, a
consistent analytical framework for describing strategies followed by humans in
design-related information acquisition decisions and the effects of problem-
specific and individual-specific influencing factors will be established.
Second, the project will result in an experimental framework consisting of a set
of behavioral experiments based on engineering design problems, instantiated as
games and implemented in an online platform, for efficiently conducting
behavioral experiments in the lab and in the field. Third, a reasoning framework
will be established that probabilistically represents the state of knowledge
about which descriptive models best represent individuals' design decisions, and
sequentially suggests maximally informative experiments for improving this state
of knowledge. In addition to contributing to the systems science knowledge base,
the project will advance the state of the art in the fields of hierarchical
Bayesian modeling, advanced inference methods, Bayesian model selection, and
sequential experimental design. The research activities will enhance
multidisciplinary collaboration between systems design and social science
researchers, and facilitate the integration of theories and research methods
from these disciplines. It will prepare graduate students with unique strengths
at the interface of these fields. The results of the project will be
disseminated through scientific publications, an open platform for deploying and
executing experiments on human decision making, and computational tools for
Bayesian analysis that will be distributed as open source software.