* 1662695
* Nanostructured Composite Coatings to Harden and Toughen Polymer Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Daeyeon Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 380,000.00

Owing to their low density, high toughness, ease of processing and low cost,
polymers are playing increasingly important roles in a broad set of
applications, including electronics, vehicles, building materials, and
industrial and household appliances. Compared to metals and ceramics, however,
polymers have rather poor scratch- and wear-resistance. A common approach to
enhance the scratch/wear resistance of polymers is to add hard coatings on their
surfaces. However, many conventional hard coatings suffer from poor adhesion to
the polymer and can crack easily. Furthermore, the conventional deposition
methods for hard coatings are often done under negative pressure, making them
expensive and challenging to implement for large-area processing. The goal of
this work is to investigate a new class of nanostructured coatings that have
high scratch and crack resistance and can be produced using an inexpensive
scalable method. This work is motivated by recent success in creating
nanocomposite coatings with extremely high concentrations of nanoparticles based
on infiltration of polymers into nanoparticle films. These coatings can be
formed directly on the surface of polymers to produce coatings that have very
strong adhesion and high scratch resistance. Scratch resistant nanocomposite
hard coatings can potentially be used as key components of next-generation
energy storage and conversion devices as well as optical, biosensors and
electronic devices. Also, such materials have applications as barriers in
electronics and food packaging. The team will develop modules demonstrating the
properties of composite materials for use at outreach events planned for
students, teachers and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will establish the processing-structure-property relationships of brick-and-
mortar structured nanocomposite coatings produced via capillary rise
infiltration (CaRI) of poly(methylmethacrylate) into films of gibbsite
nanoplatelets. The project is a collaboration between two investigators: Lee, an
expert in the fabrication and structural and optical characterization of
nanostructured materials, and Turner, an expert in materials and mechanics. The
project will address fundamental issues that must be understood and overcome to
advance CaRI materials and the general area of nanocomposites. Specifically, the
effect of spatial confinement on the capillary rise and transport of large
polymers through nanoporous media will be studied by changing the molecular
weight of the polymer and its size relative to the characteristic pore size in
the nanoplatelet film. Furthermore, by taking advantage of the versatility and
tunability of the CaRI process, the relationship between the internal structure
of the composite coatings and their mechanical and optical properties will be
established. Through processing, characterization, and modeling, we will develop
a holistic understanding of processing-structure-property relationship of CaRI
composites.