* 1662720
* Collaborative Research: Extreme Enhancement of the Electromechanical Properties of Soft Nano-Particulate Composites via Interphases
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Zoubeida Ounaies, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2020
* USD 228,287.00

This collaborative research project concerns a combined theoretical and
experimental investigation of interphases and their role in the enhancement of
the macroscopic electromechanical response of dielectric elastomer
nanoparticulate composites under finite deformations and finite electric fields.
While the remarkable electromechanical properties of this emerging type of
nanocomposites have been linked to interphasial phenomena around the
nanoparticles, the precise (quantitative) nature of how the presence of
interphases improves the macroscopic properties remains largely unresolved. Such
a fundamental understanding is of utmost importance for advancing the
technological exploitation of this promising class of materials as the next
generation of actuators and sensors. The general mathematical framework
developed will also be directly applicable to a wide range of other particulate
reinforced composites. The project will train two graduate students for careers
in academia or industry and will integrate research results in the undergraduate
and graduate curricula at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and the
Pennsylvania State University. The PIs will also develop visual experiments
illustrating the potential of dielectric elastomer nanoparticulate composites as
the next generation of soft actuators to integrate into outreach to high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the project are to: (i)
obtain experimental measurements of the geometry, electromechanical properties,
and space charge distribution in and around interphases in representative
classes of dielectric elastomer nanoparticulate composites, (ii) derive and
numerically implement a highly tractable homogenization framework to describe
the effect of interphases containing space charges on the macroscopic
electromechanical behavior of nanoparticulate composites, and (iii) deploy this
framework to explore the design of nanoparticulate composites with optimally
enhanced electrostriction capabilities. Objective (i) entails experiments
covering nanoscopic to macroscopic length scales, while objective (ii) entails a
generalized yet tractable definition of macrovariables capable to account for
interphasial phenomena and its stable and convergent numerical implementation in
the non-convex setting of finite deformations and finite electric fields.