* 1662879
* A First-Principles Study of Electro-Mechanical Coupling in Triboelectric Nanogenerators
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Gurpreet Singh, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2020
* USD 245,494.00

The triboelectric effect, a phenomenon wherein one material becomes electrically
charged after it contacts a different material through friction, has been known
since the times of ancient Greece. Mechanical contact between dissimilar
surfaces is a ubiquitous part of life and thus a buildup of electric charge is
constantly happening. Harvesting of this buildup of electrical charge provides
an opportunity for the generation of electricity for devices that operate at
very small scales. The tools for understanding and capitalizing on this
phenomenon have only become available in the last decade due to the advent of
nanotechnology. This fundamental research will provide a theoretical framework
based on complementary modeling and experiments, which will allow the research
team to engineer "triboelectric nanogenerators" that are capable of harvesting
significant amounts of power in a more controlled way. Triboelectric
nanogenerators have demonstrated a high area-wise power density of up to 1.2
kW/m2, a volume-wise power density of up to 490 kW/m3 (compare this to the
stellar fusion of hydrogen ~276.5 W/m3), and similarly a very high energy
conversion efficiency of ~50-85%. Harvesting of this energy that is inherently
available from dissimilar surfaces is central to this research and can
potentially pay dividends to the economy and society. This research will involve
many disciplines including contact mechanics, solid mechanics, materials
science, electrical engineering, and manufacturing. Participation of
underrepresented groups in research and pedagogy will also be facilitated and
broadened in this program through direct participation and exposure.

The goal of this project is to understand the fundamental mechanism of
triboelectrification and the surface charge density in triboelectric
nanogenerators through the lens of a first-principles investigation, both
theoretically and experimentally. The research team will perform first-
principles simulations in conjunction with carefully designed experiments to:
(1) derive an atomistic electrodynamic theory and integrate it into simulations
that are directly compared to experiments thereby establishing a baseline
between theory and experiment; (2) investigate the charging mechanism of contact
mode triboelectrification and correlate normal strain with the induced, bound
charges; and (3) relate the charging mechanism of sliding mode
triboelectrification with shear strain, surface roughness, friction cycles and
harvesting efficiency.