* 1662332
* Correlating The Chemistry and Process With The Impurity, Structure and Properties of Electrodeposited Cobalt for Advanced Interconnects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Qiang Huang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 298,685.00

The network of metal wires in semiconductor chips are referred to as
interconnects. These wires connect the transistors and carry the electronic
signals for different functions of the circuitry. The resistivity of copper in
state-of-the-art interconnects exponentially increases as the dimensions of
semiconductor devices decrease. Cobalt has emerged as a top candidate among
alternative materials to replace copper, and it will allow further advancement
of semiconductor technology. However, the chemistry and processes that are
needed for fabricating cobalt interconnects are still being developed, and there
is insufficient information about how the chemistry and processing impact the
structure and properties of such interconnects. This award will provide the
fundamental research to fill this knowledge gap. The research will focus on how
organic additives used in electrodeposition enable the fabrication of cobalt
interconnects and control the incorporation of impurities in cobalt. More
importantly, cobalt will be used as an example to provide a general
understanding of how different impurity elements in electrodeposited metals
impact the microstructures and electrical properties of the metal. The latter
are important metrics for applications in advanced device fabrication. The
research will be used to showcase student research activities in a new
Electrochemical Society student chapter. In addition, a new class module on
electrodeposition and microfabrication will be developed for an undergraduate
level electrochemical engineering course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synergistic
interactions between multi-component organic additives that have been used in
copper interconnect fabrication requires a long incubation time and faces
challenges for interconnect structures with dimension below 30 nm. On the other
hand, a newly discovered molecule, dioxime, results in an agitation-dependent
strong suppression on cobalt deposition. It enables the preferential growth of
cobalt at the bottom of the structure, where the electrolyte is stagnant, due to
the lack of agitation. This project employs various derivatives of dioxime
molecules to dissect the mechanisms of such suppression effects and how
different impurities become incorporated into the deposited metals. Furthermore,
local electrode atom probe will be used in conjunction with electron microscopy
techniques and in-situ electrical measurements to understand the distribution of
different impurity elements as well as their impacts on the microstructure
evolution and resistivity change of cobalt. Template electrodeposited cobalt
nanowires will be used to characterize electromigration of small lines without
the use of advanced lithography techniques.