* 1662708
* Switched Control Systems with Limited Information: An Entropy Approach to Stabilization and Disturbance Attenuation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Daniel Liberzon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2021
* USD 349,540.00

This project will extend a deep and intuitive notion of the entropy of a dynamic
system to the control of switched systems subject to external disturbances.
Similarly to related concepts of entropy from thermodynamics and information
theory, the entropy of a dynamic system is a measure of uncertainty about its
state -- more specifically, it is a measure of the rate of increase in this
uncertainty. The importance of this concept of entropy for control engineering
arises in part from its relation to the fundamental control tasks of
stabilization and disturbance rejection. Stabilization means that the system
will return to its desired operating condition after being perturbed.
Disturbance rejection means that a persistent external disruption to the system
will either not appear in the system output, or will at least be highly
attenuated. For either of these desirable objectives to be achieved, it is
required that the uncertainty growth -- due, for example, to open-loop unstable
dynamics, external disturbances, or finite control resolution -- must be
counteracted using information from measurements of the system. The use of
entropy allows important practical limitations on sampling rates, sensor and
actuator resolution, and communication bandwidth, to be rigorously incorporated
into systematic analysis and design procedures. These critically important
elements of real engineering systems are too often treated as an afterthought in
current control engineering practice. The results of this project are expected
to have significant impact on applications such as autonomous cars and aerial
vehicles, chemical process control, and the safety and reliability of the
electric power grid. The project also includes components for integrating basic
research with personnel training and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entropy characterizes the rate at which
uncertainty about the state of a dynamical system increases with time. From the
point of view of control theory, entropy corresponds to the minimal rate at
which information about the system has to be communicated to the controller in
order to stabilize the system. The control-theoretic entropy also informs the
information rate needed to perform other control tasks, such as disturbance
attenuation. In this project, these concepts and connections will be extended in
the context of switched systems, for which the analysis of system behavior, as
well as the task of controlling it, are considerably more complicated than the
unswitched case. The project has the following three main theoretical goals: 1)
to identify meaningful classes of switched systems for which the entropy (or
reasonably tight bounds on it) can be calculated; 2) to design encoding and
control strategies that achieve stabilization and disturbance attenuation for
switched systems based on limited data rate feedback; and 3) to systematically
use entropy as a tool to measure efficiency and performance of these control
schemes. Switched systems describe many processes of industrial relevance, and
the extension of the definition of control-theoretic entropy to these systems
allows rigorous treatment of realistic limitations on sensing, actuation, and
communication. Entropy-based analysis promises a unified analysis and design
framework for control of realistic dynamics and control architectures.