* 1662970
* Contrast-enhanced MicroCT-based Analysis of Human Atheroma Biomechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Luis Cardoso, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 423,621.00

More than half of the 500,000 deaths each year in the U.S. caused by what is
called "acute coronary syndrome" result from the rupture of the thin fibrous cap
that covers an "atheroma", a site where the artery is "hardened." The rupture of
an atheroma cap is a very complex phenomenon governed by many factors beyond its
thickness. Recent finite element studies have found that the maximal stresses in
thin caps are typically far less than the widely accepted threshold for tissue
rupture, revealing that cap thickness is not the only or even the most important
criterion. The critical rupture stress threshold was established many years ago
using 2D finite element modeling in which the vessel wall layers were considered
homogeneous, isotropic and elastic, while in reality, the tissue composition in
blood vessels, particularly in atheromas is non-homogeneous, non-isotropic and
hyperelastic. The overall goal of this research is to investigate the
contribution of cap morphology, tissue heterogeneity, and blood flow dynamics on
the biomechanics of cap rupture in human coronary vessels. This research will
form the basis for developing new strategies for imaging, preventing and
possibly reverting changes in tissue composition that transform a stable plaque
into one vulnerable to rupture. The educational component of this effort
integrates a multidisciplinary education plan on cardiovascular biomechanics,
advanced 3D imaging, and multiscale finite-element modeling. The PIs will
provide training to undergraduate students (through academic year and summer
research opportunities) and graduate students (PhD research) and offer
internships for underrepresented high-school students to work in the laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the field of cardiovascular
biomechanics by increasing our understanding of vulnerable plaque rupture as
well as providing an alternative paradigm for vulnerable plaque risk. To this
end, the PIs will use laboratory physical models, contrast-enhanced high-
resolution microCT imaging, fluid-solid interaction numerical models with tissue
specific properties and mechanical testing in human coronary vessels with
atheromas. A novel contrast-enhanced microCT-based finite element modeling
approach with realistic vessel wall layers morphology and pixel-based tissue
composition will provide a more accurate 3D spatial distribution of stresses and
a revised analysis of the critical threshold for atheroma cap rupture. This
approach will also be used to investigate the actual mechanism of initiation of
the cap rupture. In general, contrast-enhanced high-resolution microCT imaging
and advanced numerical modeling are expected to yield mechanistic insights of
the composition-structure-function relationship in both stable and vulnerable
atheromas in human coronary vessels.