* 1662422
* EAGER:   Particle Concentration Measurements in Turbulent Flows using Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* John Eaton, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 99,744.00

The behavior of small solid particles such as sand, dust or volcanic ash moving
in water or air flows is an important consideration in a wide range of fields.
For example, environmental dust can shorten a jet engine's service life by 90
percent. State-of-the-art experiments can only collect particle data in highly
simplified systems. A new technique is being developed that uses conventional
medical Magnetic Resonance Imaging systems to make quantitative measurements of
how particles are distributed in complex systems. The data sets produced would
have broad benefits for engineers, as well as for researchers studying
environmental, biological, and fundamental physical systems. A series of
validation experiments will be carried out to complete development of the
imaging technique and to establish its accuracy and limitations. After the
technique has been developed, two additional experiments will be performed to
demonstrate broad societal benefits of the new measurements: one by assisting
the design of more dust-resistant aircraft engines and the other by illuminating
how inhaled dust or spray droplets move through the human nose. Following the
successful completion of this project, researchers would have a general method
to aid in their understanding of any system where particles are carried by air
or water currents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments have
demonstrated that Magnetic Resonance Imaging can be used to measure the
concentration of microparticles quantitatively and in three dimensions. The
proposed work begins with a detailed set of validation experiments to test the
range, resolution, and accuracy of the new experimental method across a range of
flow conditions and particle concentrations. Following the validation
experiments, two application-relevant test cases will be employed as test beds
for continued development of the technique. The first will explore the behavior
of particles in an internal impingement cooling geometry frequently employed in
aircraft turbine engine cooling systems. In the second test case, particle
concentration will be measured inside a model human nasal passage. In addition
to developing the technique, the test cases allow for new understanding of
particle transport in two disparate fields of significant research interest. The
impact of the project has the potential to extend well past the scope of this
proposal, as the technique could prove useful for computational model
validation, fundamental particle-laden flow research, or a number of other
research areas.