* 1662817
* Understanding Alloy Chemistry for Enhanced Environmental Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Hojong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2022
* USD 357,412.00

Materials used in technologies with aggressive chemical environments such as gas
turbines, fuel cells, batteries, and solar thermal power plants are being pushed
to their operation limits to meet market demands for higher power and efficiency
at reduced emissions and operating costs. The continued development of next-
generation technologies requires a fundamental understanding of how materials
respond to extreme chemical environments, which will enable the design of high
performance alloys. This award supports fundamental research to learn how the
composition and structure of high performance alloys can be engineered to
improve performance in these environments. The ultimate goal is to provide tools
for the design of corrosion-resistant materials for aggressive chemical
environments found in future sustainable technologies, such as heat transfer
fluid for concentrated solar power systems, gas turbines, and molten carbonate
fuel cells. The knowledge gained in this project has broad applicability across
fields essential for the future of U.S. competitiveness, including
electrochemical energy storage (batteries), materials synthesis, and corrosion-
resistant coatings. The research will be incorporated into courses at the
graduate and undergraduate level, and will enhance K-12 outreach programs
directed at broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
centers on understanding the impact of alloying elements in controlling (1) the
degradation reactions at interfaces between the alloy and its chemical
environment at elevated temperatures (650-950Â°C), (2) the structure and
chemistry of the protective oxide layer, as well as (3) the thermodynamic and
mass transport properties of alloys - critical factors in the formation of
protective oxide layers. Based on a model Ni-Al system, the research team will
determine the thermodynamic, mass transport properties, and interfacial
degradation reactions of Ni-based alloys under the systematic control of alloy
chemistry (Cr, Pt, and Hf) using electrochemical techniques. The researchers
will test the hypothesis that alloying elements (Cr, Pt, and Hf) can enhance
environmental resistance of the Ni-Al alloys by facilitating the formation of a
protective oxide layer (Al2O3). The work will result in the creation of a
database of thermodynamic, mass transport, and interfacial corrosion properties
of multi-component alloys, as well as the experimental techniques for their
measurement.