* 1662573
* 2017 Proteins: Exploring the Role of Proteins as Cellular Organizers by Combining Experiment and Theory
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2017
* Catherine Royer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 4,115.00

Title: 2017 Proteins: Exploring the Role of Proteins as Cellular Organizers by
Combining Experiment and Theory &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will cover a
very broad range of topics relevant to protein science, including protein
structure, function and dynamics, from the molecular to the cellular level,
using biophysical, biochemical, structural, optical and computational tools. The
meeting has evolved with the field, and represents the cutting edge of protein
science. This year a Gordon Research Seminar exclusively for young scientists,
will be held two days prior to the Gordon Research Conference at the same site.
This year's list of speakers has many eminent scientists including one Nobel
Laureate. Half of the invited speakers are females and also include members of
the underrepresented minorities, young scientists and international scientists.
Attendees include graduate students and postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty
from primarily undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major themes
will be highlighted in this meeting. The first theme depicts proteins as
cellular organizers from molecular to cellular level using state-of-the-art
biophysical approaches. The second theme is integration of theoretical and
computational approaches with experiment.