* 1662825
* Service Facilities and Guideway Planning in Open Spaces Under Congestion and Disruption Risks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Yanfeng Ouyang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 359,023.00

Location of transportation service facilities (such as security gates at
airports, transit stations near shopping malls) and layout of guideways (such as
tunnels, gates and barriers) affect pedestrian traffic and poor design may
induce congestion in both the immediate and surrounding contiguous spaces.
Failure to address congestion-related issues leads to deterioration in the
efficiency of those facilities, and negatively impacts the general public,
through unnecessary delay and safety hazards due to overcrowding. An extreme
manifestation of poor design leading to congestion is devastating pedestrian
stampede incidents in crowded spaces. The overcrowding situation is further
worsened if some of the built facilities become unavailable for service from
time to time. This research will create new methodology for planning efficient
and reliable service facility location and guideway layout, while considering
how pedestrian traffic will respond to the system design. It will provide key
insights and strategies that will underpin improvement in design and ultimately
result in significant economical and societal benefits for transportation,
freight and manufacturing industries. This project will also lead to new
educational practices by the creation and integration of education materials and
a variety of outreach activities with transportation industries and public
schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While it is well-known that many service systems
are vulnerable to congestion and disruptions, studies on problems posed in open
spaces are quite limited. This project will develop methodology to describe
customer traffic fluxes, and overcome challenges associated with facility and
guideway design using two complementing modeling schemes: one based on
continuous/planar modeling techniques, and the other based on discrete model
formulations to address a number of pressing challenges, including (i) point-
wise service facility location design, (ii) integrated guideway deployment, and
(iii) probabilistic service disruptions, in a variety of engineering contexts.
The framework will enable quantification of the system performance either in
analytical closed forms or in compact-sized (i.e., of low-order polynomial to
the system size) expressions, either exactly or as high-fidelity approximations.
This scheme opens up opportunities to transform a set of traditionally hard
problems into solvable models.