* 1662177
* Mechanics of Topologically Interlocked Stereotomic Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Thomas Siegmund, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2022
* USD 390,161.00

This research investigates the reconciliation of opposed properties in material
systems through the use of stereotomic architectures. Engineers and scientists
continuously search for high damage tolerant materials and structures.
Stereotomy is the art of cutting materials into geometric shapes. The cut blocks
are then assembled into complex structures. Scientists have recently discovered
new principles for the assembly process. The result is Stereotomic Material
Systems with new architectures realized as interlocking assemblies based on
single and multiphase tessellations. This research then aims to reconcile
opposed properties such as strength-toughness, brittleness-ductility, and
hardness-wave speed. It also aims to find approaches to control such properties.
The outcomes will have impact on several technologies, including flexible
electronics, battery systems, armor, and high temperature structures. The PI
will develop related educational modules in the context of engineering
mechanics. These activities will introduce pre-college students to engineering
principles. The awardee also will develop new graduate-level educational content
on architectured material systems. He will engage undergraduate students in
related research experiences. Advances in the scientific discourse on
architectured material systems will be undertaken through an international
symposium on the subject. A collaboration with a small business will enable the
implementation of the stereotomic material
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stereotomic Material Systems (SMS) are assemblies
of polyhedra on underlying tessellation patterns. The present work focuses on
non-regular single-phase and multi-phase stereotomic material systems. For
static loading, measurements of stiffness, strength and toughness under
quasistatic loading are conducted. Under impact loading, experiments to
determine wave front speed, unit element velocity and decay rates are planned.
There are two main research questions: (1) given the large number of
possibilities of tessellations providing potential architectural templates for
SMS, and the option to consider multi-material systems, the question is how
complexity in the SMS architecture would control SMS stiffness, strength and
toughness. (2) since unit-to-unit element contact interactions in SMS are
dependent on the degree of transverse deformation, the question is how such
contact nonlinearity will manifest itself in the dynamics of the SMS response
following impact loading, and how such dynamic response depends on SMS
architecture complexity. Multi-material 3D printing is employed to manufacture
specimens. Experiments under static and dynamic mechanical load are conducted.
Theory and finite element simulation are used in the analysis.