* 1662992
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: A New Framework for Computational Model Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Steve Wojtkiewicz, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 228,834.00

Simulations play a key role in helping decision makers respond to complex
societal problems, ranging from strategies for enhancing infrastructure
resilience to natural hazards, to understanding financial markets, or managing
air traffic. However, to be effective, individuals must select appropriate
models and understand their limitations. This project conducts fundamental
research to create a computationally efficient paradigm for model validation
designed to guide decisions on model accuracy and validity. The resulting
probabilistic framework will allow users to explore many families of models and
to choose the ones that are the most useful. Advanced computational algorithms
and architectures will enable the framework to leverage vast amounts of data
from devices, platforms, sensors and systems and users to simultaneously
evaluate multiple models. By developing an integrated framework of model
falsification and Bayesian model selection, the project investigators give
researchers and decision makers a powerful tool for effectively using models to
understand and respond to emerging societal challenges and opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating Bayesian model selection with two model
falsification phases forms a novel probabilistic framework for model validation:
initial falsification eliminates unsuitable models that do not fit measured
data, while final falsification selects the model classes with the most accurate
simulations. New approaches to model falsification -- false discovery rate
testing and model likelihood thresholds -- provide a cohesive framework that
accommodates many types of dynamic response data. The approach is optimized and
calibrated with testbed modeling problems such as NASA's benchmark for
turbulence model validation and modeling a fully instrumented base isolated
building. This work will transform the efficiency, accuracy and widespread
applicability of model validation, allowing it to be used for previously
intractable science and engineering applications. The researchers will explore
modeling collaborations in promising areas including turbulence, material
behavior, and biochemical reactions. The project will enhance awareness of model
validation through education and outreach activities. Research results will be
disseminated in journal publications and presentations at national and
international conferences. Two graduate students will be mentored and research
concepts and results will be incorporated into two graduate uncertainty
quantification courses and an undergraduate engineering risk analysis class. The
researchers will also incorporate research findings into their ongoing K-12
outreach efforts, including a model-building module targeting middle/high school
STEM enrichment programs.