* 1662080
* EAGER: Identification of molecular parameters defining the fine line between thermostability and thermophilic properties
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Elizabeth Howell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2020
* USD 193,131.00

Enzymes from thermophilic organisms are often more suitable for applications in
biotechnology because they are thermostable and have optimal activities at high
temperatures. This project will use novel experimental and computational
approaches to define the molecular basis for these highly useful properties.
Ultimately, these studies will provide important information for the selection
of enzymes that are stable and optimally active at high temperatures and for the
engineering of such enzymes for applications in biotechnology. This project will
contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate students and will be
incorporated into outreach efforts to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elucidation of molecular principles that
render proteins more stable under extreme conditions such as high temperatures
has been subject of a large body of research. Earlier work suggested that
thermophilic variants of enzymes have more polar interactions or more H-bonds or
increased hydrophobic interactions, better packing of hydrophobic core or some
combination of them. Other studies showed that some of these properties were not
applicable to many other mesophilic to thermophilic comparisons and more subtle
and distributed effects and dynamic properties of proteins may play a
significant role in attaining thermophilicity. Sequence-based comparisons also
failed to explain the basis of thermophilicity and so far no clear and unifying
explanation has emerged. This project aims to determine dynamic and
thermodynamic properties that separate thermophilic enzymes from their
mesophilic counterparts by dissecting the effects of protein dynamics and
solvent reorganization on the enzyme ligand interactions. To do this,
thermophilic and mesophilic variants of the same protein
(aminoglycoside-N3-nucleotidyltransferase) will be used; these variants have
minimal differences in the primary sequence.