* 1662452
* Three-Dimensional Crack Propagation Algorithms Based on Universal Meshes and their Application to Fracking
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Adrian Lew, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2021
* USD 490,809.00

Accurate prediction of when and how a crack will grow and propagate through a
rock formation is an important yet unsolved problem in engineering. Crack growth
and prediction models guide the design of strategies to frack oil and gas
reservoirs and to inject fracking fluids and waste water back underground, and
help assess the resulting seismicity. Crack growth models are also used in
evaluating the stability of reservoirs for carbon sequestration, and in the
engineering of geothermal reservoirs. Additionally, they play an important role
in developing understanding of geophysical phenomena, such as volcanic eruptions
and fracture of glaciers. This award supports fundamental research to formulate
and implement numerical algorithms and methods to simulate the propagation of
cracks through structures and underground rocks. The outcomes of this project
will reduce the predictive uncertainty to the understanding of the physics and
the structure of the rock being fractured. It will alleviate or remove
uncertainties associated with the computational methods. By improving the way
such predictions are made, the project has the potential to impact energy
production and associated concerns for years to come. Additionally, this project
will train a graduate student in an area in which experts are highly sought, as
well as involve undergraduate students from predominantly underrepresented
minority institutions, training and exposing them to research in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To attain control of the numerical errors associated with
simulating the propagation of cracks, this project will combine three novel
developments. First, the formulation of a robust algorithm to deform a single
background mesh of tetrahedra so that it exactly meshes every cracked geometry
obtained as the fracture propagates in three dimensions. Such mesh is called a
universal mesh. Second, the formulation of a class of numerical methods that
enable the computation of stress intensity factors along a crack front with
high-order of accuracy. Third, the creation of an algorithm to compute
convergent evolution of brittle and hydraulic fractures in three dimensions.
Working jointly, the universal mesh algorithm and the high-order method should
enable the computation of very accurate crack evolutions without constant re-
meshing around the crack front.