* 1662700
* Simultaneous Physical Field Reconstruction and Property Identification Using Multi-Target Sensing Methods for Metal Additive-Manufacturing and Thin-Walled Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Kok-Meng Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,929.00

Metallic Additive-Manufacturing using laser sintering to fabricate parts layer-
by-layer directly from a 3D computer model has emerged and has grown rapidly in
the past decade. Such technology can significantly reduce time-to-market,
improve product quality, reduce material-waste, and reduce cost. This project
will help overcome important roadblocks that currently exist before this
technology can be widely adopted. This research will use eddy current-based
novel sensing mechanism during manufacturing process that will enable precision
in manufacturing along with reduced cost. This technique will allow a robust
layer-by-layer quality assessment while the part is being fabricated and the
production rates will be expedited eliminating post-build inspection or
destructive testing. While the method is in the context of metal additive
manufacturing, the underlying system architecture and ideas can be extended to
spawn a spectrum of different applications; for example, new medical
applications such as magnetic induction tomography for accurate diagnosis of
intracerebral hemorrhage. Several industries may benefit, including the
automotive, the aerospace, the medical and healthcare, and industrial
manufacturing sectors. The project also includes interesting K-12 outreach
efforts in addition to curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the research is to develop a novel methodology to model a
distributed-parameter system, reconstruct its physical fields and infer its
system properties from limited measurements for analyzing and controlling its
dynamic behaviors. A novel multi-target sensing methodology based on a set of
multi-frequency eddy-current sensing will be developed for reconstructing the
physical fields which measure geometrical parameters as well as detect surface
and subsurface defects during the machining process. The work will also
formulate dynamic model of the thin-walled plate during machining, and develop
efficient methods for reconstructing its displacement, strain and stress fields
from limited displacement measurements in real time for monitoring and
controlling the dynamics of the distributed-parameter system. Unlike traditional
single-frequency eddy-current sensors the multi-target sensing system can
adaptively synthesizes a relatively high-resolution eddy-current pattern between
adjacent coils with a combination of appropriate frequencies to simultaneously
determine the displacement, thickness and electrical conductivity. The
distributed current source (DCS) modeling method for sensor design and analysis
is highly efficient and reduces computational complexity. It is expected that
the ability to reconstruct the multi-physical fields (electric, magnetic,
displacement, force, strain and stress) from the multi-target sensors and field
reconstruction algorithms during part fabrication not only will offer intuitive
insights into the effects of several critical factors (such as material
mechanical properties, boundary geometrical/clamping constraints and damping
coefficients) on thermal/machining induced residue stresses that are generally
the main cause of thin-walled product distortions, and but also will provide an
essential basis to vibration suppression.