* 1662854
* Theoretical Understanding of Porosity-Induced Mechanisms during Solidification of Cast Alloys and their Influence on Process-Structure-Property Correlations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Mark Horstemeyer, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2022
* USD 445,296.00

Casting is a process in which liquid metal is poured into a mold and then
allowed to cool and solidify. Cast alloys are used in many diverse applications,
ranging from automotive parts to aerospace components. Porosity that arises
during the solidification process has long been recognized as a critical factor
in limiting the mechanical performance of cast alloys, especially under
repetitive use that results in "fatigue" behavior. There is a strong drive
towards minimizing porosity through a combination of casting design and
optimization of the solidification process. To achieve that, a fundamental
understanding of the underlying physics of porosity formation, growth and
mobility and its impact on fatigue, and an enhanced predictive capability become
necessary. This research addresses these needs through theoretical and
computational modeling of processing and behavior at multiple length scales.
Results from this research will lead to time- and cost-effective design and
optimization processes that automotive, aerospace, and other industries can
utilize to obtain better alloys and alloy components. This research features a
synergistic approach based on materials science, manufacturing, and
computational mechanics, which will expose graduate students to broader concepts
and skills. Active focus will be given to ensure participation of
underrepresented undergraduate students in research and outreach to high school
students will strive to inspire interest in engineering education from an early
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to acquire a
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that govern porosity nucleation,
growth, and migration during directional solidification process and employ that
understanding to identify process-structure-property relations in cast alloys.
This objective will be accomplished based on analysis and interpretation of
existing solidification experimental data using theoretical and computational
tools. Competing and contributing mechanisms that control porosity nucleation
(solidification shrinkage and hydrogen segregation), growth (hydrogen diffusion,
solidification front grow, and dendritic growth), and migration (buoyancy and
thermocapillary effects) will be theorized and modeled. The multiscale
computational framework, which will consist of a developed phase-field model and
an existing internal state variable model combined with first-principles
calculations, crystal plasticity, and the finite element method, will enable a
phenomenological interpretation of the solidification process at multiple length
scales. The accumulated constitutive descriptions will then be used to develop
process-structure-property correlations.