* 1662655
* RUI:   Bio-Inspired Architectures Enabling Real-Time Feedback Control in Wireless Sensing and Actuating Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Courtney Peckens, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 133,899.00

The goal of this project is to use strategies found in biological sensory
circuits to create practical wireless networked control systems for minimizing
damage to buildings and other critical civil infrastructure during events such
as hurricanes, tornadoes, and earthquakes. Critical civil infrastructure, such
as bridges and buildings, are highly vulnerable to extreme load scenarios, such
as high winds or earthquakes. Failure of such structures can have a
significantly negative impact on society, both through loss of productivity as
well as potential loss of life. To guard against these failures during extreme
events, the project will use integrated feedback control, in which distributed
sensors detect building motion and wirelessly send measurements to one or more
processing nodes, which then use that data to command strategically located
actuators to generate counteracting forces. Practical wireless implementation of
such systems may be difficult due data-overload on communication links and
processing nodes, and by time delays of signals traveling over the wireless
links. The goal of this project is to overcome these problems using data
compression strategies and other advantageous adaptations found in sensory loops
in the biological central nervous system. This project will be carried out at
Hope College, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution, and will introduce Hope
College students to cutting-edge research in structural engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless feedback control systems are challenged by
constraints such as computation inundation at nodes and communication latencies,
which have to date limited real-time control capabilities and large-scale
deployments on civil infrastructure. In contrast, biological sensory systems are
able to robustly react and adapt to their environment in ways that outperform
engineering systems. The goal for this project is to draw inspiration from these
biological mechanisms and develop a bio-inspired sensing and actuating
architecture that utilizes front-end signal processing and simplistic
information integration so as to streamline communication and enable real-time
control. This will be achieved by utilizing optimal control theory as well as
iterative training techniques to develop synaptic weights between layers of
sensing and actuating nodes. The project will also study the synaptic plasticity
exhibited by biological neural networks and integrate this behavior into the
bio-inspired control architecture. The result will be an adaptive, bio-inspired
control architecture that will be capable of real-time feedback control which
will alleviate the challenges experienced in traditional wireless control
systems. This architecture will be validated in hardware on a small scale
structure that is subject to seismic excitation. By demonstrating an alternative
sensing and actuating paradigm based on principles employed by the biological
nervous system, the project will remove the constraints of traditional Nyquist
sampling on wireless sensor networks while still maintaining effective control
capabilities. This will move the field in a vertical direction as it will reduce
current challenges of communication latencies and computation inundation, thus
enabling real-time feedback control using wireless telemetry.