* 1662646
* Texture Evolution and Softening During Discontinuous Dynamic Recrystallization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Stephen Niezgoda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 415,843.00

Metals are enablers of numerous advanced engineering designs that require high
strength and toughness, and remain irreplaceable for key components in
structural applications in aviation, transportation, power generation, etc. The
mechanical properties of engineering metals are closely related to their
internal microstructure, which is obtained and optimized through thermal and
mechanical processing. However, the processing-microstructure relationship is
still poorly understood, which severely limits the prospect of direct one-step
microstructure engineering. This award supports an integrated computational and
experimental study to establish a quantitative physics-based model that will be
used to explore the fundamental mechanisms that control microstructure evolution
during hot working. The model will have the ability to assist in the design and
optimization of thermomechanical processes for many engineering alloys including
nickel-based superalloys for high temperature applications and magnesium-alloys
for light structural applications. The PIs are committed to support an
undergraduate research program as well as an existing university program that
engages undergraduate researchers as mentors who develop K-12 engineering
outreach activities under the guidance of K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic recrystallization (DRX) involves the
nucleation and growth of new grains during straining at elevated temperatures
and plays a critical role in controlling microstructure changes during
thermomechanical processing (TMP). Nevertheless, many aspects of DRX remain
poorly understood, with the lack of both fundamental knowledge and predictive
physics-based models for the evolution of dislocation density, grain structure
and texture and the corresponding effects on the macroscopic stress-strain
response. This award supports an integrated computational and experimental study
that will first establish a full-field DRX model by dynamically coupling a
phase-field recrystallization model with a fast Fourier transform crystal
plasticity model. Then the model will be used to investigate the following
central hypothesis on DRX: The orientation of newly nucleated grains and the
degree of subsequent softening are direct consequences of the long-range, inter-
granular stress field resulting from plastic anisotropy and the dislocation
structure evolution near grain boundaries. In addition to the traditional
bulging mechanism, a new DRX nucleation mechanism that selects orientations for
easy elastic or plastic deformation will be tested. The computational model
established in this project will be directly applicable to many important
engineering alloys such as nickel-base superalloys and magnesium-alloys during
TMP. The processing-texture-property relationship established in this research
will improve the fundamental understanding of the interplay between
microstructural and micromechanical fields during DRX and may lead to better
optimization of industrial processing.