* 1662542
* Safe, Resilient and Efficient Operation of Autonomous Aerial and Ground Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2021
* USD 396,512.00

Autonomous vehicles working alone or in coordination with other autonomous
vehicles have become indispensable in recent years for many military and law
enforcement missions (e.g., in surveillance, long-range communication, target
acquisition and tracking, and even weapon delivery). Most recently, the aerial
versions of these autonomous vehicles ('flying robots' or 'drones') have entered
the civilian sector and have been used successfully in many applications such as
fire detection, crop dusting, aerial surveying, entertainment industry, traffic
monitoring, infrastructure inspection, weather/hurricane monitoring, and
commercial product delivery, to name a few. The unmanned air vehicle (UAV)
market is exploding and most often than not these autonomous vehicles will have
to operate in an environment that is highly uncertain, and even adversarial. For
instance, for the case of unmanned aerial or marine/underwater vehicles winds or
sea currents have a great impact on system performance. Similarly, self-driving
vehicles must operate and interact with the surrounding traffic flow. The theory
and methodologies developed in this research will make it possible to enable
better coordination of such autonomous vehicles and systems, thus increasing
their efficiency, reliability, and overall performance. The results of this
research will help in extending the usability and endurance of aerial and marine
autonomous vehicles and contribute to the safe operation of self-driving
vehicles in traffic. The educational aspects of the project also includes
efforts for involving minority and other under-represented students in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research tackles a fundamental problem in
the area of differential games and optimal trajectory generation for autonomous
vehicles operating in the presence of exogenous or endogenous disturbances.
Recent advances in the analysis of coordinated control of multi-agent systems in
the presence of external flow fields using Voronoi-like decompositions, along
with numerical techniques based on level sets will be utilized to solve multi-
agent pursuit-evasion and target assignment problems in a numerically efficient
manner. A novel reachability set inclusion property allows for the solution of a
large class of such pursuit-evasion problems with multiple agents, even under
the influence of external disturbances such as the drift field. The results of
this research will allow coordination strategies and distributed pursuit-evasion
protocols that go beyond the usual Euclidean metrics to establish proximity
relationships between the agents, including time, energy and fuel. Extensions to
stochastic environments will also be addressed, by leveraging new decomposition
methods to solve stochastic partial differential equations arising from a
stochastic formulation of level set propagation.