* 1662469
* Collaborative Project: Carolina Cyber Defense Scholarship
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Huiming Anna Yu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 3,482,744.00

The University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) and North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University (NCAT) propose to continue and
expand the Carolina Cyber Defender Scholarship Program supported by the
CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program. The project will prepare
highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government
workforce, and will have an immediate impact on the information assurance and
forensics capabilities of the federal workforce by developing well-trained
cybersecurity professionals. The project will support community college students
at the Forsyth Tech Community College (FTCC) through early mentoring and
advising activities before their transfer to either UNCC or NCAT through
established 2+2 pathways. Further, the proposed collaboration will help NCAT
obtain CAE-R designation in research and contribute towards graduating under-
represented cybersecurity researchers at the PhD
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves students in cybersecurity
research and hands-on activities guided by a large team of experienced faculty,
with sixteen current research initiatives and active funding from government
agencies and private corporations. The core expertise is focused on Secure
Software Development; Secure Network Administration; Cyber intelligence and
Analytics; and Cloud Security. The NSF supported Industry/University
Collaborative Research Center on Configuration Analytics and Automation provides
a rich environment where students work on cutting-edge cybersecurity challenges
and integrate with classroom education, which has generated many innovations,
including a U.S. patent awarded to a team of SFS students at UNC Charlotte. The
proposed program is designed to provide students with a solid foundation of
cybersecurity, exposure to real-world cybersecurity problems, and hands-on
experiences through competitions so that upon graduation they are well-prepared
to meet the challenges of defending the nation's critical infrastructure. NCAT
is implementing a new Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) approach
for teaching cybersecurity. POGIL is based on the process of guided inquiry - a
learning cycle of exploration, concept invention and application based on
carefully designed materials that students use to guide them to construct
cybersecurity knowledge.