* 1662615
* Understanding and Predicting Properties and Performance of Additively Manufactured Nickel-Based Superalloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Brian Gleeson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Additive manufacturing, or 3D Printing, offers tremendous opportunity for
efficient, custom manufacturing of critical parts. This processing approach can
be applied to Nickel-based superalloys, which are specialized materials that
have excellent high-temperature strength and good oxidation resistance, and
hence are used in a wide range of technologies and applications. This award
supports research to understand the fundamental relationships between processing
and performance which will allow development of optimal additive manufacturing
processes to fabricate nickel-based superalloy parts. An optimal process will
enable the additively manufactured nickel-based superalloys to have excellent
resistance to surface damage by high temperature oxidation while also retaining
superior strength. Additively manufactured alloys have potential application in
aerospace, automotive, biomedical, energy, and chemical industries. The results
from this research therefore have the potential to benefit the U.S. economy and
enhance manufacturing capabilities. Moreover, the research results will be
incorporated into curriculum enhancement, student training, industrial
collaboration, and an educational outreach program. Activities supported under
this award will contribute to recruiting students from underrepresented groups
to participate in research, and will positively impact higher education in
science and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
high strength and superior oxidation resistance of nickel-based superalloys make
these materials good candidates for high-temperature applications. Additively
manufactured nickel-based superalloys can possess mechanical properties
comparable to those produced by conventional manufacturing techniques, but their
resistance to high temperature oxidation is not comparable to conventionally
manufactured components. To enable the application of additive manufacturing for
high-temperature alloy fabrication, this research aims to understand and predict
the processing-microstructure-oxidation relationships for additive manufactured
nickel-based superalloys. The research team will fabricate nickel-based
superalloys in layered forms using the laser engineered net shaping additive
manufacturing technique, perform microstructural analysis on the alloys using
electron microscopy, predict the solidification microstructure of the additive
manufactured Ni alloys using numerical modeling techniques, and measure the
high-temperature oxidation performance of additive manufactured Ni alloys via
thermogravimetric analysis. This research will provide knowledge for
determination of a critical cooling rate below which the superior high-
temperature corrosion properties can be maintained in the additive manufactured
nickel-based superalloys.