* 1662305
* Collaborative Research: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Synthetic Microbial Consortia
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Kresimir Josic, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 605,145.00

Synthetic biology aims to engineer the genetic code of cells for practical
applications such as the production of biofuels and genetic therapies. However,
most synthetically engineered microbes act at the single-cell level. Such
organisms cannot coordinate their activity, limiting their ability to make large
impacts. In contrast, synthetic multicellular systems are composed of cells
designed to act in concert to achieve their goals. The coordinated behaviors of
such populations can be more complex, flexible and impactful than that of
uncoordinated collections of cells. One method of creating such multicellular
systems is through the engineering of synthetic microbial consortia -
conglomerations of various strains of genetically engineered microbes that work
together to achieve tasks. The coordinated activity of constituent strains
within a consortium can display emergent behaviors that are difficult to
engineer into a single strain. At their core, the individual strains in a
synthetic consortium are similar to other synthetically engineered microbes, as
their genetic sequences have been purposefully altered. Individual cells within
a synthetic consortium communicate with one another through intercellular
signaling pathways. Therefore, when designing synthetic microbial consortia, one
must take into account the continually changing spatial arrangement of cells and
strains within the greater population. However, the spatio-temporal dynamics of
intercellular signaling within microbial consortia are poorly understood,
limiting our ability to engineer large synthetic multicellular consortia. Here,
the PIs will develop mathematical approaches for describing the dynamics of
synthetic microbial consortia. To do so, they will use an interdisciplinary
approach that combines experimental synthetic biology, microfluidic engineering,
and mathematical biology. By examining increasingly complex consortia, the PIs
will develop a hierarchy of sophisticated mathematical and computational models.
The overall goal of this work is to better understand the complex, emergent
dynamics of synthetic microbial consortia, and to engineer consortia that
achieve specific goals by coordinating gene activity across space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of synthetic gene circuits have been
built within a single strain and operate at the single-cell level. Yet, to
realize the full potential of synthetic biology we need to be able to design
organisms that can interact with each other within and across different strains.
Synthetic microbial consortia can coordinate gene expression across a population
or specialize by assuming different responsibilities within the collective. This
allows consortia to be more efficient, and have a wider range of functions than
communities of non-interacting cells. However, the larger the consortium, the
harder it is to coordinate behaviors of the constituent cells. This is because
the limited diffusion of molecules in the extracellular medium makes it
difficult to coordinate the activity of gene networks interacting through
intercellular signals. To understand, rationally design, and control large
populations it is necessary to develop and validate mathematical and
computational models of gene network dynamics that describe large-scale
population-wide gene regulation. This is challenging because the dynamics of
microbial collectives is stochastic, nonlinear, spatially inhomogeneous, and
multi-scale. Models must account for the nonlinear dynamics of genetic circuits
within individual cells, the spatial diffusion of signaling molecules that
mediate interactions between cells, and the dynamics of multiple, co-mingled
bacterial populations whose spatial configurations change due to cellular growth
and division. In the proposed work, the PIs will develop such mathematical and
computational models of the spatio-temporal dynamics of synthetic microbial
consortia. To do so, they will use an interdisciplinary approach that combines
experimental synthetic biology, microfluidic engineering, and mathematical
biology. By examining increasingly complex consortia, the PIs will develop a
hierarchy of increasingly sophisticated mathematical and computational models.
The overall goal of this work is to better understand the complex, emergent
dynamics of synthetic microbial consortia, and to engineer consortia that
coordinate gene activity across space and time.