* 1662742
* Distributed Fault Diagnosis for Large-Scale Nonlinear Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Ioannis Raptis, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 176,259.00

Certain industrial and commercial processes or systems consist of increasingly
large and complex networks with a number of spatially distributed sub-systems
that continually exchange information between each other over a band-limited
communication network. Such complex large scale systems are vulnerable for
faults and a single malfunction in any sub-system component can cause the entire
system to fail or malfunction. This project is motivated by a growing need for a
solution that will allow reliable real-time monitoring and supervision of such
complex systems especially the safety-critical systems in particular. Current
fault detection and isolation technology relies on centralized information
processing based on collecting data from the sensors from across the entire
network. For complex and large scale networks this approach is not practical due
to computational complexity and communication bandwidth limitations. The
research will use a novel decentralized approach based on advanced mathematical
tools to formulate a solution framework that will enable real-time fault
detection and isolation in such large networks and will provide resiliency,
availability, and dependability. The project outcomes will impact broader
societal applications such as cyber-security, multi-robot systems, structural
and agricultural monitoring, pollution source localization, and healthcare
monitoring. The project not only has an educational plan for graduate students
but also a strong outreach program aimed at multidisciplinary groups of
undergraduate and under-represented students to engage them in a real-world
scientific experience that lies in the intersection of control systems,
communications and algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research
objective of this project is to establish an analytical and computational
foundation for distributed fault diagnosis algorithms of nonlinear, large-scale
stochastic systems. A distributed version of the particle filtering method will
serve as the foundation of the derived diagnostic algorithms. The particle
filtering technique is a highly suitable estimator for fault diagnosis since it
avoids linearity and Gaussian noise assumptions typically found in current
state-of-the-art. The target monolithic process is monitored by a network of
interconnected diagnostic nodes with local processing and communication
capabilities. The diagnostic network infers information of the entire system
based on partial observations and local information exchange between neighboring
nodes. The methodology conducts simultaneous real-time fault detection and
isolation, keeping the computational complexity to a minimum. The project will
establish a novel distributed fault detection methodology that takes advantage
of the decentralized architecture and computational strength of modern embedded
systems such as wireless sensor networks and multi-core processors. The specific
tasks include: derivation of a computationally efficient, centralized fault-
sensitive filter that eliminates the need for a bank of estimators to conduct
fault isolation; establishment of an analytical method for obtaining global
inference about the health of the system based on local observations and
information exchange, targeting monolithic processes with geographically sparse
subcomponents; and formulation of a distributed FD method that subdivides the
monitoring task to low-order, possibly interconnected, components targeted to
high-dimensional processes that cannot be accommodated by a central
configuration. This research combines previously disparate concepts from
estimation theory, fault-tolerance and combinatorics to provide a robust and
coherent framework for resilient, available and dependable systems.