* 1662835
* Biomechanical Regulation in Human Neural Induction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Yubing Sun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2021
* USD 408,000.00

Neural tube defects are among the most common birth defects and affect more than
500,000 infants worldwide each year. Neural tube defects can result in severe
health problems, including paralysis of legs, brain damage, and even death. To
develop novel approaches for the prevention and diagnosis of neural tube
defects, a fundamental understanding of the development of the central nervous
system is required. Using animal models, genetic and biochemical factors that
regulate neural induction, the first stage of the central nervous system
development, have been partially unraveled. Recent studies suggest that the cell
fate decision in the neural induction is regulated by biomechanical cues. This
mechanical mechanism is poorly understood and very difficult to study using
animal models. This research will build a series of novel cell culture tools to
investigate the genetic, biochemical and biomechanical interactions during
neural induction. These new tools will provide the ability to perform
experiments with lower costs and not using animal subjects to determine the
mechanical effects on neural tube formation. Fundamental data on how the
mechanical environment of the cells changes their behavior during neural tube
development will be collected. The principal investigator will engage K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students with diverse ethnic backgrounds and genders
with this interdisciplinary bioengineering research, and encourage them to
pursue science and engineering careers.

This project will test the hypothesis that mechanical interactions dictate
morphogenic events in neural development. Micropatterned cell culture
environments are known to cause human cells to mimic the spatial patterning of
neuroepithelial cells and neural plate border cells of the neural plate, and
thus will be used to model neural induction. Drug treatment and a novel device
which locally expands the cells located in the designated regions of
micropatterns to dynamically regulate cell shape and force will be used to
investigate how cell spatial patterning in the in vitro neural induction model
regulates cell shape and force. The mechanotransduction pathways in neural
induction will be investigated, focusing on the functional involvement of YAP,
BMP and Wnt signals. Lastly, a radial chemical gradient generation device
integrated with the micropatterning platform will be developed to interrogate
whether biochemical gradient can also induce cell spatial patterning during
neural induction, and whether cell shape and force act downstream of biochemical
gradient or work independently to determine lineage specification. Using
integrative microsystems with the capability to fine-tune chemical and
mechanical environment, this research provides for the first time a quantitative
analysis of the interactions between biochemical and biomechanical cues in
neural development.