* 1662554
* Investigation of Heterogeneous Deformation for Discontinuous Fiber Composites Through Combined Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Sangid, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 446,206.00

The application of compression / injection molded fiber-reinforced polymer
composites in automotive and aerospace applications has the potential to
decrease weight while maintaining desirable mechanical performance. These
discontinuous fiber reinforced composites offer an alternative to metals for
improved efficiency. Even though injection molding has the ease of manufacturing
benefit, this method, like all others, produces defects within the material.
Uncertainties about how the complex microstructure and defects influence the
mechanical response and integrity of discontinuous fiber-reinforced composites
have prolonged adoption of these materials for structural applications. Uses of
fiber-reinforced composites are subjected to large-scale testing programs,
necessary for certification, which lead to excessive time and cost resulting
from a trial-and-error approach to manufacturing. Computational models have the
ability to cut the time and cost necessary for certification, but first
confidence must exist in the model's predictions. In this research, measurements
from x-ray tomography during in situ loading provide knowledge of the initial
defects, neighboring microstructure, and strain states within the composite
materials contributing to material failure. These experiments provide the
foundational information and initial states to enable material strength models,
in order to predict the strength of these fiber-reinforced composites.
Additionally, the project efforts include a multi-objective approach to
outreach, in order to educate and mentor third through eighth grade and
undergraduate students and broadly disseminate the tools created during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the mechanical behavior of
composites will be studied through x-ray tomography scans during in situ
loading, followed by state-of-the-art image analysis to reconstruct, identify,
and track microstructural features within the composite. Through digital volume
correlation, the heterogeneous deformation of individual events such as fiber
rotation, pull-out, and breakage will be quantified with respect to the local
microstructure during deformation in 3D bulk material. The experiments will
provide the cornerstone for strength modeling by quantifying the irreversible
deformation with respect to microstructural features. Statistical modeling based
on modern probability theory, including rare event modeling using large
deviations, will be used to characterize the composites overall strength with
respect to the multivariate spatially varying distributions. A forward modeling
formulation will be used to design fiber-reinforced thermoplastics with superior
strength properties. These composites will be fabricated and characterized via a
similar in situ loading, x-ray tomography experiment to validate the predictive
nature of the model.