* 1662776
* Substrate Rigidity and Long Non-Coding RNA Expression: Role of TRPV4 Ion Channel
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Shaik Rahaman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 398,499.00

The stiffness of the organic material (the matrix) that cells grow on changes
numerous cellular functions including migration, proliferation, and
differentiation. Using a substrate that provides the correct mechanical cues to
cells is a promising approach for enhancing tissue repair/regeneration and
facilitating tissue-biomaterials integration. Long non-coding ribonucleic acids
(LncRNAs) are messenger molecules that are powerful regulators of cell
differentiation, development, and important during the progress of cancers.
Since matrix stiffness changes cell functions, the project will test whether
stiffness regulates LncRNA production. One important cell change that we think
is associated with LncRNA production is the epithelial-mesenchymal-transition
(EMT). This is an essential cellular process in development, tissue repair, scar
formation, and cancer development that changes whether the cells are quiescent
or migratory. This project will identify LncRNAs that are turned on or off in a
matrix stiffness-dependent manner under conditions that cause EMT. The overall
goal of this research program is to produce transformative contributions to the
current understanding of the role of matrix stiffness signals in LncRNA
expression and cell differentiation. By enhancing our understanding of how
matrix properties regulate gene expression in cells, results of this research
will have broad-ranging impacts in fields as diverse as cell-biomaterial
interactions, cell mechanotransduction, and molecular and cell biology of gene
regulation. The PI will will provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to work on independent projects, and will create a summer
course on 'Cell Biomechanics' in collaboration with the University of Maryland's
Upward Bound Math-Science program for high school students from underrepresented
groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to identify and
characterize matrix stiffness-sensitive LncRNAs using global expression
analysis, and to determine the role of TRPV4 in matrix stiffness-induced LncRNA
expression and EMT. Based on the preliminary data, the central hypothesis is
that matrix stiffness controls LncRNA expression, and thereby EMT in a manner
dependent on TRPV4. Two Specific Aims will test this hypothesis by utilizing
molecular strategies involving human and mouse normal primary cells, TRPV4 null
and congenic wild-type mice, LncRNA arrays, and in vitro and in vivo models of
the EMT. Specific Aim 1 will identify and characterize matrix stiffness-
sensitive LncRNAs using in vitro and in vivo model systems. Specific Aim 2 will
delineate the association between TRPV4, matrix stiffness-sensitive LncRNAs, and
modulation of EMT. When completed, we expect that the results of this study will
provide novel information and insight regarding the molecular mechanisms
mediating LncRNA expression and EMT.