* 1662816
* Advancing Knowledge on the Performance of Seismic Collectors in Steel Building Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Fleischman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 908,696.00

To safely survive an earthquake, and thereby protect its occupants, contents,
adjacent property, and passersby, a building structure must transfer the large
forces that develop during the earthquake from within the building down to the
foundation. Earthquake (lateral) forces are generated by the building weight
being accelerated horizontally, and thus most earthquake forces originate in the
building's heaviest element, i.e., its floors. A key structural element in the
force transfer path to the foundation are collectors, which are either special
reinforcement in the floor slab or special beams below the slab, that "collect"
the forces in the floor, and transfer them to the primary seismic force-
resisting vertical elements (frames, braces, or walls). The loss of collectors
or collector connections can be catastrophic, as evidenced by the collapse of
the CTV building in the 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand earthquake, which killed
115 people, the largest loss of life in this event, and to some extent the
collapse of nine parking garages in the 1994 Northridge, California earthquake.
Despite the critical nature of seismic collectors, no research effort, including
physical testing, has focused specifically on collectors, and knowledge of their
seismic performance is lacking. A challenge in understanding the performance of
seismic collectors is the complex nature of the floor system itself, a
complicated assemblage of many components of different materials (e.g., steel,
metal, and concrete) at different elevations, with multiple purposes and
uncertain force paths. Past seismic design methodologies for buildings may have
significantly underestimated the collector forces. This lack of knowledge
impacts not only new construction but also the assessment and retrofit of
existing, especially critical care, facilities in high seismic regions. This
condition also applies to older non-seismic compliant steel structures
nationwide, where inadequate or non-existent seismic collectors are often a
major concern. A better understanding of the performance of steel seismic
collectors is needed for safe and economical structures, both in the existing
building stock and for new construction. Further, the collector's unique role as
the critical link between the floor and the vertical elements provides an
opportunity for collectors from trying to "out-strength" the earthquake force to
instead serve as an innovative force-limiting element that protects the
structure from damage. The goals of this research are to: (1) advance knowledge
on the seismic performance, analysis, and design of collectors in steel
composite floor systems, and (2) develop new knowledge on the reliable seismic
performance and potential benefits of innovative collector concepts that can
lead to low-damage structural design. This project will support researchers and
graduate students from the University of Arizona, University of California, San
Diego, and Lehigh University. The project will benefit from working closely with
collaborators who are separately supported, i.e., a researcher and a
practitioner in New Zealand and an industry panel of seismic design engineers in
the United States. An outreach program will be conducted by the University of
Arizona with local K-8 schools identified demographically as possessing student
bodies of predominately underrepresented groups. The outreach program will
target third, fourth, and eighth grade students to include: (1) slides shows and
question and answer sessions on earthquake engineering, (2) career mentoring
from graduate and undergraduate students, and (3) hands-on science and math
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an integrated research program
will investigate the performance of seismic collectors for steel composite deck
structures using the experimental and computational simulation capabilities
afforded by the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI). The research will involve: (1) large-scale testing of
collector elements in a steel composite floor system at the NHERI experimental
facility at Lehigh University, (2) shake table testing of a 0.4-scale, single-
story, steel composite floor system at the NHERI shake table facility at the
University of California, San Diego, and (3) nonlinear analysis of steel
structure collector elements, details and surrounding regions under seismic
effects, and earthquake simulations of steel buildings under strong earthquakes.
The planned experiments on steel collectors, with realistic boundary conditions
and inertial forces, will be the first of its kind. New data products and
calibrated numerical models will be produced from large-scale physical testing.
Analytical models will be developed for the collectors and the collector
inertial force paths. Transfer of research results into practice will include:
(1) new concepts for low-damage structural design, (2) research-based design
recommendations, and (3) assessment and retrofit guidelines.