* 1662113
* Collaborative Research: Microfabrication and Self-Assembly of Shape-Changing Hydrogels with Chromonic Liquid Crystalline Order
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* M Ravi Shankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2022
* USD 155,203.00

Shape-changing liquid crystal hydrogels are soft, rubbery materials that can
perform mechanical work as "artificial" muscles, without motors, joints, or
control systems. They move spontaneously in response to slight temperature
changes, and can be designed to flex in different geometries. This collaborative
research effort focuses on developing techniques to engineer these materials to
produce novel devices such as self-cleaning surfaces. Like the cilia that sweep
contaminants from human lungs, surfaces will be coated with micro-scale hydrogel
structures that move as temperature fluctuates. These novel active coatings will
address a critical need for self-cleaning devices in healthcare applications,
and could prevent bacterial contamination that leads to frequent infections and
thousands of deaths annually in the United States. In addition, community
outreach efforts will be designed that engage young students and will help to
broaden the diversity of the technical workforce, and research internships will
help prepare high school students for advanced studies in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart, programmable materials that respond
mechanically to environmental stimuli are needed for smart biomedical devices.
Hydrogels with chromonic liquid crystalline order are of interest for such
applications because they morph anisotropically in response to biologically-
benign temperature changes, and because their actuation trajectory can be
programmed by patterning the material's molecular alignment. A key challenge is
to fabricate such complex actuators at length scales too small to access via 3D
printing and in shape profiles that are not flat films. This award supports
development of novel techniques for design and microfabrication of shape-
morphing hydrogels, using hierarchical patterning of molecular orientation
achieved by combining soft lithography and liquid crystal self-assembly. This
fundamental research will test the hypothesis that the shape of soft lithography
molds can be used to pattern molecular alignment in micro-scale structures made
of chromonic liquid crystal hydrogels, and that these aligned hydrogels can
undergo programmable actuation in response to biologically-benign temperature
changes. This processing approach will be used to create artificial cilia-like
structures. Experimental efforts will be closely coupled to theory/simulation at
two levels. First, the molecular order (nematic director) arising from surface
anchoring from the soft lithography mold and liquid crystal chirality will be
modeled. Second, nonlinear finite element elastodynamics simulations will be
used to model shape evolution of active hydrogel micro-devices with a given
director field as they transform under stimulus. This collaborative project
brings together a multidisciplinary team with complementary expertise in
responsive materials chemistry, materials modeling, and mechanical design.