* 1662434
* Mechanical Factors in Maturation of the Large Artery Wall
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jessica Wagenseil, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The large arteries are composed of smooth muscle cells surrounded by an
extracellular matrix that provides reversible elasticity. The arterial wall
distends when blood is pumped out as the heart contracts, and then returns the
stored energy as the heart relaxes, dampening the pulsatile pressure wave from
the heart and providing continuous blood flow to distal vessels. This dampening
behavior is known as the Windkessel function and when it is compromised, there
are negative effects on downstream organs such as the kidneys, heart, and brain.
Maturation of the arterial wall, specifically deposition of elastic fibers in
the extracellular matrix, is critical for the Windkessel function. The overall
goal of this research program is to determine how hemodynamic forces during
embryonic development drive elastic fiber assembly and overall arterial wall
maturation. The results of the research may be used to optimize clinical
interventions or tissue engineering protocols that encourage proper temporal and
spatial expression of extracellular matrix proteins and smooth muscle cell
differentiation necessary for the Windkessel function. To date, there are no
clinical interventions that can repair the Windkessel function in arterial
disease or replicate the Windkessel function in tissue-engineered arterial
replacements. The project will also have broader impacts through training
students in research methods, exposing students to the unique growth and
remodeling behavior of arteries, and introducing middle school students to
engineering topics.

It is generally accepted that mechanical factors, such as blood pressure and
flow, influence the form and function of developing arteries, but little of the
previous work has focused on the time period of arterial wall maturation.
However, the maturation process is critical for the arterial Windkessel
function. This project will use chick embryos to take advantage of the physical
manipulation of cardiovascular hemodynamics and imaging throughout development
that is uniquely possible in the chick. The role of hemodynamic forces in
arterial wall maturation will be investigated through quantification of normal
arterial wall maturation in the chick; quantification of altered arterial wall
maturation in the chick caused by changes in blood flow and/or pressure and the
resulting shear and circumferential wall stresses due to ligation of the
vitelline vein; and by integrating the experimental data into a biomechanical
model of arterial wall maturation that can be used for identifying critical
parameters in the maturation process that may be important for clinical
applications.