* 1662101
* Allosteric Interactions between Proteins on DNA and Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Prashant Purohit, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2022
* USD 329,095.00

The regulation of genes in cells is controlled by the binding/unbinding of
proteins on DNA. Often, the binding of one protein changes the binding affinity
of a different protein at a distant site on the DNA molecule. This phenomenon is
called "allostery"; it has been extensively studied in enzymes, but not through
DNA which has mostly been regarded as a rigid object that provides binding sites
for proteins. Allostery through DNA has been implicated in many previous
experimental studies, including in the binding of drug molecules, but it has not
been understood through a mechanical theory which regards DNA as an elastic (not
rigid) molecule that is locally deformed by the binding proteins. Similar
elastic deformations caused by proteins binding to lipid bilayers also result in
allosteric interactions that are responsible for cellular processes, such as,
endo- and exo-cytosis required for transport of materials into and out of cells.
Often, allostery also involves entropic forces between the proteins that are the
result of fluctuations caused by Brownian motion of the elastic media (DNA or
lipid membrane) separating them. The overall goal of this research program is to
quantitatively describe allosteric interactions between proteins on DNA and
lipid membranes through a mathematical theory that regards them as elastic
objects while accounting for their Brownian fluctuations. The model will
significantly improve understanding of how genes are regulated in living cells.
The project will include instruction of graduate students, mentoring of
undergraduates and masters students. The PI will also perform outreach through
organizing symposia and advanced schools in international conferences, and
working with the Penn MRSEC and the Nano Bio Interface Center for NanoDay and
other activities targeted at high school (minority) students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the fundamental
understanding of allosteric interactions through DNA, thus addressing long-
standing open questions in the field and providing quantitative explanations for
the wealth of experimental data on the subject. In particular, this project will
show how a birod model for DNA can describe the deformations caused by proteins
at a single base-pair level, and how the energy due to these deformations is
sinusoidally modulated due the helical nature of DNA. For proteins on lipid
membranes this project will show how self-assembly may be caused by the
competition of their elastic and entropic interactions. The new theoretical
approaches developed in this project will enable quantitative predictions of
allosteric interactions between proteins as a function of the mechanical
properties of the DNA or membrane and the boundary conditions imposed on them by
the binding proteins. The analysis performed in this project will place
allosteric interactions of proteins on DNA and lipid membranes in the broader
context of theories for the interactions of defects in elastic solids.