* 1662098
* Intrinsic Residual Stresses in 3D Woven Composites: Measurement, Modeling, and Mitigation of Their Impact on Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Igor Tsukrov, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2021
* USD 508,016.00

Three-dimensional (3D) woven composites are a relatively new class of materials
that show great promise as an alternative to the traditional metallic materials
used in the aerospace, renewable energy and automotive industries. The material
exhibits exciting properties including higher toughness, greatly enhanced
strength, and better fatigue resistance compared to the traditional laminated
composites. 3D woven composites can also be manufactured into large, complex
shapes that were previously unattainable using laminates. However, the
reinforcement complexity that is responsible for the improved properties
presents researchers and engineers with new challenges. It has been observed
that processing of some polymer matrix 3D woven composites results in
development of microcracks. The damage occurs as a result of high residual
stresses that develop during cooling of the composites after curing due to the
mismatch in the properties between the material constituents. This award
supports research to understand the fundamental scientific phenomena controlling
these residual stresses, their magnitudes and distributions within the
composites, and how these in turn affect material performance under cyclic
loading. The research will be incorporated into teaching environments including
classroom instruction, and direct involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in hands-on research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports novel study of intrinsic residual stresses in 3D woven polymer matrix
composites. The research calls for creation of new experimental and numerical
methods including the following: 1) incremental hole-drilling method combined
with electronic speckle pattern interferometry and Raman spectroscopy for
microscale residual stress estimation; 2) inverse finite element analysis method
to relate experimentally determined strains in the fibers and high resolution
displacement field measurements resulting from material removal (holes and
slits) to the spatially varying stress field in the composite; 3) evaluation of
modifications to the industry-standard curing cycle to lower the residual
stresses in the epoxy-matrix composites; 4) detailed mechanical testing of 3D
woven composites with known magnitudes of the residual stresses to determine
their effect on monotonic and cyclic mechanical properties the composites. The
project will advance the fundamental understanding of the development mechanisms
and strategies for mitigation of the residual stresses and related damage in 3D
woven composites, which will lead to improvements in technology of manufacturing
and better performance of these materials for a broad range of industrial
applications.