* 1662475
* Laser-Chemical Processing of Semiconductor Devices Based on Two-Dimensional Atomic Layer Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 403,940.00

Two-dimensional atomic layer semiconductors based on transition metal
dichalcogenides have attracted intense interest due to their exceptional
optoelectronic properties. Compared to silicon, they have substantial advantages
for flexible electronics as they are inherently flexible and their properties
are highly tunable. However, they have been very difficult to fabricate with
conventional methods because they are atomically thin and fragile. This award
investigates laser-assisted chemical processing to fabricate stable, high-
performance atomic layer semiconductor devices with ultra-high sensitivity and
extraordinary functionalities. It contributes a new technology for the
processing, functionalization and patterning of transition metal dichalcogenide-
based two-dimensional semiconductor devices. The chemical composition of the
two-dimensional semiconductor materials are modified and controlled at the
nanoscale by incorporating doping atoms from a selected gas source by means of
laser irradiation. This process is stable in ambient air and enables precise
tuning of the electronic properties of the material that is necessary for
fabricating high performance devices. This coupled materials synthesis,
processing and characterization methodology provides significant opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, including women and minorities, to gain
valuable research experiences and training in nanoscience and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to utilize
laser driven chemical processing for localized functionalization of two-
dimensional atomic layer semiconductors in a dual-beam processing system. The
process involves a laser beam irradiated at normal incidence to generate
vacancies and another synchronized ultraviolet nanosecond laser beam irradiated
parallel to the target specimen for dissociation of dopant precursor gas
molecules. In this manner, it is possible to decouple and control the mechanisms
involved in the doping and alloying processes. Near-field optical processing is
implemented to reduce feature resolution and generate highly defined nanoscale
patterns. Scalability and integration into functional devices are explored to
demonstrate large-scale nanomanufacturing. The first contribution entails stable
and spatially controlled writing of p- and n-doped domains in these materials,
followed by the deliberate tuning of the semiconductor band gap via laser
induced alloying. The second contribution is the direct nanopatterning of the
target materials using assembled microlens and nanowire elements integrated into
the laser CVD system. The research work is validated by fabricating transistors
having sharp nanoscale PN junctions and lateral tandem optoelectronic devices.
Finally, this project offers a robust and repeatable platform for discovering
entirely new and exciting physics of these exotic materials.