* 1662046
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Processing and Stability of Amorphous Dispersions for Advanced Pharmaceutical Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Sindee Simon, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2020
* USD 253,742.00

New processing methods will be developed to combat a major technological problem
of many pharmaceuticals, namely that of stability. Pharmaceuticals that are in
the molecularly-disordered, or amorphous, state are advantageous compared to
molecularly-ordered, or crystalline, forms of the same drug because the
amorphous material has higher solubility in water and higher bioavailability.
Consequently, lower doses can be used, decreasing both cost and the probability
of toxic side effects. However, amorphous pharmaceuticals are generally not
stable and can crystallize, albeit slowly, from the amorphous state. The aim of
this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) collaborative
research project is to gain a fundamental understanding of crystallization from
the amorphous state and to develop new processing strategies to make stable
forms of amorphous pharmaceuticals. The results are anticipated to facilitate
development of new amorphous drug formulations and to, thus, benefit the U.S.
economy and society. The graduate students on the project will be trained in
this multidisciplinary scientific research that involves manufacturing
engineering, amorphous and crystal physics, and pharmaceutical science. The
collaboration with the industrial partner will ensure commercial consideration
and provide a unique and broad-perspective training opportunity for the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental knowledge related to amorphous
pharmaceuticals will be pursued in this project. The crystallization or
devitrification from the glassy state will be addressed using as a framework,
the time-temperature-transformation diagram for crystallizing materials. The
research is based on the hypothesis that one can create more stable amorphous
pharmaceutical glasses if the nucleation nose of the diagram and the
crystallization nose are both avoided, with the former occurring at shorter
times. Flash scanning calorimetry will facilitate exploration of a wide range of
very high cooling rates or short isothermal crystallization/nucleation times in
order to establish the bounds of the potential for making specific compounds
into stable glasses. Spray drying, vapor deposition, and melt extrusion methods
will also be investigated as processing paths to create stable glassy
pharmaceuticals. Crystallization kinetics from the glassy state will be studied
by calorimetry, and the relationship to glassy dynamics, as obtained from
dielectric spectroscopy and viscoelastic methods, will be established.