* 1662544
* Role of Small Proteoglycans in the Structure and Biomechanics of Articular Cartilage
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* David Birk, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2020
* USD 349,454.00

Articular cartilage provides key biomechanical functions for joint motion, such
as load bearing, energy absorption and lubrication. Osteoarthritis, a chronic
disease causing cartilage dysfunction, affects more than 27 million Americans
and represents a significant societal burden. To restore cartilage function and
alleviate joint pain in osteoarthritis patients, it is necessary to understand
the structure and mechanical properties of healthy cartilage as a benchmark.
Cartilage is mainly composed of collagen and proteoglycan (protein attached with
negatively charged sugar chains). The direct contribution of collagen and the
large proteoglycan, aggrecan, to cartilage biomechanics is well understood.
Small proteoglycans do not contribute directly to cartilage biomechanical
properties; however, they may regulate the structural assembly of cartilage by
interacting with both collagen and aggrecan. Combining novel nanotechnology and
gene modification tools, this project aims to determine how the most abundant
small proteoglycan in cartilage, decorin, modifies the structure and
biomechanics of cartilage. The outcomes will have a broader impact by
identifying a new molecular mechanism that governs cartilage structural
integrity, which can enable the development of novel strategies for restoring
cartilage function and attenuating cartilage degradation in osteoarthritis. New
outreach programs will be established to increase the participation of minority
students in STEM education and career paths. Specific outreach activities
include workshops for Philadelphia inner city high school teachers and students,
as well as the development of science museum exhibition displays.

The cartilage of decorin knockout mice develops substantially reduced aggrecan
content and impaired mechanical properties. This project will determine whether
decorin governs the structural assembly of aggrecan. We hypothesize that decorin
regulates the presence of aggrecan in cartilage through interacting with
aggrecan in the extracellular matrix, and through influencing the synthesis of
aggrecan by chondrocytes. This hypothesis will be tested at a hierarchy of
length scales. First, at the molecular level, adhesion between decorin and
aggrecan will be quantified by atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based molecular
force spectroscopy. Second, at the cellular level, the synthesis and mechanics
of aggrecan by normal and decorin knockout chondrocytes will be evaluated by
biochemical assays and AFM single cell nanoindentation. Lastly, at the tissue
level, the expression of decorin will be ablated at different phases of post-
natal joint growth using our novel inducible decorin-knockout murine model. The
resulting changes in cartilage biomechanics, including both elastic and
poroviscoelastic properties, will be evaluated by our custom-built
nanorheometer. In conclusion, this project will elucidate how the small
proteoglycan, decorin, regulates the aggrecan assembly in cartilage, thereby
ensuring cartilage structural integrity and proper biomechanical functions