* 1662139
* Collaborative Research:  Statistical Methods for RNA-seq Based Transcriptomic Analysis of Macrophage Function in Spinal Cord Injury
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Jianqing Fan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

Spinal cord injury causes functional impairment via the primary mechanical
injury, followed by subsequent secondary injury mechanisms at cellular levels.
Most research has focused on understanding the mechanisms of secondary injury
since it corresponds to functional deficits. Inflammation is a principal
mediator of the secondary injury cascade, with macrophages contributing
profoundly to the secondary injury. Macrophages, one of the most important type
of immune cells, migrate towards the injured spinal cord and engulf myelin
debris that is generated at injury onset to form myelin-laden macrophages. In
this project, the investigators will utilize RNA sequencing, a powerful method
for analyzing global gene expression levels, and develop new statistical
approaches to address biological questions related to how myelin-laden
macrophages amplify inflammatory response and promote secondary injury. These
studies will help researchers understand molecular mechanisms for spinal cord
injury and shed new light on the treatment by targeting myelin-laden
macrophages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer important
questions regarding the mechanisms of secondary injury through the integration
of new statistical methods and cutting-edge biological techniques. The central
hypothesis is that myelin-laden macrophages in the injured spinal cord promote a
local pathologic process and distal organ dysfunction. Specifically, the
investigators will determine their molecular patterns and functions, study
whether myelin-laden macrophages released extracellular vesicles (exosomes)
carry microRNAs from myelin debris to recipient cells and then regulate their
functions, and investigate whether these exosomes can enter the bloodstream and
contribute to systemic inflammatory response syndrome and distal organ
dysfunction. New statistical tools will be developed to analyze large datasets
of microRNA sequencing and mRNA sequencing from multiple cell types and time
points. In particular, novel robust statistical techniques are proposed to
answer the following important questions: how to uniformly and robustly estimate
large-scale gene expressions; how to compare them reliably across multiple
phenotypes and measured across different platforms; how to accurately identify
microRNAs' mRNA targets via sparse regression; how to use quantitative tools for
studies of molecular mechanisms and comparisons of gene expression networks; how
to control false discovery rate under general dependence; how to perform robust
variable selection; how to estimate the size of spurious correlations. The
proposed methods will be applied to newly collected, as well as existing data to
answer the biological questions related to spinal cord injury. The project will
integrate research and education by involving undergraduates, graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows, creating new datasets, and developing publicly
available software. Students from underrepresented groups will be trained as
part of this project. The results will be disseminated broadly through
presentations at seminars, conferences, and professional association meetings.