* 1662735
* Microfluidic Synthesis of Nanoparticles for Cell Reprogramming
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,995.00

During normal life, the cells in different parts of the body use their genetic
legacy to perform tasks that create human health. During illnesses certain cells
may not properly perform these tasks. As appropriate and optimal therapies may
vary among patients due to their own genome difference, it would be very helpful
to use the patient's own cells to correctly perform their designated tasks. This
could become feasible after the identity of a cell is successfully changed from
one type to another by proper genetic programming. Ground-breaking progress was
made in this field recently by converting adult skin cells into other desirable
cell types. Such cell reprogramming methods are more acceptable because the
cells that are modified come from the patient and the changes cannot be
transmitted to others or to offspring. Unfortunately, current delivery tools for
cell reprogramming are very slow and too inefficient to use in therapy. This
award investigates a new microfluidic approach to synthesize and manufacture
novel polymeric nanoparticles for efficient gene delivery. With its continuous
flow operation, this novel approach produces such gene carriers in large
quantities and at low cost. Moreover, the high-quality nanoparticles that are
generated could significantly increase the success rate of cell reprogramming to
produce desired types of a patient's cells with high yield. Its
nanomanufacturing potential could accelerate future clinical and pharmaceutical
uses of such patient-matched cells. This research will also train graduate
students in multidisciplinary skills in science and engineering. The results
will be integrated into engineering courses to inspire, educate, and retain
undergraduate and minority students through hands-on opportunities in bio- and
nanomanufacturing, cell therapy, chemistry, characterization, and process
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although sustained cell reprogramming is
feasible, the low success rate is tied to its transient transfection behavior,
namely, poor delivery efficiency of the key transcription factors and low cell
survival to allow for repeated delivery, and the lack of appropriate
manufacturing process in the production of desired gene carriers and
reprogrammed cells. This research project studies a hybrid field microfluidic
process to produce homogeneous polyplex nanoparticles for better protection,
condensation, and release of genetic probes by limiting the complexation at the
fluid interface. Gold nanoparticle carriers help fix the internalized polymer
molecules after the dissociation of the polyplex to reduce cytotoxicity. In
addition, electroporation treatment promotes transport of genetic material to
the nucleus. The combination ensures increased delivery efficiency and the
allowance for repeated transfection to sustain the expression of the needed
reprogramming factors. The hybrid microfluidic system?s flow operation allows
continuous production of gene carriers and later patient-matched cell lines with
high throughput and good quality control. The project's success provides not
only a powerful manufacturing route in nanoprobe synthesis, but also an
effective tool for potential synergy of diagnosis and therapeutics to advance
current gene/drug delivery and cell-based bio-manufacturing processes.