* 1662329
* Molecular-scale Breaking due to Repeated Loading in Molecular Shuttles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Henry Hess, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 476,393.00

The rate at which machines degrade with use has a large impact on their value.
For example, modern cars last significantly longer than cars built only thirty
years ago due to diligent research into failure modes and subsequent design
improvements. Nanotechnology has progressed so that we can successfully build
nanomachines such as 'molecular shuttles': nanoscale transport systems powered
by biomolecular motors capable of delivering molecular cargo. The goal of this
project is to advance our understanding of the degradation mechanisms limiting
the lifetime of these molecular shuttles. The PIs research showed that 'mileage'
matters - for every thousandth of an inch of distance moved, the molecular
shuttle shrank a few nanometers in length. In this research project, the PIs
will investigate if the course matters as well, and let the molecular shuttles
travel through increasingly curvy microfabricated tracks which puts mechanical
stress on their structure and should cause them to break at increasing
frequencies. These experiments will improve understanding of degradation
mechanisms for nanomachines in general, enable improvement of the design of our
'molecular shuttles', and may even provide insights into how biological
nanomachines degrade and age. The project will integrate undergraduate
researchers and high school students, and the new insights will be integrated
into a new nanobiotechnology course. Outreach activities include lab activities
and lectures as part of the 'Introduction to Nanotechnology' summer course for
underrepresented high school students,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
guided by two hypotheses. Firstly, it is our hypothesis that breaking events
will occur stochastically at average rates determined by mechanochemical
principles. Secondly, it is our hypothesis that the overall degradation of
molecular shuttles in engineered environments can be understood as a combination
of breaking and shortening of the microtubule component. To test these
hypotheses, we will observe microtubules moved by kinesin motors (our basic
'molecular shuttle') through microfabricated guiding structures which exert a
defined amount of constant and cyclic strain on the microtubule. The outcome of
the project will be a potentially transformational broadening of our perspective
from the physics-inspired force spectroscopy of intermolecular bonds (measuring
e.g. rupture forces) to an engineering-inspired view of an accumulation of
damage as result of mechanical stress in nanomachines, which may ultimately
result in fracture. More immediately, the results of the project will help the
community to overcome the limited lifetime roadblock in the design of
nanodevices based on biomolecular motors.