* 1662523
* Learning Optimal Control Using Forward Backward Stochastic Differential Equations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 07/31/2020
* USD 349,539.00

Stochastic systems are those whose behavior is random and cannot be predicted
accurately but can be analyzed statistically. Stochastic optimal control has a
wide range of applications in robotics, space exploration, autonomous systems,
finance, computational neuroscience and computational biology. Despite the long
history of stochastic optimal control theory, existing methodologies suffer from
limitations related to assumptions on the structure of the dynamics, the form of
cost functions, and connections between control strategies and random
disturbances. These assumptions have restricted the applicability of this
control method to special classes of problems that typically have simpler
descriptions. This project will expand the applicability of stochastic optimal
control to a broader class of stochastic optimization problems. The educational
benefits of this project involve development of a new course and instructional
materials for advanced undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this research aims to develop novel and
scalable stochastic control algorithms using the theory of forward-backward
stochastic differential equation and their connections to probabilistic
representations of solutions of backward nonlinear partial differential
equations. To aid future research and adoption of this work into these domains,
the code, data, and results developed during the course of this project will be
distributed freely to the scientific community. The PIs plan is to integrate
powerful methods on adaptive importance sampling and forward-backward stochastic
differential equations to develop scalable iterative stochastic control
algorithms. In addition, this research project plans to make generalizations and
extensions of the theory of forward-backward stochastic differential equations
to problems such as stochastic differential games, control-constrained and bang-
bang stochastic control and stochastic control under non- smooth cost functions.
The work on these generalizations involves the development of algorithms which,
will further expand the applicability of stochastic optimal control into new
domains and new tasks. The educational plan of this research project has several
goals designed to engage undergraduate and graduate students in research and
inspire students to work on challenging problems at the intersection of
stochastic control and statistics. The educational benefits involve development
of a new course and instructional materials for advanced undergraduate and
graduate students.