* 1662485
* Novel Framework for Incorporating Consumer Preferences and Public Goals into Engineering Design Applied to Energy Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Nordica MacCarty, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 01/31/2022
* USD 402,867.00

What drives consumers to choose to adopt products that protect common pool
resources rather than continuing with current inefficient and/or polluting
methods? And how can designers create products that encourage adoption despite
social and financial barriers? Understanding and modeling of user choice and
behavior is common in engineering design efforts to predict market share, user
preference, and optimal design for consumer products where purchase motivation
is plentiful. Yet these valuable tools are less commonly, and notably less
easily, applied to the design of products where user uptake is key to meeting
public social, environmental, economic, and security goals. For example, smart
and efficient appliances and vehicles can provide significant energy savings but
may offer reduced convenience and be costly to the user. Yet these technologies
will only have an impact if they are desirable and affordable enough to
encourage adoption by a large fraction of users, and simultaneously perform well
enough to meet the public goals of society at large. This delicate balance often
is difficult to achieve due to the complex system of constraints, interrelated
variables, conflicting objectives, and diverse market segments. The findings of
this study will help designers to develop engineered products that are likely to
achieve consumer adoption levels required to realize public goals. This project
also will engage students through a unique course on rural household energy and
related study-abroad opportunities. The course will cover issues addressed in
this research and provide students experience with fieldwork techniques needed
to understand rural and underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to create and demonstrate a modeling framework
that enables a more rigorous integration of consumer preference and public goal
considerations into engineering design decisions. This will be achieved through
a novel integration of techniques from user-centered design, computational
social sciences, environmental psychology, usage context-based design, and
agent-based modeling. The general framework will be demonstrated extensively in
the context of designing household energy-related technologies. A
multidisciplinary team of collaborators will combine new and existing real-world
data with models of the current state of the user environment, technological
options, potential actions and strategies, social norms, and utility functions
to predict the consumer attitude, choice, and adoption behavior. This adoption
model will be integrated into an existing systems-level model developed by the
PI with prior NSF support to predict the outcomes of technological strategies in
terms of a holistic set of objectives. Simulation results will inform
engineering designers about the complex outcomes generated by various strategies
across a community energy system.