* 1662250
* Collaborative Research: Heart Dynamics: Bifurcation Estimation and Alternans conTrol (HeartBEAT)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Alena Talkachova, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2021
* USD 339,319.00

This project will combine methods from the mathematical fields of dynamical
systems theory and time-series analysis to understand and predict the cardiac
behavior called "alternans." Alternans is a type of irregular heart rhythm,
characterized by alternating strong and weak beats. Alternans is important
because it is known to be a precursor to another type of abnormal cardiac
behavior called ventricular fibrillation, which can lead to death from sudden
cardiac arrest (SCA). The project will begin by creating mathematical models of
a single heart muscle fiber, which will then be extended to represent large
regions of heart muscle. The mathematical models will be used to produce novel
model-free, data-driven schemes to first predict the onset of alternans, and
then to control or prevent it. The mathematical results will be validated in
experimental studies on rabbit hearts. Results of this project will be valuable
in predicting and preventing SCA, which is the leading cause of death in the
industrialized world. At present, ventricular fibrillation is treated with a
disruptive electrical current, in the hopes that the heart will thereafter
resume a normal rhythm. Currently, patients known to be at risk for ventricular
fibrillation may have an electrical device implanted in their chest to apply
this disruptive current directly to the heart. Knowledge gained from this
project could lead to devices that instead gently steer the heart away from
dangerous arrhythmias, before life-threatening events can occur. This project
also includes outreach activities, to introduce high school students in
Minnesota and Tennessee to cardiac electrophysiology. In addition to encouraging
students to pursue interests in biomedical engineering, these programs will
increase awareness of the importance of cardiac dynamics in everyday
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiac alternans, a recognized harbinger of sudden
cardiac arrest, manifests as beat-to-beat alternation in action potential
duration at the cellular level, or in electrocardiogram morphology at the whole-
heart level. Current approaches to predict cardiac alternans based on
restitution properties of the heart are either too simple to be valid or too
complex to be useful. This project will develop a novel, practical method to
estimate rhythm stability directly from action-potential measurements without
the need for a restitution hypothesis and complex pacing protocols.
Specifically, based on dynamical systems theory, the method estimates the
dominant eigenvalues of cardiac oscillations using robust statistical
approaches. To simulate heart rate variability, the method will be evaluated
under various pacing protocols. Feedback control techniques based on linear
stability analysis have been exploited to suppress alternans in isolated cardiac
myocytes and fibers. This project will carry out extensive bifurcation and
stability analyses to understand the controllability issues of alternans in
extended tissue, and to create novel control schemes to prevent alternans in
extended regions of cardiac tissue. These new insights into the bifurcation and
control mechanisms of alternans may have a broader social impact through its
medical implications on fibrillation. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students in a multidisciplinary environment, and will expose high
school teachers and students to nonlinear thinking and quantitative reasoning of
cardiac dynamics. More than 65 percent of Americans do not understand sudden
cardiac arrest and underestimate its seriousness. The activities in outreach,
education, and research dissemination in this project will advance the awareness
of sudden cardiac arrest.