* 1662429
* Biomechanical Simulations of Progressing Osteoarthritis to Advance Understanding and Therapies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Pierce, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 407,950.00

The objective of this project is to understand the influence of intra-tissue
stress distributions on the progression of osteoarthritis (OA) in human
cartilage by leveraging new mechanical and imaging experiments, novel
simulations of evolving virtual human cartilage in vivo, and multiple images of
the knee from the NIH-funded Osteoarthritis Initiative (OAI) database. OA is a
disease of the synovial joint, with degeneration and loss of articular cartilage
as one hallmark change. Mechanical stresses play a key role in the destructive
evolution of the disease. Both overloading (e.g. trauma) and reduced loading
(e.g. immobilization) of cartilage induce molecular and microstructural changes
that lead to mechanical softening, fibrillation, and erosion. Crucially, there
is currently no direct method to correlate spatially resolved intra-tissue
stresses with progression of OA in individual patients. Events with the
Connecticut Science Center's Women in Science Initiative will spark STEM
interest in female middle school students. High school, undergraduate and
graduate students will perform new experiments and establish
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary hypothesis is that intra-tissue
stresses (e.g. maximum shear stresses) will more strongly correlate with
structurally defined OA progression measured by changes in both the network of
collagen fibers (organization and density) and gross tissue volume, than with
corresponding strains. Objective 1 establishes chemo-biomechanical constitutive
relations for evolving OA ex vivo by measuring the large-shear stress-strain
response of OA human cartilage; imaging the corresponding cell viability,
composition, and microstructure; establishing functions describing the turnover
of structurally significant cartilage constituents; and incorporating these
within a custom simulation framework. Objective 2 establishes and validates
simulations of evolving virtual human cartilage in vivo by establishing patient-
specific models using the OAI data; training simulations to produce measured
time-course outcomes; performing sensitivity and statistical analyses; and
performing validation studies using additional OAI patients. The studies will
link physical activity, and the resulting mechanical stimuli, to progression of
OA and loss of cartilage function.