* 1662288
* Electromechanics of Bioinspired Switchable-Surface Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jincheng Du, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 398,335.00

Geckos can rapidly turn on and off the adhesive force of their feet and keep
them from fouling during running on dusty walls, while some desert beetles can
use their forewings to collect drinking water from fog. Mimicking these natural
surfaces could result in novel materials with unique capabilities for numerous
applications. In this project, an integrated experimental and computational
approach will synthetically reproduce the desired biological features to create
a new class of nanocomposites with tunable stickiness and self-cleaning
characteristics. The anticipated long-term research outcome is a technical
platform for developing the next generation of engineered materials, potentially
useful for self-cleaning, sensing, nano-manipulation and assembly, and water
harvesting in extremely arid regions, to mention a few. This research involves
several disciplines including mechanics, materials science, biology, and
nanotechnology. The multi-disciplinary platform will provide opportunities for
underrepresented groups to participate in advanced research. Similarly,
undergraduate research fellowships will be supported to provide exposure to
engineering students to wide-ranging education and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, new biomimetic wrinkle graphene-
based nanocomposites with tunable adhesion and self-cleaning capabilities will
be fabricated by mimicking the unique features of the biological structures
found on gecko footpads and beetle forewings. A multiscale atomistic and
micromechanics modeling approach will be used to interpret experimental results
and to address how the biomimetic features can be translated into enhanced
switchability, self-cleaning, and controlled release capabilities. The adhesive
force and deformations will be measured with advanced microscopy tools and high-
rate image capture, and a physics-based modeling approach will be developed to
understand electromechanics of the biomimetic thin films. The modeling and
experiments will be integrated to link the nanoscale phenomena to macroscopic
performance. The results of this research will provide novel smart materials and
a fundamental understanding of switching mechanisms for the design and
development of the materials with unique performance features of practical
significance.