* 1662284
* Micro-Macro Scale Investigations to Study Osteocyte Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Sarah Dallas, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,010.00

Osteoporosis is a disease of low bone mass and increased risk of fracture.
Exercise can increase bone size and help protect against fractures. This project
aims to improve understanding of how bone cells detect bone loading. The bone
cell thought to be the load detector is called the "osteocyte". Osteocytes
communicate with each other and to other cells on the surface of the bone to
change bone size to match the loads on the bone. The goal of the work is to
determine how bone deformation and fluid flow are detected and changed into a
chemical signal that the cell uses to communicate to other cells. Mechanical
loading will be related to the biological response of the cell using advanced
cell biological methods. The outcomes of this research will determine the role
of solid-fluid interaction mechanics in the activation of bone formation to help
explain and mitigate age related bone loss. The project will offer local high
school students, especially female students, one day research camps and
encourage them to pursue engineering and medical education. Undergraduate
students will work on various aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective is to gain a better understanding of the role of multiscale mechanics
- from macro-scale bone strains to micro-scale strains (local bone matrix and
lacunar strain and the corresponding fluid flow shear stress on the cell
membrane) in mechanotransduction at the osteocyte cellular level. We plan to
study these effects using the activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway in osteocytes as a readout for their response to loading. This pathway
is known to be important in mediating load related bone formation. The methods
include experimental studies using axial loading experiments on mouse whole
forearm, novel microscale axial loading experiments on murine ulna sections
using the MicroXCT-200 (Carl Zeiss/Xradia) to determine lacunar strains. Newly
developed multiplexed 3D confocal microscopy techniques will be used for 3D
modelling of osteocytes and their lacunar fluid space for fluid-structure
interaction FE models.