* 1662211
* Theoretical Studies in Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Stuart Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 423,000.00

The LIGO-VIRGO Scientific Collaboration recently reported the first two direct
detections of gravitational wave (GW) signals and demonstrated that these events
(named GW150914 and GW151226) were produced by the inspiral and coalescence of
binary black holes. This breakthrough marks the beginning of the era of GW
astronomy. They also provide the strongest evidence yet that Einstein's theory
of general relativity (GR) is the correct theory of gravity and that binary and
spinning black holes exist with the properties prescribed by GR. The research
funded within this project spans several problems involving GR, the generation
of GWs, relativistic hydrodynamics (fluid flow in strong gravitational fields
and moving at the speed of light)) and relativistic magnetohydrodynamics (fluid
flow in magnetic fields). A common thread uniting the different theoretical
topics is the crucial role of gravitation, especially relativistic gravitation.
Compact objects (black holes, neutron stars and white dwarfs) provide the
principal forum, and the dynamics of matter in a strong gravitational field is a
major theme. Some of the topics for investigation include the inspiral and
coalescence of compact binaries (binary black holes, binary neutron stars and
binary black hole--neutron stars), the generation of GWs from compact binaries
and other promising astrophysical sources and the electromagnetic signals that
may accompany them (e.g., gamma-ray bursts), gravitational collapse,
circumbinary disks around merging supermassive black holes in the cores of
galaxies and quasars, and the profile and observable consequences of dark matter
(the major form of matter in the universe and unlike normal atoms and their
constituents) around supermassive black holes in galaxy cores, including the
Milky Way. The results have important implications for astronomical
observations, including those planned for GW interferometers, such as the
Advanced LIGO/VIRGO network, GEO, KAGRA, the PTAs and LISA, and transient-event
electromagnetic detectors, such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
(LSST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of these topics represent long-standing,
fundamental problems in theoretical physics requiring large-scale computation
for solution. Hence the approach involves to a significant degree large-scale
simulations on supercomputers, in addition to analytical modeling. The key tool
will be our robust and well-tested Illinois general relativistic,
magnetohydrodynamic (GRMHD) code. The simulations solve Einstein's field
equations of GR for gravity coupled to the equations of relativistic MHD for the
fluid and Maxwell's equations for the electromagnetic fields. These equations
constitute highly nonlinear, coupled partial differential equations in 3+1
dimensions that we solve by finite-differencing. The Illinois GRMHD code employs
the BSSN technique with moving puncture gauge conditions to solve the field
equations and a high-resolution, shock capturing scheme for the MHD. The
problems to be tackled comprise both initial value and evolution computations
and treat vacuum spacetimes containing black holes, as well as spacetimes
containing realistic matter sources, magnetic fields and both electromagnetic
and neutrino radiation ("multimessenger astronomy").