* 1662705
* Catalytic asymmetric oxidation reactions by chiral-supported bimetallic nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Duy Hua, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 401,450.00

Catalytic Asymmetric Oxidation Reactions by Chiral-Supported Bimetallic
Nanoclusters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of organic molecules important
in medicine from inexpensive raw materials is important for reducing cost and
improving environmental sustainability. In this project, Dr. Hua of Kansas State
University is developing a new catalytic process using oxygen from air to
prepare these valuable molecules. This process is also making especially
important chiral molecules, which are three-dimensional structures that exist as
mirror images. Often, only one of the mirror image structures has the biological
activity required for the medical application. The project is also involving
outreach activities to students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Specifically, Dr. Hua's laboratory is training
graduate and undergraduate students, and is providing summer research
internships for undergraduates and high school seniors. Attention is being paid
to attracting women and minority students to STEM careers, and stimulating their
interest by enabling hands-on research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Hua
of Kansas State University is developing a new chiral catalyst system involving
nanoclusters such as palladium/gold or copper/gold stabilized by chiral-
substituted poly-N-vinylpyrollidinones (CSPVPs) for the catalytic asymmetric
oxidation of polyols, alkenes, and alkanes. Hua's laboratory is investigating
the reaction mechanism and possible reactive site of the nanoclusters-polymer.
Various analytical techniques including transmission electron microscopy, energy
dispersive X-ray microanalysis, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy are being
used for characterization. Optimization of the enantioselectivity by
modification of CSPVP and nanoclusters is being investigated. The Hua group is
also studying the scope of the catalytic oxidation reactions, with application
to the oxidation of medium-sized molecules and the total syntheses of bioactive
molecules. Total synthesis targets include fabianine, cyperanic acid,
cyperolone, and clavulone I, while the regioselective C-H oxidation targets
comprise ambroxide, artemisinin, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor inhibitor,
memantine, caryophyllene, and dehydroabietyl amine. These reactions are
considered to be green, since catalytic amounts of environmentally benign CSPVPs
and nanoclusters derived from copper, palladium, gold, or iron are used. Dr. Hua
is actively involved in STEM outreach programs by focusing on recruitment of
women and underrepresented minorities into the STEM fields and providing summer
internships for undergraduates from small colleges and nearby high school
seniors, which support the project's broader impacts.