* 1662487
* Establishing Scholarship for Service Program at University of Hawaii at Manoa
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2024
* Martha Crosby, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 4,246,329.00

This project seeks to establish a new CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) to prepare 24 highly-
qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the federal, state, local,
or tribal government workforce. The program will be regionally focused, seeking
to draw students from the local ecosystem and place them in local jobs, and will
be built on an existing, strong cybersecurity research and educational program
at UHM. Currently, there is no SFS program in the state of Hawaii, a state with
a large presence of government and military agencies, and a severe shortage of
cybersecurity professionals. The proposed program will provide multiple career
paths for students within the state. The SFS team will collaborate with all 10
UH campuses, local community colleges, and K-12 institutions. UHM faculty will
continue joint efforts with the National Security Agency (NSA) Hawaii, the US
Coast Guard, the Hawaii National Guard, and the US Pacific Command (PACOM)
through activities such as the UH Cyber Security Education Summit, NSA Hawaii
Education Fairs, and Hawaii GenCyber Camps. The team will work with the Native
Hawaiian Science and Engineering Mentorship Program (NHSEMP) and Society of
Women Engineers (SWE) to recruit minority and women students. The project will
develop an SFS community that emphasizes individual mentorship across the entire
academic experience at UHM, including career development, research advising, as
well as the job placement. The SFS Situation Room will be set up for SFS
scholars to stimulate interaction with faculty and other student groups, and to
organize various learning activities. The proposed program will offer individual
mentorship; involve students in security research in collaboration with
government and industry to gain practical experience; provide customized study
plans; facilitate internship opportunities; and help develop students' career
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Adaptive Security and Economics Laboratory
serves to bond the team together in various cybersecurity research and
educational activities. The center and the university are designated as a
DHS/NSA Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research. UHM is a
Research I University and supports advanced security research on many critical
topics including: cryptography, network security, privacy, big data security,
IoT security, mobile and wireless security, smart grid security, cloud security,
computer software and web security, and hardware security. UHM has a
comprehensive cybersecurity curriculum at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels, including 14 cybersecurity courses and two bachelor's degree programs
with a Security Science Focus. The students have been participating in national
and state level cybersecurity activities, including the Collegiate Cyber Defense
Competition (CCDC), National Maritime Cybersecurity Exercise, Annual Pooihe
Cyber Defense exercise, GenCyber, and Cyber Patriot. The team has long term
collaborations with government agencies such as NSA Hawaii, US Coast Guard,
Hawaii National Guard and PACOM. The team will build a dedicated management
framework with associated tools to support project evaluation.