* 1663680
* EAGER: The evolution of anti-predator defenses in tortoise beetles (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae: Cassidinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Caroline Chaboo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2018
* USD 147,426.00

The evolutionary hypothesis of 'escape and radiation' posits that when a species
develops a novel defense against its enemies (predators or parasites) this
results in more rapid speciation, at least until the enemy species (or new enemy
species) adapt to circumvent this defense. The evolution of yet another novel
defensive trait resets the cycle anew, which ultimately results in the
accumulation of species over evolutionary time. It has been suggested that this
evolutionary processes is ubiquitous and can be found not only in plant-
herbivore interactions but also in many other ecological associations, where it
may likewise foster creation of new biodiversity over evolutionary time. Despite
the theoretical importance of this hypothesis, evidence is limited that novel
defense traits spurs the diversification of new species. This study will test
this hypothesis using a species rich group of plant-eating beetles and an
innovative set of field bioassay methods. The work will address whether novel
defensive traits are narrow or broad in efficiency against predators, and
whether the evolution of novel defense traits is correlated with increased rates
of speciation. This project and the novel data it will produce, promise to
transform systematic study of plant-insect interactions. Understanding defense
trait evolution can reveal important and novel information about speciation
patterns in insects, which can be important for agriculture, invasive species
control, and sustaining biodiversity. This project will also support the
research training of three undergraduates, and data, specimens, and images will
be disseminated broadly via publicly accessible
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an innovative study
that will combine phylogenetics, chemical ecology, and bioassay performance
experiments in an integrated approach that will enable the PIs to detect: (i)
increased prey speciation rates due to the evolution of novel or more potent
defensive traits; and (ii) whether the mechanism of diversification via novel
defense acquisition is associated with broad-spectrum defenses, or with narrow,
highly specific anti-predator adaptations. This study will significantly advance
our understanding of the macroevolutionary processes that underlie the
relationship between novel defensive trait evolution and prey diversification
and will provide a suite of research tools for future investigations