* 1663101
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Supply Prepositioning for Emergency Preparedness by Social Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rajan Batta, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 393,965.00

Foreseen disasters, such as hurricanes, snowstorms and droughts, can be detected
several days prior to their landfall. To ameliorate the consequences of these
disasters, humanitarian and governmental agencies can utilize forecast
information to conduct preparedness activities. However, one unresolved
challenge is to obtain accurate estimation of spatial-temporal heterogeneous
supply demand for supply prepositioning. To tackle this challenge, this research
plans an approach which integrates data from social media and simulation to
predict demand for humanitarian supplies. Resulting models and prototype tools
are expected to contribute to support for improving communication with the
public, for optimizing supply prepositioning strategies, and for facilitating
decision-making to help prevent or ameliorate the impacts of extreme disasters.
This research will also lead to new educational modules and software useful for
teaching undergraduate and graduate students how to design, analyze and
implement a humanitarian logistics system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will investigate the potential for integrating social media data and agent-based
simulation to reduce uncertainty associated with the demand for post-disaster
relief supplies. This project will develop a new social sensing approach based
on the integration of social media analysis and agent-based simulation.
Trustworthy information will be extracted from social media by a new spatio-
temporal Bayesian method. Second, this project will build a new forecast-driven
multi-commodity supply prepositioning model that incorporates Markovian and
decision theoretic perspectives within a stochastic optimization framework.
Third, the outcome of the supply prepositioning will be realized by social
delivery, an emerging delivery scheme that leverages delivery power from both
fleet and volunteers' vehicles. Different optimization decomposition techniques
will be examined and developed to handle the large-scale nature of the
considered problem. To test the validity of the approaches, a range of case
studies will be conducted.