* 1663794
* NSF Cloud for Everyone Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Patrick McGeer, US Ignite, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2017
* USD 43,916.00

This workshop, NSF Cloud for Everyone, will develop curricula, course materials,
and projects, for the use of the NSF Cloud facilities CloudLab and Chameleon in
graduate and advanced undergraduate systems courses at institutions serving
under served populations, specifically Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) and
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The Workshop will feature
tutorials to train faculty at the target institutions on the use of CloudLab and
Chameleon, and then will consist of collaborative interactive sessions to adapt
existing course material to use Chameleon and CloudLab and develop new
assignments and research projects that use these
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This workshop will develop
new course materials for graduate and advanced undergraduate courses in Cloud
computing, particularly the design and implementation of Clouds. Though targeted
at specific institutions, these materials will be broadly usable by
undergraduate and graduate classes throughout the United States. This Workshop
will also demonstrate joint project across both
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The primary impact will be the
enhanced education of underserved communities. Workshop participants have in
identified specific classes at their institutions which will feature these
facilities. This also has the effect of enhanced workforce training, both for
commercial Cloud ventures and for the undergraduate and graduate research
population. Workshop participants will form the nucleus of a Cloud Education
community going forward, since we will make results public and maintain the
community as a mutual-support organization.