* 1663055
* GOALI: Control of Broadband Acoustic-caused Vibration at Nanoscale: An Enabling Technology for Cleanroom Metrology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Qingze Zou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,246.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
to create a suite of dynamics and control tools to understand and combat
acoustic-caused mechanical vibrations at nanoscale in atomic force microscope
(AFM), a well-known and unique instrument used for studying objects at fractions
of nano-meter scale. Specifically, the objective is to eliminate the acoustic
caused vibrations of the AFM probe to enhance the instrument's accuracy and
efficiency. Success of this research will enable AFM to achieve sub-nanometer
metrological accuracy in cleanroom environment, thereby, contributing to ensure
the fabrication quality of next-generation nano-/micro-fabrication in
semiconductor industry. The knowledge and techniques learned in this work can be
readily used in other scanning probe applications such as scanning electronic
microscope and laser annular detector. The resulting control tools for
combatting acoustic-caused probe vibration will also broaden the implementations
of AFM in other emerging applications; for example, it will allow researchers to
combine AFM with other instruments such as optical tweezer and optical
microscope to enable multi-function measurement and manipulation of live
biological samples. The educational activities of the project include summer
internships for students, curriculum course module development, recruitment and
retention activities for under-represented students, and outreach to K-12.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated by the need for eliminating
acoustic-caused mechanical vibrations to enable high level of accuracy and speed
in sub-nanometer measurement and calibration in cleanroom environment. The
specific research goals include: creating a data-driven, robust approach to
accurately estimate and predict the noise-caused probe vibration, creating a
data-driven feedforward-feedback control approach with online iterative
adaptation to cancel the acoustic-caused probe vibration, analyzing the
convergence and robustness of the proposed modeling and vibration estimation,
and the convergence and performance of the proposed data-driven feedforward-
feedback control, and experimentally implementing, testing, and validating the
proposed approach. The testing and validation will take place for general-
purpose AFM as well as semiconductor-AFM at both facilities -- in the laboratory
at Rutgers University and in laboratory facilities at Bruker, the participating
industry.