* 1663135
* Doubly Negative Acoustic Metamaterials with Air-Coupled Diaphragms
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Haijun Liu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2021
* USD 368,560.00

In recent years, Acoustic Metamaterials (AMM) have become an emerging tool to
create materials with exotic properties that are not found in natural materials.
A central idea in this research project is the realization of doubly negative
mass density and bulk modulus (a.k.a. negative index material), which is the key
to designing many AMM devices with novel functionalities. Such material's
refractive index for an electromagnetic wave has a negative value over some
frequency range. This research supports fundamental advances on the creation of
a new type of AMM with double negativity, whose unit cell consists of diaphragms
directly coupled by an air cavity. With this simple yet innovative
configuration, the unit cell can be easily scaled to form 1D, 2D, and 3D AMM,
paving the ways for transforming many applications ranging from super-resolution
imaging, cloaking, to perfect absorbers. The outcome from the this research will
be integrated into new course that will serve as a catalyst to motivate
students, particularly minority and women, to pursue advanced degrees and
careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
supports fundamental research on a new type of AMM with double negativity. The
research will investigate characteristics of such materials using a
comprehensive approach including analytical, numerical, and experimental
methods. The overall objective of the awarded research program is to achieve a
fundamental understanding of the AMM with air-coupled diaphragms, develop fiber
optic sensors for in situ pressure and displacement measurements, and use the
gained understanding and the developed new tools to create AMM with double
negativity. With a simple configuration of air-coupled diaphragms, the unit
cells can be scaled to form 1D, 2D, and 3D AMM that has the potential to
transform many applications requiring double negativity (e.g. sub-wavelength
imaging and transformation acoustics) and complex geometry (e.g. acoustic
metasurface). Newly developed fiber optic sensors will be used for mapping the
pressure and displacement fields inside and outside the AMM. The work also
complements theoretical and numerical studies with the well-thought out
experiments that use high-performance fiber optic probes to map the acoustic
wave. This work provides a new paradigm to the study of wave manipulation by AMM
and has wide spread applications in fields such as imaging, cloaking, and
several others.