* 1663341
* Understanding the Prime Factors Driving Distortion in Milled Aluminum Workpieces
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Michael Hill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2021
* USD 320,057.00

Rework or rejection of metallic components due to component shape errors
resulting from machining distortion reflect a significant economic loss. The
cost of machining distortion is estimated to be billions of dollars annually,
with a large part borne in the aerospace sector, so the control of machining
distortion is a significant industrial challenge. Existing engineering
approaches address the problem, but provide only point solutions to specific
circumstances and rely on empirical trials at high cost. The collaborative
research between the University of California, Davis (USA) and the University of
Kaiserslautern (Germany) focuses on understanding the main factors and
mechanisms that drive machining distortion, and subsequently explores the use of
models for prediction and control. Distortion will be analyzed by analytical and
experimental methods across variations of its main drivers: initial residual
stress and geometry of the workpiece and parameters used in machining. The work
will advance sustainable manufacturing in aerospace and other metal working
industries by studying approaches that can lead to reduced losses from rework
and rejection of parts. Along with graduate students directly involved, graduate
and undergraduate students working in research laboratories at the two partner
institutions will benefit from the international communication and exchange.
Research results will be used to educate undergraduate and graduate students at
both universities in existing courses in manufacturing and engineering
(mechanical and aerospace), and the general public will learn about machining
distortion and compensation through publications, conferences, and institutional
websites. New knowledge will be gained and shared on how part geometry,
symmetry, and stress levels affect machining distortion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to understand how
workpiece deformations can be forecast and controlled by predictive or
compensative techniques for more economical and sustainable manufacturing. The
research plan relies on unique expertise and facilities at two partner
institutions, and synergizes metal-cutting experiments and residual stress
measurements with analytical and numerical modeling. The deep understanding of
residual stress at the University of California, Davis is complemented by the
expertise in milling assessment at the University of Kaiserslautern. The
hypothesis to be tested is: the effects of bulk residual stress (from material
processing) and machining residual stress (from milling) each create distinct
effects on workpiece deformation and can be separated. Therefore, bulk residual
stress and machining residual stress are first analyzed separately. In work task
1 at UC Davis, different input models for bulk residual stress will be
investigated, in particular process models from the University of Kaiserslautern
and the eigenstrain model from UC Davis. Furthermore, different methods
(simultaneous or incremental material removal) to simulate geometry changes in
workpieces with bulk residual stress are analyzed. UC Davis is responsible for
defining the bulk material stress levels and characterizing bulk residual
stresses with established mechanical techniques. Complementary, work task 2 is
performed at the University of Kaiserslautern and different input models and
their quality for machining residual stress will be investigated. Comprehensive
milling experiments will help to understand the distortion of thin-walled
monolithic workpieces from machining residual stress and serve as a database for
the combined bulk and machining residual stress distortion. At the University of
Kaiserslautern, X-ray diffraction is used to characterize the surface residual
stresses. Based on the new knowledge, in work task 3 both research partners will
analyze how the machining residual stresses depend on the bulk residual
stresses, for example by machining within different stress regimes. In addition,
boundary conditions such as effects of workpiece setup and constraint and the
geometric criteria for three regimes will be explored: where both types of
residual stresses or one individually have major impact on machining distortion.
Finally, in work task 4 compensation techniques will be investigated and
summarized first in a best practice model. The possibility to compensate the
bulk induced distortion via a deliberate machining induced distortion will be
explored.