* 1663859
* PREEVENTS TRACK 2: Integrated Modeling of Hydro-Geomorphic Hazards: Floods, Landslides and Sediment
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Erkan Istanbulluoglu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,715,663.00

Floods claim many lives, destroy property, and cost billions of dollars
annually, motivating the need for improved tools for making predictions.
Flooding is typically related to higher precipitation, but there is growing
evidence that reduction of a river channel's ability to convey floodwaters as a
result of sediment deposition can lead to more frequent floods and increased
flood hazards. Current flood models do not sufficiently resolve sediment
dynamics in river networks and related consequences for channel conveyance. The
overarching objective of this research is to improve our understanding and
ability to forecast flood and landslide risks by targeting key uncertainties of
sediment inputs to the system from landslides and debris flows and sediment
dynamics in channels. The investigators will develop process-based models, which
will be directly compared with existing operational flood models, so that
advancements and innovations at the research level can be moved toward
operational models rapidly. Two PhD students and two postdoctoral associates
will receive training with faculty and government scientist support in a multi-
disciplinary research environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use
Landlab, a recently developed toolkit for modeling earth surface processes, to
model upland sediment input and sediment dynamics in channel networks. Landlab
will be incorporated into an integrated flood modeling framework that includes
distributed hydrology (DHSVM), and fluvial geomorphology and hydrodynamics
(Delft3D) models. DHSVM will provide hydrologic forcing to Landlab, which will
be used to model sediment flux that is routed through the watershed by DHSVM and
incorporated into Delft3D for flood prediction. This modeling framework will be
applied to Skagit and Puyallup Rivers draining two different sediment-laden
stratovolcanos, Glacier Peak and Mount Rainier, in the State of Washington. The
Skagit and Puyallup Rivers both have long histories of generating damaging
floods linked to sedimentation processes. The modeling framework will be
extensively validated with existing observations and remote sensing data to
address the following questions: (1) What are the dominant geomorphic processes
that lead to sediment supply and channel change in the study systems, and how
they can be represented in an integrated flood model? (2) How do geomorphic
processes, including landslides, debris flows and channel storage affect flood
risk? (3) How will flood risk change in the future given expected changes in
geomorphic processes? The integrated modeling framework will evaluate how
processes interact over a range of temporal and spatial scales during and
between flood events, shaping sediment dynamics, river conveyance, and flood
frequency. Improved understanding of flood and landslide risks in these systems
will provide valuable information for management decisions to address future
flood risks and will be communicated via stakeholder workshops.