* 1663287
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Investigation of Fatigue Crack Growth Mechanisms in Microstructurally-Stable Nanocrystalline Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Kiran Solanki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 253,515.00

Metallic materials with a crystallite size of less than 100 nanometers (known as
nanocrystalline alloys) have enhanced strength and toughness compared to those
with much larger crystal sizes. These crystals tend to grow rapidly, however,
when exposed to cyclic external forces, limiting their practical utility as
load-bearing structures. This award supports fundamental research to enable
enhanced stability in nanocrystalline alloys and to uncover their behavior under
cyclic loading conditions, by applying innovative alloy design and synthesis
methods. Further, this project will develop a predictive framework which will
identify suitable compositions of novel nanocrystalline alloys that will meet or
exceed the performance of conventional alloys under cyclic loads, including
rotating machinery and engine components critical to the transportation, defense
and energy sectors. This interdisciplinary research will provide opportunities
for students from underrepresented minority groups, women, and persons with
disabilities, and will directly raise public interest in science and engineering
through creative outreach initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals with a mean
grain size below 100 nm have inspired much research interest owing to their
superior mechanical properties as compared to course-grained materials. However,
despite the potential applicability of nanocrystalline alloys for load-bearing
structures, very few studies have addressed the fundamental microstructural
evolution under fatigue loads, specifically, grain size effects on fatigue
processes. The critical gap in knowledge has stemmed from microstructural
instability, i.e., grain growth and texture evolution observed during cyclic
deformation. Motivated by this, the goals of this project are: (1)
implementation of selective segregation of nanoclusters to lower the
thermodynamic and kinetic driving forces for grain growth, and as a result, a
clear understanding of the true microstructural grain size effects on salient
fatigue growth mechanisms can be unraveled; and (2) to exploit the subsequent
knowledge to reconcile key theories and hypotheses pertaining to fatigue crack
growth behavior of nanocrystalline metals. The fatigue crack growth mechanisms
as a function of grain size quantified in this project have broad scientific
ramifications as this knowledge is highly relevant for designing and
synthesizing nanocrystalline alloys with optimal microstructures, and for
accurate predictive simulations.