* 1663247
* Dynamics and Control of Hummingbird-Inspired Aerial Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Moble Benedict, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2022
* USD 242,241.00

The goal of this project is to advance the state of the art in the dynamics and
control of flapping-wing flight, enabling creation of a next generation of
miniature flying robots, with robustness and agility comparable to natural
flyers. Specifically, this project has the goal of creating flying robots with
the remarkable flying qualities found in hummingbirds. The insights to enable
these advances will be obtained from analytical and computational studies of the
role played by wing flexibility in hummingbird flight mechanics, which will be
validated experimentally on a hummingbird-like flying robot. Flying robots with
these capabilities would play pivotal roles in missions such as search and
rescue, environmental monitoring, and emergency response. The project will
leverage the inherently intriguing aspect of the robotic hummingbird to
cultivate an engaging environment for creative, rigorous application of
aerodynamics, dynamics and control theory to motivate a diverse population of
students to pursue STEM education and careers. The PI will organize lab visits,
summer camps and participate as a guest speaker in K-12 outreach programs for
minority and women students and provide research experiences for aerospace
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
improve understanding of the flight dynamics, maneuverability, and disturbance
rejection capabilities of realistic hummingbird-like flapping-wing robots
through fully nonlinear simulations and flight experiments. Results of the
project will include the creation and experimental validation of a fully
nonlinear 6-DOF flight dynamics model of a hummingbird-like flapping-wing robot
with flexible wings, comprehensive nonlinear simulations and flight tests to
identify critical design parameters for stability and controllability of a
flapping-wing robot in hover, and control design for maneuverability and
disturbance rejection based on identified linear time invariant models. The
project will address the role of passive wing-twist in maneuverability, the
effect on stability of dynamic coupling between large unsteady wing deflections
and the resulting aerodynamic and inertial forces, the role of center of gravity
location in stability while hovering, the effect of nonlinearities and modeling
uncertainties, and the relation between the flapping wing mechanics and wind
gust response. The outcomes will provide increased understanding of the
aerodynamic and control mechanisms of natural flight, and show how these
mechanisms may be applied to dramatically improve the maneuverability and gust-
tolerance capabilities of the next generation of bio-inspired micro air
vehicles.