* 1663807
* Collaborative Research: PREEVENTS Track 2: Thresholds and envelopes of rapid ice-sheet retreat and sea-level rise: reducing uncertainty in coastal flood hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert Kopp III, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2022
* USD 699,800.00

Emerging science based on observations and numerical modeling of the polar ice
sheets on Greenland and Antarctica suggests that current projections of future
sea-level rise could be significantly underestimated. Physically plausible
mechanisms have been identified that could produce a rise in global mean sea
level of 2 meters (&gt; 6 feet) or more by 2100. This amount is roughly twice
the "likely" sea-level rise assessed by the most recent (2013) report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Sea-level rise of this magnitude
would soon transform the potential for extreme flood risk in many coastal cities
and communities, with the potential for devastating economic consequences and
severe impacts on strategic infrastructure. While progress has recently been
made in modeling the future response of the polar ice sheets to a warming
atmosphere and ocean, substantial uncertainty remains and more work is needed to
verify the potential for such extreme rates of sea-level rise. This project will
use state-of-the-art glaciological theory, modeling, and observations of past
and present ice sheet behavior to better characterize this uncertainty stemming
from complex ice-sheet physics and interactions among the ice sheets, ocean,
atmosphere, and the underlying solid Earth. It will produce new projections of
the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets' response to a range of plausible future
greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Advanced statistical techniques will be used
to combine the new ice-sheet projections with other factors contributing to
global and local sea-level change and associated coastal flooding, in order to
produce both sea-level projections and time-evolving water-level probabilities
along inhabited coastlines around the globe. The project will provide national
and local policy makers and stakeholders with: 1) an assessment of possible
levels of future sea-level rise, 2) the frequency (probability in any given
year) of specific flood heights being exceeded, 3) an assessment of how those
frequencies and storm-surge heights might evolve in the future, and 4)
quantified measures of the uncertainty in the projections. The results will be
disseminated widely through the development of easily interpretable and
universally accessible web-based tools, in close cooperation with Climate
Central, an established organization linking climate science and public
communication. The goal is to provide the best possible toolkit for informed
decision making in terms of coastal resilience and
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the future of the polar ice sheets
remains one of the grand interdisciplinary challenges in geoscientific modeling.
Previously underappreciated glaciological processes (hydrofracturing of ice
shelves and ice-cliff collapse) have recently been incorporated into ice-sheet
models, but further work is needed to quantify and calibrate these mechanisms,
establish ranges of structural and parametric uncertainty, and identify climatic
thresholds capable of triggering drastic and possibly irreversible ice-sheet
retreat, particularly in the marine-based sectors of Greenland and Antarctica.
Technical aspects of this project include extending a numerical ice sheet-shelf
model with new processes (water enhanced crevassing, firn influence on
supraglacial and englacial hydrology and hydrofracturing, ice-cliff collapse,
m√©lange influence), more direct linkages among ice, ocean, and atmospheric model
components, and two-way coupling with solid Earth-gravitational-sea-level
models. Large-ensemble methods will be used to identify climatically driven
instability thresholds and envelopes in the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets,
and the ensembles will be statistically integrated with other global and local
relative sea-level contributors including both non-climatic processes (glacio-
isostatic adjustment, gravitational/rotational effects, subsidence/compaction,
tectonics, land water storage) and climatic processes (mountain glacier loss,
ocean thermal expansion, ocean dynamics, land water storage) to "downscale" the
polar ice sheet results to the global network of existing tide gauge locations.
Blending extreme value statistics of individual tide gauge time series with our
new local relative sea level projections will provide a probabilistic assessment
of time-evolving changes in storm-flood frequencies and return periods along
global coastlines.