* 1663244
* CDS&amp;E: DFT-informed Topology Optimization Upscaling: An Accelerated Fixed-point Iteration Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Phanish Suryanarayana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,126.00

Engineering design drives economic prosperity and the quality of life. The world
is comprised of complex dynamical systems from weather and natural disasters to
financial systems and human health. Engineering design enables the development
of products, systems and networks that allow us to thrive and to meet emerging
challenges and opportunities. Since design involves trade-offs among many
variables, an effective design must resolve conflicts at multiple scales and
understand how the compromises affect the dynamical systems performance. A tool
like topology optimization can guide the development of key design concepts but
may have high computational costs. This project advances fundamental research to
create efficient solvers that allow large-scale simulations at significantly
reduced cost, thereby enabling the discovery of advanced systems with novel
properties in areas such as energy, health care, and aerospace and with broad
applicability across science and engineering. The project will train graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students and design new graduate curriculum. The
knowledge gained from the research will be broadly disseminated through social
media and by organizing conference symposia.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will create new efficient and scalable solvers for linear and nonlinear systems
of equations that enable the solution of systems of unprecedented size.
Specifically, the systems of equations will be reformulated as fixed-point
problems, which will be accelerated using the novel, efficient, and accurate
extrapolation algorithms designed in this project. Parallel implementations of
these approaches will be developed that can efficiently use large-scale
distributed memory computer architectures. The researchers will also formulate
linear-scaling approaches and scalable parallel implementations for Density
Functional Theory (DFT) and topology optimization, which will be integrated to
form a novel multiscale method for the design of new structures with tailored
properties. In this process, laws for material behavior will be obtained from
the first principles of quantum mechanics, with no ad-hoc approximations.
Overall, the linear scaling DFT method will enable the accurate study of
condensed matter systems at unparalleled length and time scales. The ability to
perform large-scale ab-initio informed topology optimization will enhance the
capacity to achieve high-resolution, accurate designs that can be realized in
practical engineering applications.