* 1663360
* Collaborative Research: Computational Design of Metal-Organic Framework Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Peter Greaney, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2022
* USD 269,245.00

This award supports research in computational methods for the automatic
exploration of the search space of metal-organic frameworks to obtain desired
combinations of mechanical, thermal and chemical properties. A metal-organic
framework is a repeating three-dimensional crystal lattice with a large open
space-frame structure composed of organic linking molecules bonded to inorganic
nodal units. The interconnected pore-spaces in these materials endow them with a
rich variety of unusual properties that can be exploited for gas storage, gas
separation, and catalysis. Given the constraints of chemical bonds and bond
angles, one cannot easily customize the lattice for a particular size and shape.
Thankfully there is an astronomically large number of permutations for combining
various atomic elements together. However, human designers are confounded on how
to find one for their particular problem domain. What is needed is a
computational process to search the space for a best solution. By formalizing
the molecular design as a decision tree, the developed computer algorithms will
invent new materials whose functional behavior is defined by its chemical makeup
and the resulting geometry and movement of the lattice structure. As part of
testing the design approach, the project will address two technologically
important problems: designing new metal organic frameworks optimized for gas
storage, and materials for separating isomers in industrially important chemical
feed stocks. STEM outreach activities to high school students and teachers will
also be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project seeks
materials that exhibit highly chemically selective adsorption or permeability of
gases through mechanisms that arise from chemical, steric, and vibrational
behavior of the frameworks. The computational search for this incorporates a
unique graph transformation approach that mimics correct stoichiometric
reactions and leads to a large search tree that is amenable to recent advances
in artificial intelligence planning algorithms. Furthermore, machine learning
methods will establish a link between the structure and function of organic
frameworks by leveraging data from complex molecular simulations. This will lead
to more efficient search of the decision tree so that meaningful results can be
obtained. Through detailed simulations of the resulting metal organic
frameworks, the researchers will publish how their new materials can be used to
tackle challenging problems in energy storage, high-tech manufacturing, and the
creation of new sensitive sensor equipment.