* 1663616
* SFS Renewal: Using Auburn University's Land Grant Mission to Prepare Cybersecurity Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2025
* Anthony Skjellum, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,079,634.00

Auburn University, one of the sixteen National Centers of Academic Excellence in
Cyber Operations, proposes to continue and expand its participation in the
CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified
cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce. Along the
path to becoming prepared for the public sector, students work with Alabama
communities to raise awareness of cybersecurity issues. The project will have an
immediate impact on the information assurance and forensics capabilities of the
federal workforce by developing well-trained cybersecurity professionals. Given
the University's strong record in graduating engineers from underrepresented
groups, the team will work closely with the Auburn University's BellSouth
Minority Engineering Program (BMEP), 1000-Women Strong organization, the Office
of Accessibility, and the Office of Veteran Affairs to ensure at least half of
the scholarship students come from segments of the population that are under-
represented. SFS students are required to participate in extracurricular
activities that ensure they are equipped with skills that will prepare them for
the variety of challenges they will see in the workplace. Undergraduate and
graduate scholarship recipients are encouraged to seek cybersecurity
certifications that demonstrate in a tangible and recognizable fashion their
cyber capabilities, making them more competitive for placement in civil service
positions. In addition, graduate scholars complete their degree having done a
deep dive into a least one area of advanced cybersecurity resulting in a
publishable paper relevant to the public sector. Those mentoring the SFS
scholars engage with government agencies to understand cybersecurity needs and
trends to achieve a mutual fit between SFS graduates and
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auburn's SFS program continues to be a source of
qualified cybersecurity personnel going to work in the public sector. The
specific objectives are to 1) qualify students for cybersecurity careers in the
public sector; 2) prepare students through hands-on learning that reflects the
realities of the workspace; 3) engage students in raising the awareness of
cybersecurity within Alabama's communities in support of Auburn University's
role as a land grant university; and 4) fund qualified students from
disenfranchised backgrounds who would not be able to otherwise afford an
education. The University's long-term research and education relationships with
government organizations such as Redstone Arsenal, Maxwell AFB, Alabama
Department of Revenue, and Ft Benning have fostered special contributions to the
success of the SFS program by aligning scholarship recipients with agencies
early in their careers. Over two-thirds of the SFS students participated in a
cybersecurity project sponsored by the Federal Government during a regular
academic year. Such close collaboration provide students hands-on experience and
support efforts within government organizations, resulting in students receiving
multiple offers of employment upon graduation.