* 1663827
* Collaborative Proposal - PREEVENTS Track 2: Cascadia Scenario Earthquakes: Source, Path, and implications for Earthquake Early Warning
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Marine Denolle, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2021
* USD 324,495.00

The Cascadia Subduction Zone is a 1200 km-long plate boundary that is capable of
hosting a magnitude 9 megathrust earthquake and is the greatest source of
seismic and tsunami hazard in the Pacific Northwest. One very pressing issue is
accurate estimation of potential ground motions because they are a predictor of
damage resulting from an earthquake and can guide emergency response. In
Cascadia, current ground motion predictions do not incorporate the physical
processes governing earthquake rupture on the plate interface or account for
realistic 3D wave propagation in the Earth's crust. The project aims to predict
strong ground motions resulting from a magnitude 9 earthquake in the Pacific
Northwest by combining physics-based earthquake models and realistic estimates
of wave propagation. The predicted ground motions will be used to test the
currently operating version of ShakeAlert, the West Coast Earthquake Early
Warning system. This project will provide state-of-the-art scientific
information about possible Cascadia scenario earthquakes to local residents and
help stakeholders make informed decisions to improve earthquake resilience in
the Pacific Northwest. The research will facilitate substantial collaboration
among three early career female professors, four students (graduate and
undergraduate students), and two postdoctoral researchers. Additionally, it
builds an effective communication framework between earthquake source, ground
motion, and early warning communities to promote a comprehensive methodology for
seismic hazard mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prediction of earthquake
ground motions requires fundamental understanding of earthquake source dynamics
and accurate estimation of wave propagation path effects. Previous ground motion
predictions for megathrust earthquakes either rely on empirical relations that
are not well constrained by data in this region or simulate wave propagation
assuming a certain kinematic rupture history that does not necessarily satisfy
the physics of dynamic ruptures. Moreover, previous calculations strongly rely
on the accuracy of a velocity model, in which realistic wave propagation through
fore-arc and sedimentary basins is not well represented. Finally, both realistic
source processes and accurate wave propagation are necessary to establish
reliable information in the seismic waveform for earthquake early warning. The
project will construct a suite of realistic scenario earthquakes that could
occur in the Cascadia Subduction Zone using an innovative three-stage approach.
First, the most up-to-date knowledge of properties of the Cascadia Subduction
Zone (e.g. geometry, coupling and stress conditions) will be incorporated in
fully dynamic rupture simulations to determine the influence of each of these
factors on rupture history and to construct a suite of potential rupture
histories for a magnitude 9 earthquake. The earthquake source models will then
be combined with Green?s functions derived from the ambient seismic field to
estimate ground motions in major population centers in the Pacific Northwest.
Finally, the project will explore the implications of these ground motions for
earthquake early warning algorithms that are currently under development.