* 1663376
* Analysis and Design of a Nonholonomic, Impact-Based, Dual-Mode Vibration Isolator/Absorber System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Philip Harvey, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 277,526.00

The objective of this project is to insulate sensitive contents of a building
from disruptions due to vibration, while also preventing severe damage to the
structure of the building from large motions, such as from an earthquake. This
will be achieved by advancing and combining the techniques of vibration
isolation and vibration absorption, which have previously only been applied
independently or in parallel. An effective method of protecting sensitive
equipment from small amplitude building motion is a vibration isolation
platform, supported by rollers. However, when the building motion is
sufficiently large, as in an earthquake, the overriding concern becomes
preventing the possible collapse of the structure. In this case a vibration
absorber can be used to transfer mechanical energy out of the structure. This
project uses the same system to act as a vibration isolator when the building
motion is small, and as a vibration absorber when the building motion is large.
The hybrid device is created using purely passive mechanical elements, each
consisting of a ball rolling between two concave plates, with a restraining wall
or similar structure at the boundary of the concave region. When the amplitude
of motion is small, the ball remains near the center of the plates. As the
motion becomes large, the ball will eventually impact the restraining structure,
marking the transition from vibration isolator to vibration absorber. This
project will relate parameters such as the curvature of the concave plates, the
size of the concave region, and the materials of the plates and restraining
boundary to the isolation and absorbing properties of the device. The results of
this work will be used to minimize disruption to business operations, damage to
structures, and injury to building occupants. Web-based demonstration of the
concept will facilitate education and outreach to building owners, structural
engineers, and future professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
answer the ongoing question: How can systems and their subsystems be designed to
achieve synergistic interactions and enhanced system-level resilience? To answer
this question, the research will: (a) develop a framework to model complex
nonholonomic dynamical systems; (b) extend nonlinear vibration absorption
theory; (c) optimize impact mechanisms for enhancing multi-level hazard
mitigation; and (d) experimentally verify the predicted performance. Rolling
isolation platforms are the primary means of equipment isolation. A new
mathematical framework will be created to model the three-dimensional dynamics
of these systems incorporating the nonholonomic constraints described by the
kinematics of rolling balls, loss of contact, and impacts with displacement
limits. At low-to-moderate disturbance levels, the platforms are to function
primarily as isolators, and they will passively adapt under strong disturbances
to function as essentially nonlinear (vibro-impact) dynamic vibration absorbers
to protect the primary building system from collapse. In order to achieve the
desired multi-functional dynamic behavior, this research will establish new
algorithms for determining optimal control strategies satisfying inequality
constraints on state and control trajectories. Ultimately, the methodologies
developed in this project will help to understand the fundamental limitations
and achievable performance of multi-functional isolation systems.