* 1663633
* I-Corps: Label-Free detection of Sialic Acid Using Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Miguel Jose Yacaman, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader and commercial impacts of this I-Corps program are to improve the
early-stage detection methods of breast cancer which is expected to reduce
morbidity, mortality and rates of recurrence. It is also expected to decrease
the overall cost of cancer care and lost productivity from breast cancer
treatment and impacts. This screening technology is based on surface-enhanced
Raman scattering and offers a noninvasive, high sensitive, rapid and cost-
effective method of detection and dynamic monitoring of a breast cancer
biomarker sialic acid in saliva. The non-invasive nature of our method helps to
accommodate cultural and religious sensitivities that decrease compliance with
mammography among certain populations. Moreover, portability and affordability
give this technique the potential to promote early diagnosis of breast cancer in
low-income, rural or remote areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
develops a surface-enhanced Raman scattering system for cancer screening. This
screening technology offers a noninvasive, high sensitive, rapid and cost-
effective method of detection and dynamic monitoring of a breast cancer
biomarker sialic acid in saliva. Currently available methods of specific
detection and quantification of sialic acid (such as chromatographic methods)
are complicated, expensive and time consuming, while more robust techniques
(such as colorimetric assays) suffer from non-specificity and interference. This
technology may present a versatile and age-independent alternative to standard
mammography screening, holding promise for the improved management of breast
cancer. Furthermore, it has been reported that sialic acid levels increased in
the serum of patients with uterus, lung, colon/rectum, stomach and prostate
cancer. Therefore, our method can be potentially used to detect not exclusively
breast cancer, but also other types of cancer.