* 1663085
* Collaborative Research: Formation and Stability of Eutectic Nanostructures in Laser-Irradiated Particle Suspensions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,08/31/2021
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2021
* USD 376,628.00

Powder metallurgy, in which complex parts are made by fusing together a metal
powder, has a large economic footprint in the USA. This footprint will only grow
as additive manufacturing (AM) techniques become more pervasive. A pressing
concern with AM is that the parts produced often have worse mechanical
properties than parts produced from forging or machining. The goal of this
collaborative project is to develop new approaches to create a nanoscale
physical structure within powder particles in order to improve mechanical
properties (strength and thermal conductivity) of final parts. To accomplish
this, this research will use lasers to melt different metal and ceramic alloys
that have a special chemical composition, known as a eutectic, which produces an
internal sheet-like structure. By lasing the powders while they are in a fluid
that extracts heat quickly, the eutectic structure can be preserved when the
particle solidifies. This work will suspend the powder particles in liquid and
solid media that can remove heat, but these media must not react, boil, or
obscure the laser. Experiments will be combined with modeling to understand the
removal of heat, and to simulate how the internal structure forms within
indivdual spherical particles under these conditions. Success in this research
would enable a new class of tailored materials to be used in sintering and
additive manufacturing to rapidly manufacture complex pieces with improved
technical properties. This will have significant direct benefits for the
aerospace, automotive, medical products, and defense industries. In addition,
the PIs have a good history of recruiting underrepresented minority students in
their research, and this effort will continue.

Pulsed laser melting and cooling in certain fluids can provide very fast
solidification rates to form nanoscale eutectic structures. Unfortunately, in
materials with high optical absorption, lasers with nanosecond pulse widths only
melt the near-surface region and cannot be considered true bulk processing
techniques. This research will circumvent this limitation by using laser
irradiation of eutectic alloys in powder form. Most investigations of eutectic
solidification in discrete particles have used molten droplets formed by
atomization, where heat extraction from the particle into a surrounding gas is
inefficient. Although rapid eutectic solidification still occurs, atomization
results in highly heterogeneous internal microstructures, which are undesirable
with respect to many technical properties. This research will employ particles
suspended in liquid or solid media that can extract heat much more efficiently
following pulsed laser melting. The suspensions will be volume-restricted such
that boiling of the media in contact with the molten particles is suppressed,
thereby maintaining effective heat dissipation. In addition, by controlling the
laser power and number of pulses, it is possible to partially melt a particle if
desired. The experiments will examine these processes in metallic,
semiconducting and metal-oxide alloy powders. The dynamic rapid solidification
process in bulk and three-dimensional particles will be simulated in detail
using the phase field modeling approach. The stability of the nanoscale eutectic
structure during spark plasma sintering of the produced particulate material
will also be examined.The Broader Impacts of this research include the new
processing approaches that create tailored microstructures in feedstock
materials for use in sintering and additive manufacturing that will yield
improved mechanical and electrical properties in rapidly-manufactured
components. This will have significant direct benefits for the aerospace,
automotive, medical products, and defense industries.