* 1663546
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Field and Laboratory Based Assessment of Liquefaction Triggering and Residual Strength of Gravelly Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 279,878.00

One of the leading causes of damage during earthquakes is soil liquefaction.
Liquefaction causes loose soil to behave more like a heavy liquid than a solid
which can result in settlement of buildings as well as landslides and dam
failures. Recently, extensive gravel liquefaction and damage was observed in the
2008 Wenchuan, China, earthquake and the 2014 Cephalonia, Greece, earthquake
sequences, and the evidence indicates that gravelly soils that were considered
non-liquefiable using existing liquefaction susceptibility methods, did liquefy.
This study will provide a fundamental understanding, as well as practical
guidance on assessing whether a gravel deposit will liquefy. Such deposits are
encountered widely and their potential liquefaction is commonly a critical
consideration in the stability of our nation's ports, dams, levees and in
general, civil infrastructure. The improved procedures that will be developed
will enhance the resiliency of these facilities, and will help in avoiding
unnecessary expenses when gravel liquefaction is not really an issue, or more
importantly, highlight the need for stabilization when gravel liquefaction is
indeed expected. The research team will establish a web-site with a gravel
liquefaction database, and document all available case histories of gravel
liquefaction. Videos on the mechanism of liquefaction that can be used for
outreach purposes will be developed, as well as a recorded webinar and other
educational resources on the outcomes of this study with emphasis on the
recommended procedures for liquefaction assessment of gravelly soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of gravelly soils in a reliable, cost-
effective manner for routine engineering projects remains a challenge and
methods such as the Cone Penetration Test and Standard Penetration Test are not
considered appropriate. Even for large projects, such as dams and energy
projects, characterization is expensive (if Becker testing is used) and
problematic. Nevertheless, because liquefaction is known to have occurred in
gravelly soils in a significant number of earthquakes, dam engineers are
frequently called upon to assess the potential for liquefaction in gravels and
liquefaction mitigation costs often run into millions of dollars. With the
majority of research in soil liquefaction engineering focused on the assessment
of the likelihood of "triggering" of liquefaction in sands and silty soils, new
approaches, and transformative methods for characterizing gravels are needed. In
this collaborative project, there is a coordinated plan that combines unique
large scale laboratory testing and innovative field testing at key gravel
liquefaction sites to develop liquefaction triggering charts and post-
liquefaction shear strength recommendations for gravelly soils. A prototype
300-mm diameter cyclic simple shear (CSS) device has been developed at the
University of Michigan and will be used to evaluate the cyclic (and monotonic)
undrained shear response of gravelly soils in the laboratory. A next-generation
dynamic cone penetration test (DPT) that was originally developed in China will
be modernized with key instrumentation and will be used for field testing along
with in-situ shear wave velocity (Vs) measurements. Field testing will be
conducted in the USA, China, and Greece, leveraging resources from international
partners, in-situ testing firms and organizations. The PIs will leverage well-
documented case studies of gravel liquefaction in the recent Cephalonia
earthquake to validate the new methods and augment the field performance record
of gravel liquefaction.