* 1663887
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: EVOLVE: Enhancing the Open MPI Software for Next Generation Architectures and Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Edgar Gabriel, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2022
* USD 308,785.00

For nearly two decades, the Message Passing Interface (MPI) has been an
essential part of the High-Performance Computing ecosystem and consequently a
key enabler for important scientific breakthroughs. It is a fundamental building
block for most large-scale simulations from physics, chemistry, biology,
material sciences as engineering. Open MPI is an open source implementation of
the MPI specification, widely used and adopted by the research community as well
as industry. The Open MPI library is jointly developed and maintained by a
consortium of academic institutions, national labs and industrial partners. It
is installed on virtually all large-scale computer systems in the US as well as
in the rest of the world. The goal of this project is to enhance and modernize
the Open MPI library in the context of the ongoing evolution of modern computer
systems, and to ensure its future operability on all upcoming architectures. We
aim at implementing fundamental software techniques that can be used in many-
core systems to execute MPI-based parallel applications more efficiently, and to
tolerate process and memory failures at all scales, from current systems, up to
the extreme scales expected before the end of the
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open MPI is an open source implementation of the
Message Passing Interface (MPI) specification. The MPI API is currently being
extended to consider the needs of application developers in terms of efficiency,
productivity and resilience. The project will also support academic involvement
in the design, development and evaluation of the Open MPI software, and ensure
academic presence in the MPI Forum. The goal of this proposal is to enhance the
Open MPI software library, focusing on two aspects: (1) Extend Open MPI to
support new features of the MPI specification. Open MPI will continue to support
all new features of current and upcoming MPI specifications. The two most
significant areas within the context of this proposal are (a) extensions to
better support hybrid programming models and (b) support for fault tolerance in
MPI applications. To improve support for hybrid programming models, the MPI
Forum is currently considering introducing the notion of MPI Endpoints, which
could be used by different threads of an MPI rank to instantiate multiple
separate communication contexts. The goal within this project is to develop an
implementation of endpoints to support effective hybrid programming model, and
to extend the concept to other aspects of parallel applications such as File I/O
operations. One of the project partners (UTK) leads the current proposal in the
MPI Forum to expose failures and ensure the continuation of the execution of MPI
applications. In the context of this SSI proposal, the goal is to harden,
improve, and expand the support of the existing ULFM implementation in Open MPI
and thus enable end-users to design application-specific resilience approaches
for future platforms. (2) Enhance the Open MPI core to support new architectures
and improve scalability. While Open MPI has demonstrated very good scalability
in the past, there is significant work to be done to ensure similarly good
performance on future architectures. Specifically, we propose a groundbreaking
rework of the startup environment that will improve process launch scalability,
increase support for asynchronous progress of operations, enable support for
accelerators, and reduce sensitivity to system noise. The project would also
enhance the support for File I/O operations as part of the Open MPI package by
expanding our work on highly scalable collective I/O operations through
delegation and exploring the utilization of burst buffers as temporary storage.