* 1663832
* Dynamics in Anion Clusters and Liquid Jets Using Ultraviolet and Extreme-Ultraviolet Time-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Daniel Neumark, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2021
* USD 728,574.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniel Neumark from the
University of California, Berkeley uses ultrafast laser pulses to examine
chemical reactions in the gas phase and in aqueous solution. The gas phase
experiments are aimed at understanding the interactions between electrons
excited by light and nucleic acid (NA) constituents; this interaction is
important in radiation biology and plays a key role in cell mutation, cancer,
and cell death. Complementary experiments in aqueous solution are focusing on
the changes of nucleic acid components subsequent to exposure to ultraviolet
light. In these experiments, ultraviolet light excites the electrons in the
molecules, and the stability of the molecules depends on how rapidly they can
convert the light energy into vibrational energy (which can then be dissipated
by the surrounding solvent molecules before reactions occur). The experiments
are providing new insights into these relaxation dynamics. In addition to its
implications for radiation biology and other areas of medical technology, this
research project provides training for the next generation of scientists.
Professor Neumark promotes the training of female scientists, with the ultimate
goal of increasing the representation of women scientists in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on complementary studies of
chemical reaction dynamics in gas phase ion complexes and liquid water microjets
by means of femtosecond time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. The goal of
the gas phase experiments is to investigate electron-induced chemistry in
nucleobases, nucleotides, and nucleosides. Starting with binary complexes of
iodide anions (I-) bound to a nucleic acid constituent, an electron is
transferred from the I- to the nucleic acid (NA) constituent through excitation
by an ultraviolet (UV) femtosecond pump pulse. The subsequent dynamics are
followed by photodetaching the excess electron with a femtosecond probe pulse
and measuring the resulting photoelectron kinetic energy distribution. In the
liquid water microjet experiments, femtosecond high harmonic generation
(HHG)experiments are being developed as a very general probe of reaction
dynamics in solution via photoemission at photon energies as high as 100 eV.
Here, for example, a nucleic acid constituent is excited by a UV pump pulse, and
time-resolved photoelectron spectra obtained by ionization with the HHG probe
pulse tracks the relaxation dynamics of the photoexcited species all the way
back to its ground state. One can also perform time-resolved core level
photoemission experiments that rely on the 4d electron binding energy of atomic
iodine exhibiting a measureable chemical shift that depends on its overall
charge and chemical bonding environment. This method is being used to follow
electron recombination with iodine atoms in solution subsequent to charge-
transfer-to-solvent excitation.