* 1663747
* SI2-SSI Collaborative Research: The SimCardio Open Ssource Multi-Physics Cardiac Modeling Package
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Shawn Shadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2023
* USD 943,832.00

Cardiovascular (CV) simulations have become a crucial component of fundamental
research in surgical planning, device design, diagnosis, and disease mechanisms.
The project team has previously developed SimVascular (www.simvascular.org),
which is currently the only open source software package providing a complete
pipeline from medical image data segmentation to patient specific blood flow
simulation and analysis in arteries and veins. The SimCardio open source project
will extend and enhance the functionality of SimVascular to the realm of heart
modeling, providing the first fully integrated computer model of cardiac
physiology and function. This will help basic science and medical researchers
perform computer modeling in numerous diseases affecting heart function in
children and adults. This computer modeling software will enable researchers to
build models of the heart and vascular anatomy directly from medical imaging
data, which can be used for personalized treatment planning and medical device
design, ultimately leading to new treatments for patients with cardiovascular
disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SimCardio project will create a unique open
source software package for multi-physics cardiac modeling and simulations.
SimCardio will include a new multi-physics finite element solver with
capabilities for large-deformation fluid-structure interaction (FSI) to capture
ventricular contraction and heart valve dynamics, non-linear and visco-elastic
material models, cardiac mechanics models of active heart contraction, and
electrophysiology. This will be facilitated by sustainable software
infrastructure bridging the cardiovascular fluid and solid mechanics
communities. The project will provide a new user-interface for high-throughput
construction of patient-specific cardiac and vascular models. SimCardio will
broaden the applicability of SimVascular to problems including heart valves,
heart failure, cardiomyopathy, aortic dissection, structural congenital heart
defects and medical devices. To facilitate adoption, the project will publicly
provide accompanying educational and training materials, and maintain a
sustainable software ecosystem to increase the user community and ensure
continued availability and evolution.