* 1663479
* From Future Learning To Current Action: Long-Term Sequential Infrastructure Planning Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Peter Adams, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Stakeholders and owners of assets and infrastructure systems exposed to extreme
events have to take decisions related to risk control and mitigation. Long-term
infrastructure planning need not be fixed in the present time, as decisions can
be periodically revised depending on available knowledge. This may suggest
postponing critical decisions until uncertainty has been sufficiently reduced,
though delays may actually increase risks in the shorter term. By investigating
the relationship between expected future learning (in terms of policy and
technology, for example) and current action in optimal decision making under
uncertainty, this project will allow for a) adaptive optimizing of long-term
management of infrastructure systems, b) exploration of flexible approaches to
asset design, and c) assessment of the value of collecting additional
information on attendant risks. The outcome of this project will contribute to
society's ability to select appropriate, adaptive risk mitigation actions in
optimally engaging limited resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, this
project will investigate how decisions on infrastructure planning should depend
on the expected future available information on various sources of risk and
uncertainty. This will include the development of methods for formulating
realistic assumptions about learning rates, and for integrating these
assumptions into scalable schemes for system-level sequential decision
optimization under uncertainty. The project will develop a framework for
integrating future expected learning into decision making optimization via
probabilistic modeling of the effects of various exogenous conditions on
infrastructure use and planning. Sequential infrastructure management will be
framed as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) to create an
efficient computational framework able to identify optimal policies.