* 1663327
* Synergistic Modeling, Characterization, and Design of Embedded Phase Transforming Sensory Particles
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2020
* USD 395,582.00

The nondestructive evaluation of engineering components to determine the
existence of internal damage is a process important to a wide range of
engineering sectors. This is especially true in those sectors associated with
transportation where safety is critical and the number of load/unload cycles a
part might experience can be very high, resulting in internal damage. Excessive
internal damage can lead to failure and is unacceptable. While a number of
established methods for internal damage measurement do exist, a team of
engineers and materials scientists will explore a new approach by which micro-
scale damage sensors in the form of small particles are directly embedded into
critical parts. These are expected to increase nondestructive evaluation
accuracy, thereby increasing the safety of aircraft, vehicles, trains, and
potentially other important transportation infrastructure. While the team's
approach is applied to a particular engineering challenge (internal damage
sensing), the materials science and applied mathematical and mechanics findings
are also expected to benefit researchers working on a diverse range of advanced
material developments. As part of this research, the team will also expose
students to professional opportunities at NASA and Boeing, as well as perform
outreach activities to K-12 students and teachers through summer programs.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a novel concept: embedding phase
transforming solid sensory particles into metallic structures to detect the
initiation and propagation of cracks via strong magnetic signals. A synergistic
experimental and computational approach is taken, whereby shape memory alloy
particles exhibiting multi-physical magneto-mechanical coupling are processed at
low volume fractions into structural components, their magnetic responses
characterized, and associated data employed in the formulation and calibration
of particle-matrix continuum models. These models will consider the bulk
response of the sensory particles, their interface with the surrounding matrix,
and the design of optimized particle shape, size, orientation, and distribution
for the effective location of damage. The scientific objectives of this work are
to: i) demonstrate that sensory particles can be successfully embedded in a
metallic matrix and provide magnetic signatures during in-situ experiments, ii)
acquire sufficient data regarding particle configuration and emitted response so
as to calibrate and validate computational models, iii) produce validated
continuum modeling tools specifically tailored to the scale and response of the
sensory magnetic particles, and iv) provide structural component-based
information regarding how particles should be best distributed in the host
component matrix. This work both builds upon and expands an enabling body of
preliminary results generated in past efforts while also exploring an entirely
new sensing mechanism.