* 1663108
* CAREER: Drought Predictability and the Role of Land-Atmosphere Interactions in the U.S. Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Steven Quiring, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Cai
* 02/28/2018
* USD 29,515.00

Soil moisture is an important variable in the climate system. Relatively little
work has been done to assemble and homogenize in situ measurements of soil
moisture and to utilize these measurements for investigating land-atmosphere
interactions. The research goal of this project is to understand how soil
moisture influences climate on seasonal to interannual timescales in the U.S.
Great Plains. This work will address four scientific questions: (1) How do land-
atmosphere interactions, specifically those related to soil moisture, vary over
space and time? (2) Are soil moisture and land-atmosphere interactions
accurately simulated in global land surface models? (3) What are the processes
through which soil moisture influences climate on seasonal to interannual time
scales? (4) Why are there substantial spatial and temporal variations in the
strength of land-atmosphere coupling?

This study will develop a soil moisture database for the U.S. Great Plains using
station-based observations. These data are important for developing climate
forecasting tools, calibrating land surface models, and validating satellite-
derived soil moisture algorithms. The Community Land Model (CLM) will be used to
investigate land-atmosphere interactions, interannual to interdecadal
variability and to identify the physical mechanisms that are responsible for
spatial and temporal variations in the strength of land-atmosphere coupling. The
scientific outcomes of this project will support the development of more
accurate climate forecasts and is readily transferable to other mid-latitude
regions.

Broader impacts of this project include (1) disseminating the obtained results
to stakeholders through National Drought Mitigation Center workshops and the
federal government's drought portal (drought.gov), (2) teaching a Freshman Year
Seminar (FYS) focused on drought science to 15 students/year, (3) establishing a
Drought Science Learning Community to encourage integration of learning across
courses and to involve students in one of the grand challenges facing society,
(4) training and supporting three undergraduate students, and (5) involving
actively a PhD student in all aspects of the research, including mentoring the
undergraduate students.