* 1663636
* SI2-SSI: Sustainable Open-Source Quantum Dynamics and Spectroscopy Software
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Anne McCoy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

Advances in experimental techniques that use multiple light sources to probe
chemical systems provide unprecedented ability to understand the evolution of
important and interesting chemical processes. Theory and simulation are
essential to extract the maximum amount of information from these experiments.
Thus, there is a strong need for user-friendly computer programs to model these
processes and to provide physical insights to experimentalists. To this end,
this project is developing an innovative software package (ChronusQ) capable of
modeling many types of experimental measurements that involve matter interacting
with multiple incident light sources. The physical insights gleaned through
application of ChronusQ will be useful for the advancement of renewable energy
and information technologies. In addition, given the nature of the project,
students and postdocs will have unique opportunities to gain experience in high
performance computing software development through direct collaborations with
engineers from industrial partnerships &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of the proposed activity is to develop an innovative software platform,
namely Chronus Quantum (ChronusQ), which is capable of modeling different types
of time resolved multidimensional spectral signals using quantum electronic and
nuclear dynamics. ChronusQ performs quantum dynamic simulations of the same
light and matter interactions that occur in time resolved multidimensional
spectroscopies directly in the time domain. The time correlated experimental
observables required to model multidimensional spectra can then be extracted
from these simulations. By providing a time dependent, state specific
interpretation for the chemical dynamics encoded in multidimensional spectra,
the proposed development will aid in the design of new molecules and materials
that exhibit the desirable optical characteristics, with the potential for
transformative impact in the broader scientific community and beyond. The
ChronusQ software represents the next frontier for innovations in computational
spectroscopy, which will have a far reaching impact on education and research in
multidisciplinary scientific communities including chemistry, physics,
nanoscience and surface science, and other fields relying on these cutting edge
spectroscopic methods.