* 1663204
* Exploring for Inspiration: A Bayesian Inference Based Approach to Design By Analogy Retrieval
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Katherine Fu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2021
* USD 395,019.00

People use analogical reasoning in everyday life to understand new things by
drawing parallels with familiar things. The same principle is used by
engineering designers in an approach called Design by Analogy (DbA). Many
groundbreaking innovations have emerged through DbA, including self-cleaning,
outdoor-surface paint that was inspired by the lotus flower and the first
printing press, which was inspired by the early wine press. Although analogical
inspiration can be arrived at serendipitously, formal approaches for DbA enable
reliable the approach to be applied more widely and reliably. To date, most
analogy identification techniques have relied on a query-based approaches, such
as key-word search. Instead, this research will enable visual techniques for
exploring analogies for engineering design innovation and show the superiority
of this visual approach over a query-based DbA. The results will advance
engineering design and promote engineering innovations by enhancing the ability
of engineers to search for analogical inspiration in a way that is more dynamic
and exploratory than current techniques. Results will be made available in an
open-source format for use, comparison, and integration by researchers across
many fields. Outreach efforts will incorporate research ideas about engineering
design and DbA into a mechanical engineering Girl Scout badge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to test the hypothesis
that exploration-based approaches are more effective than query-based approaches
for retrieval of stimuli for DbA practices. By using Topic Modeling techniques,
big data from the US patent database, and visual analytics techniques, the
research will transform the way DbA inspiration is found. The results will give
designers more intuitive, dynamic access and maneuverability for exploring the
design space. Properties of analogical information and external stimuli will be
extracted deductively from literature and theory of DbA. Visual, exploration-
enabling, manipulable design repositories will be constructed using Latent
Semantic Analysis, Latent Dirichlet Allocation, Non-negative Matrix
Factorization, techniques in data visualization and Human Computer Interaction
design principles; the repositories will be compared to identify which can best
support the retrieval stage of DbA. Novel, seeded, hierarchical topic modeling
methods will be developed and tested. These DbA properties and techniques will
be tested with cognitive studies of the design process. By supporting an
exploratory approach at a larger scale of repository size than ever before,
transformational effects can be achieved on the path to innovation. This
research will enable engineering of complex device designs that lead to products
with improved performance, better material use, and fewer resources consumed.