* 1663109
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical Impact of Acquisition Mechanisms on System Design Outcomes Under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Paul Collopy, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 01/31/2021
* USD 312,877.00

This project will explore the causes and cures for massive cost overruns in
large complex system developments, such as new airplanes, spacecraft, weapon
systems or novel energy power plants. The U.S. Department of Defense reports
overruns, delays and cancellations equivalent to $200 million per day in lost
value, and similar overruns are experienced by space programs, commercial
aircraft, nuclear power plants, and prototype fusion power plants. Much of these
losses are due to engineering processes, but engineering processes are usually a
response to customer or government contracts. Different forms of contracts can
bring about different processes, allowing technically ambitious systems to be
designed and developed without large losses. Not only can this save time and
money, it will also allow more projects to be attempted, accelerating the speed
of technology development and accelerating our nation's economic growth. This
project has the potential to be the basis of change in the Federal acquisition
process that could ultimately result in savings exceeding $100 million per
day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to test the
hypothesis that the mechanism that leads from technical risk and complexity to
cost and schedule overruns in large complex engineered systems is the systems
engineering process of requirements flow-down, stimulated by requirements-based
contracts. The project will use simulations of engineering organizations to
explore the hypothesis. While many others have applied principle agent theory to
contracting, and some have explored principle agent theory within engineering
organizations, this is the first project to investigate how to optimize
incentive contracts to affect the systems engineering structure of design work
within a large engineering organization. It is the interaction of the contract
and the way systems engineering is conducted that marks truly new ground in this
research. The project explores four research questions: 1) What is the causal
relationship among cost reimbursement, award fees, incentives, and project
outcomes? 2) How is this relationship affected by the structural complexity and
size of the industry engineering organization, including the supply chain? 3)
How is this relationship affected by program uncertainty, particularly technical
risk? 4) How is this relationship affected by uncertainty in the user
environment, that is, by out year changes in the relationship of artifact
attributes to government benefit? Answering these questions will expose
theoretical issues pertaining to acquisitions in systems engineering that are
poorly understood today.