* 1663138
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Ocean Salinity as a predictor of US hydroclimate extremes
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Laifang Li, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2021
* USD 260,036.00

Water availability is a fundamental necessity for society. As the largest
moisture reservoir and ultimate moisture source, water from the oceans sustains
terrestrial precipitation and is thus key to understanding variability in the
water cycle on land. Floods and droughts represent extremes of the water cycle
that have enormous consequences for society. In recent years Western drought has
led to billions of dollars of agricultural losses and extensive wildfires, while
floods produced similar losses in the South, Midwest and East of the US. They
are caused by an excess or deficit of moisture exported from ocean to land.
Moisture evaporating from the ocean surface is the ultimate source for
terrestrial precipitation. Thus, the availability of the oceanic moisture supply
modulates the severity of hydroclimate extremes on land. As moisture exits the
ocean, it leaves a signature in sea surface salinity. Recent studies have
provided remarkable new evidence that salinity can be utilized as a skillful
predictor of precipitation in the US Midwest, Southwest and other regions. The
salinity precursors significantly outperform temperature-based predictors,
especially in the years with heavy precipitation or exceptional drought. Thus,
sea surface salinity has great potential to provide a transformative improvement
to seasonal forecasts of US hydroclimate extremes. This project will develop the
scientific basis for a drought and flood early warning system for the US based
on these new insights into the predictive potential of ocean salinity and the
expanding salinity monitoring system that uses both in-situ measurements and
satellites. This will lead to a number of societal benefits: lives saved and
property preserved from wildfires and floods; improved crop yields resulting
from more accurate seasonal rainfall forecasts; national security advances
realized by better anticipation of destabilized regions affected by drought or
flood crises; and more accurate forecasting of energy demand and the impact of
water shortages on power plants. Several undergraduate students will have the
opportunity to gain valuable research experience, and thus the project will help
to train the next generation of climate scientists. Project findings will also
be incorporated into graduate courses taught through the MIT/WHOI joint program
and at Duke University, and the knowledge will be disseminated to the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes that produce the newly identified
relationships between extreme precipitation and sea surface salinity will be
explored. Daily precipitation data and a Bayesian statistical framework will be
used to sample the extreme events in the US. Based on the Bayesian inference,
the pre-season salinity precursors will be explored and mechanisms by which the
water cycle generates the salinity signatures determined by calculating
atmospheric moisture fluxes and the terms in the surface salinity budget. In
addition, the oceanic moisture flux onto land will be tracked, and the processes
assessed by which extremes develop through the moisture supply and/or energy
redistribution in the atmospheric column. Machine-learning algorithms to predict
extremes using the sea surface salinity precursors will be developed and
applied. Novel approaches will be used in this project, including the use of
Bayesian statistics to identify the optimal sea surface salinity and temperature
predictors for rainfall extremes, analysis of the oceanic salinity budget to
identify the driving atmospheric variables, analysis of the atmospheric
circulations that transport water from ocean to land, and the development of
machine learning algorithms to provide optimal seasonal predictions of extreme
drought or floods.