* 1663394
* Dielectric Photomasks for Nanopatterning Arbitrary Molecular Orientations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Qihuo Wei, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 387,993.00

Controlling molecular orientations is an essential step in manufacturing liquid
crystal devices, such as liquid crystal displays where rod-shaped molecules need
to be aligned in a uniform direction at substrate surfaces. Many emerging liquid
crystal applications, such as flat optical elements, stimuli-responsive
materials and devices rely on spatially varying molecular orientations. As a
result, scalable manufacturing techniques for patterning molecular orientations
are in high demand. Recently a projection photopatterning technique using
specially designed photomasks made of nanometer-sized rectangular holes in
aluminum films was shown capable of photo-aligning molecular orientations into
complex patterns, promising scalable manufacturing of various liquid crystal
devices. However, this kind of metallic photomask suffers from low efficiency in
optical transmission, especially for ultra-violet light. This award supports
fundamental research to develop high efficiency photomasks by using
nanostructures of dielectric materials, and facilitates practical deployment of
this photopatterning technique in liquid crystal device manufacturing. The
project studies photo-patterning of complex structures with ordered molecular
orientations using ultra-violet light and the dielectric metamasks. The research
is interdisciplinary, involving photomask design, numerical simulations, liquid
crystal materials and devices, nanomanufacturing and optical characterization.
The PI will leverage the research to educate graduate and undergraduate students
with multidisciplinary knowledge and skills, and to enhance diversity and STEM
education by involving minority and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic metamasks that can generate spatially-
varying patterns of both light intensity and polarization direction have
recently been suggested and utilized for photoaligning molecular orientations
into complex spatially varying patterns. One issue with the plasmonic metamasks
is that Ohmic losses in plasmonic materials make the optical transmission low.
This project aims to eliminate this limit by developing dielectric metamasks.
This research includes simulation, fabrication and characterization of
dielectric metamasks with designable polarization patterns and high optical
transmission in ultra-violet and near ultra-violet wavelength ranges; building
of an optical photopatterning system; and designing, fabrication and
characterization of Pancharatnam-Berry microlens arrays and mirrors as testbeds.
The research advances basic understanding and new knowledge on designing
dielectric metamasks and capabilities in scalable fabrication of liquid crystal
devices such as geometric phase optical elements. Success of this project is
expected to increase spatial resolution and throughput of the metamask-based
photopatterning technique. The research outcomes should enrich the
nanomanufacturing toolbox and facilitate practical applications of Pancharatnam-
Berry flat optical elements.