* 1663800
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Integrated Modeling of Extreme Space Weather Events from Electron to Global Scales
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Gabor Toth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,019,405.00

Space weather results from solar activity that can affect the space environment
of Earth, damage our technological systems, and expose pilots and astronauts to
harmful radiation. Extreme space weather events are caused by sudden
reconfigurations of the magnetosphere, the magnetic field surrounding and
protecting Earth, caused by magnetic reconnection, which can be thought of as a
magnetic explosion. Reconnection happens on scales much smaller than the
magnetosphere. The project will predict the effects of extreme space weather
events with a sophisticated computer model. Using innovative algorithms and
state-of-the-art models, the project will realize the first-ever self-consistent
global simulations of extreme space weather events that capture the physics of
reconnection. Extreme space weather events could knock out the power grid on
Earth with a recovery time of months and the large-scale loss of electricity for
an extended time and could collapse our technological infrastructure. The
results of this project will allow quantitative assessment of the various
impacts, which is needed for prevention plans and engineering solutions. This
project supports the training of multiple graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current magnetosphere models, including the
Michigan Geospace model being transitioned to operation at the Space Weather
Modeling Center of NOAA, employ a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) approximation that
cannot account for the kinetic processes responsible for magnetic reconnection.
Only first-principles, fully kinetic codes can reliably model reconnection, but
global kinetic simulations are not affordable on current or even near-future
computers. The recently developed MHD with embedded particle-in-cell (MHD-EPIC)
algorithm offers a unique solution. The MHD code provides the global solution in
the full computational domain, while the fully kinetic EPIC code models the
parts of the domain where reconnection occurs. MHD-EPIC is much more efficient
than a global kinetic model and this technique has been successfully validated
for several space physics systems, including the magnetospheres of Ganymede,
Mercury, Mars and Earth. The MHD-EPIC model will be employed to study extreme
space weather events. First the model will be validated against observations for
well-observed strong magnetic storms. Then the validated model will be used to
simulate what would have happened if the July 2012 Carrington-scale solar
eruption had not missed Earth. Idealized and scaled-up real events will be
modeled to investigate various scenarios: extreme solar wind ram pressure,
magnetic field, duration, and variability. For each run the local surface
magnetic field variations will be calculated and serve as input for physics-
based models of power grids.