* 1663416
* Collaborative Research: Processing and Performance of Chained Magnetic Particle Composites for Soft Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Joseph Tracy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2022
* USD 336,055.00

Soft robotics is a rapidly growing field in which soft materials, such as
polymers, are formed into devices whose mechanical response can be triggered by
physical or chemical stimuli. Magnetically responsive polymer composites
containing embedded magnetic particles are especially attractive for soft
robotics, because they allow for non-contact actuation with electromagnets or
permanent magnets. Furthermore, chaining the magnetic particles within the
polymer imparts an enhanced, directional response. This award supports
fundamental experimental and theoretical research to investigate the processing
and performance of chained magnetic particle composites for soft robotics. Soft
robotic devices based on chained magnetic particle composites developed in this
research will be immediately useful in practical applications, including non-
contact peristaltic pumps and remotely actuated microfluidic valves and mixers
for next-generation medical diagnostic devices. Theoretical tools developed in
this research will also drive innovation by providing easily accessible metrics
to inform the design and evaluate the performance of chained magnetic particle
actuators. Themes and results from this research will be integrated into
education and outreach activities designed to inspire and recruit the next
generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there have
been many reports of magnetoactive elastomers for soft robotics, the design of
these materials is usually empirical rather than guided by a predictive model,
resulting in missed opportunities to optimize their design and performance, such
as with chained-particle formulations. This research aims to develop a framework
and figures of merit for predicting the behavior of magnetoactive elastomer
actuators and to employ them for designing useful devices with enhanced
capabilities. Using these tools, the torque in chained-particle magnetoactive
elastomers generated in applied magnetic fields will be maximized, elasticity of
the polymer and elastic instabilities will be incorporated in device function,
and shape memory polymers will enable realization of magnetoactive elastomer
materials and devices that are reconfigurable and selectively addressable. This
research will advance the field of chained-particle magnetoactive elastomers by
developing tools to guide their design for applications in soft robotics and by
demonstrating the capabilities of these materials and devices.