* 1663429
* Atomistic Modeling of the Generation of Metastable Nanoparticles and Surface Structures in Pulsed Laser Ablation in Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2022
* USD 438,818.00

The generation of chemically clean and environmentally friendly nanoparticles
through pulsed laser ablation in liquids has a number of advantages over
conventional chemical synthesis methods and has evolved into a thriving research
field attracting laboratory and industrial applications. This award supports
fundamental research aimed at revealing, through advanced computer modeling and
theoretical analysis, the mechanisms and kinetics of structural and phase
transformations occurring in pulsed laser ablation in liquids. The emerging
physical understanding of these phenomena will facilitate the development of new
laser processing techniques capable of controlled generation of nanoparticles
and surface structures with properties fine-tuned for biomedical, optical,
photovoltaic, and sensing applications. This research will provide educational
and training opportunities through the involvement of the participating students
in high-performance parallel computing, and through broadening participation of
U.S. university students in the Venice International School on Lasers in
Materials Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While, experimentally, the presence of
the liquid environment has been demonstrated to strongly affect the nanoparticle
size distributions and microstructure of laser-modified surfaces, the physical
mechanisms of laser surface modification and ablation in liquids still remain
elusive. This research will address the challenge of multi-scale computational
modeling of laser ablation and processing in liquids by developing and applying
an advanced computational model which combines a fully atomistic description of
laser interactions with metal and semiconductor targets, a coarse-grained
representation of liquid environment, and a continuum-level description of heat
transfer from the irradiated surface. The simulations will target three
interrelated focus areas: (1) study of the fundamental mechanisms of
nanoparticle formation in pulsed laser ablation in liquids and evaluation of the
dependences of various channels of nanoparticle formation on the irradiation
conditions, properties of target material and liquid environment; (2)
investigation of the ability of laser ablation in liquids to produce
nanoparticles with unusual metastable structures, phase mixtures, and strong
chemical supersaturation; and (3) analysis of the processes that control surface
morphology and microstructure produced by laser processing in liquids. At the
fundamental level, this study will provide unique insights into the material
behavior far from equilibrium, under extreme conditions of ultrafast heating,
cooling, and mechanical deformation.