* 1663729
* I-Corps: Electron-Donating Phenothiazines for Non-Aqueous Redox Flow Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Aman Preet Kaur, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
enabling increased utilization of renewable energy power sources such as solar
and wind. Due to the intermittency of these power sources, energy storage
systems must be connected to our electrical grid in increased amounts to help
stabilize the grid through storage of energy during peak production times and
release of energy during peak consumption. The technology developed consists of
stable carbon-based materials that can store charge for extended periods of
time. These materials may allow for the production of batteries with organic
electrolytes, specifically called redox flow batteries, which can be charged at
higher power densities and have higher energy capacities than current aqueous-
based counterparts. In addition to stationary energy storage, these materials
could serve as additives in lithium-ion batteries that can extend lifetimes and
prevent catastrophic failure through protection during abusive conditions that
result from charging batteries to too-high potentials. Yet another possibility
is to use these materials to initiate chemical reactions that allow for lower-
cost preparation of polymer coatings through the elimination of metal
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves the exploration of
potential markets for stable, electron-donating phenothiazine derivatives as
potential materials for energy-storage applications and polymerization
initiators. These materials were developed as a result of studying a variety of
fused-ring heterocyclic organic compounds with varying substituent identity and
position, which led to identification of characteristics that led to greater
stability in multiple states of oxidation (neutral, radical cation, and
dication). The most stable derivatives were tested as redox shuttle additives
that limit voltage in overcharging lithium-ion batteries and were found to have
extensive performance in batteries containing commercially utilized electrode
materials due to their high stability. High solubility led to their
incorporation into battery electrolytes at high concentrations, which allowed
for high-rate overcharge protection. More recently, the study of these materials
as catholytes for non-aqueous redox flow batteries showed extensive lifetimes in
symmetric cells at high concentrations and with high charging currents. In fact,
in many cases, high stability has allowed for their isolation as crystalline
radical-cation salts. Furthermore, these materials have been shown to initiate
cationic polymerizations using visible light, which may lead to their use as
photo-redox catalysts.