* 1663068
* Design of Ni-Base Superalloys for Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Sammy Tin, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,894.00

Additive manufacturing techniques can provide immense design flexibility for the
fabrication of geometrically complex metallic structures. For production of
nickel-based superalloy components such as those used in advanced gas turbine
engines, these manufacturing techniques may enable transformational design
concepts and contribute to the development of ultra-efficient power systems for
aerospace propulsion, space exploration and power generation. One of the major
challenges associated with additively manufactured Ni-based superalloy
components is that the extreme temperature gradients encountered during
processing negatively impact the underlying structure and mechanical properties
of the material. This award supports fundamental research aimed at understanding
how to make Ni-based superalloys amenable for processing via additive
manufacturing. By introducing benign additives, Ni-based superalloys that are
tolerant to extreme thermal cycles can be developed. This multidisciplinary
research program will assist in the training and education of engineering
students, and will bring exposure to scientific research to high school students
and teachers through outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive
manufacturing processes that utilize a laser power source tend to produce parts
with a highly textured grain structure due to the directional nature of the
governing heat transfer conditions during the build. The characteristic columnar
grain structure induces a high degree of mechanical and physical anisotropy
which may lead to cracking or "hot tearing" when a continuous, interdendritic
eutectic phase forms along the grain boundaries. The aim of this research is to
establish a fundamental understanding of inoculant-induced heterogeneous
nucleation in additively manufactured Inconel 718. Varying levels of metal,
intermetallic and reactive oxide particles comprised of elements common to
Inconel 718 will be systematically blended with the powder feedstock and used to
additively build structures in a directed metal deposition (DMD) and powder bed
selective laser melting (SLM) system. The effectiveness of these inoculants on
modifying the resulting grain structure of the fabricated structures will be
evaluated using advanced characterization techniques. Systematic assessment of
the interfacial reaction products along the inoculant interfaces will enable
quantification of the mechanisms governing solidification and free growth of the
solid during additive manufacturing. Nano-scale 3D local electrode atom probe
(LEAP) characterization will be performed on the interface to assess the
composition and structure. This will enable the development of an optimized
post-fabrication thermal treatment that will enable dissolution and
homogenization of the residual inoculant particles. The experimental results and
observations will be applied to develop phenomenological and physics-based
models that are expected to suggest new directions for the development materials
amenable for additive manufacture.