* 1663651
* NSF-SFS: Arizona Cyber Defense Scholarship
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2025
* Stephen Yau, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,577,598.00

Arizona State University (ASU), a National Center of Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance Education/Cyber Defense (CAE IA/CD), proposes to continue
and expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into
the government workforce. A distinguished faculty and a well-funded research
program in information and systems assurance, together with a well-balanced
cybersecurity curriculum, result in SFS graduates that match the needs of the
Federal government and the public. The PIs support a diverse Federal workforce
by placing a special emphasis on recruiting and graduating highly talented
students from underrepresented groups as well as students transferred from
community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU has established a strong
curriculum in information assurance with emphasis on trustworthiness, security
and forensics involving information systems and networks. Ten cybersecurity
courses in computer science and engineering, and additional six courses in other
disciplines, including electrical engineering, industrial engineering,
mathematics and information systems are regularly offered. In 2015, ASU was re-
designated as a CAE IA/CD with five focus areas: data management systems
security, digital forensics, network security engineering, secure cloud
computing, and secure software development. The proposed SFS program aims to
meet the Federal government's critical need for cybersecurity professionals by
graduating a cadre of undergraduate, Master's and Ph.D. students, and providing
the necessary mentoring and support to place them in Federal agencies and
laboratories. The program continues to strengthen cybersecurity activities
through improvement of the academic programs, extracurricular activities
emphasizing hands-on experiences, leadership development through collaborative
work and community service, outreach activities, and extensive interactions with
Federal laboratories and agencies. Collaborative research and educational
activities, and communication skills development are strongly emphasized. The
program also supports student organizations and peer mentoring.