* 1663663
* Additive Manufacturing of Controlled Anisotropic Materials via Electrically Assisted Nanocomposite Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Yong Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2021
* USD 315,840.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) has emerged as a promising rapid manufacturing
approach for a wide variety of industries. Current AM processes can fabricate a
model with good control on its shape but not on its material properties. Most AM
processes only enable the fabrication of structures with isotropic material
properties (they are the same in all directions). This award supports
fundamental research on a novel additive manufacturing process that can
accurately create anisotropic material properties (properties that vary with
direction). This is accomplished in a three-dimensional (3D) structure by
dynamically controlling electric fields while fabricating each layer, which has
the result of orienting the short fiber reinforcement (in the form of carbon
nanotubes or metal flakes) in the polymer. The shape is achieved by changing the
projection image for each layer. Hence, varying material properties can be
achieved in the fabricated structure even when using a single type of
nanocomposite. The research results will significantly expand the capability of
AM processes to fabricate anisotropic materials with enhanced structural,
thermal, and electric properties. Such capability will enable novel design and
fabrication of impact resistant nanocomposites, thermo-metamaterials, and
wearable sensors. The new manufacturing process will provide US companies with a
competitive edge and can lead to innovations in aerospace, consumer electronics,
defense, and medical industries. The research outcomes will be integrated into
undergraduate/graduate course development, as well as outreach programs to
increase minority participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is
to establish an electrically assisted mask-image-projection-based
stereolithography (eMIP-SL) process that can build three-dimensional shapes
using nanocomposites with controlled carbon nanotube (CNT) alignment for
enhanced functional characteristics. Tasks on electrode design, nanocomposite
preparation, CNT alignment control, and integration with projection-based
stereolithography will be performed. The fundamental characteristic of the
anisotropic mechanical/electrical/thermal properties of architectures with
aligned carbon nanotubes will be studied including measuring the anisotropic
mechanical properties, the electrical and thermal conductivities, and
microstructure observation with optical/scanning electron microscopy. The
fundamental mechanism for the anisotropic mechanical/electrical/thermal
properties in the fabricated architectures will be studied as a function of the
process parameters and resulting nano/microstructures. The research result will
develop scientific and engineering knowledge on the eMIP-SL process for
fabricating anisotropic multi-functional 3D structures using controlled
properties of nanocomposites.