* 1663302
* Self-adaptive Building Facade Enabled via Pressure-regulated Metamaterials and Reinforcement Learning Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Farbod Fahimi, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 11/30/2019
* USD 365,022.00

While the forces and energies acting on our building stocks are highly mutable
(i.e., from the changing climates to the occupant behaviors) current building
practices still design and operate building exterior envelope (e.g., façade) as
a static system. Substantial energy saving potentials reside in solutions that
transcend building envelope from a simple protective space divider to a more
intelligent and responsive skin attuned to climate and energy optimization. This
project investigates a novel approach to autonomously control the thermal and
mechanical properties of building façades using pressure-regulated
metamaterials. Unlike mechanically actuated kinetic louvers that require
numerous moving parts and high operational energy, the deformable mesostructure
of some metamaterials can respond to fluidic pressure and collectively change
the envelope properties at macroscale level. This will lead to radically less
maintenance and lower life-cycle cost. It also offers advantage over smart
materials by providing adaptation to much broader variations in climate
conditions and occupant demands. This project will have broad impacts through
collaborations with industrial partners and national labs. The research
experiences will be integrated into a multidisciplinary education and outreach
program to engage a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students,
particularly, the students from historically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to enable the
design and operation of self-adaptive building envelopes that can proactively
respond to the changes in surrounding environments and evolve their performance
over time. By utilizing the interactions between fluids and mesoporous
metamaterials, the thermal and mechanical properties of building façade can be
reactively tuned to reduce building energy consumption and suppress mechanical
vibrations that are detrimental to building structures. The hypotheses of this
research are (1) the reversible volume reaction between fluids and pressure-
responsive metamaterials can be utilized to manipulate the thermal and
mechanical properties of building façade; and (2) building energy and structural
efficiencies can be synergistically improved by allowing the envelope system to
dynamically interact with the changing environments. Specifically, three
interrelated tasks will be carried out where: (1) a computational framework will
be established to design and optimize pressure-responsive metamaterials with
adjustable thermal and mechanical properties; (2) an autonomous control strategy
will be formulated based on Model-Free Reinforcement Learning method to enable
the otherwise passive building envelope to learn and adapt to the continually
changing environments; and lastly (3) full-scale component validation tests and
case studies will be performed to quantify the energy saving potential.