* 1663196
* Collaborative Research: Formation and Stability of Eutectic Nanostructures in Laser-Irradiated Particle Suspensions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Nana Ofori-Opoku, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,766.00

Powder metallurgy, in which complex parts are made by fusing together a metal
powder, has a large economic footprint in the USA. This footprint will only grow
as additive manufacturing (AM) techniques become more pervasive. A pressing
concern with AM is that the parts produced often have worse mechanical
properties than parts produced from forging or machining. The goal of this
collaborative proposal is to develop new approaches to create nanoscale physical
structure within powder particles in order to improve mechanical properties
(strength and thermal conductivity) of final parts. To accomplish this, the
research proposed here will use lasers to melt different metal and ceramic
alloys that have a special chemical composition, known as a eutectic, which
produces an internal sheet-like structure. By lasing the powders while they are
in a fluid that extracts heat quickly, the eutectic structure can be preserved
when the particle solidifies. This work will suspend the powder particles in
liquid and solid media that can remove heat, but these media must not react,
boil, or obscure the laser. Experiments will be combined with modeling to
understand the removal of heat, and to simulate how the internal structure forms
within individual spherical particles under these conditions. The Broader Impact
of this research will be the new processing approaches that create tailored
feedstock materials for use in sintering and additive manufacturing to rapidly
manufacture complex pieces with improved technical properties. This will have
significant direct benefits for the aerospace, automotive, medical products, and
defense industries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Pulsed laser melting can provide very
fast solidification rates to form nanoscale eutectic structures. Unfortunately,
in materials with high optical absorption, lasers with nanosecond pulse widths
only melt the near-surface region and cannot be considered true bulk processing
techniques. This research will circumvent this limitation by using laser
irradiation of eutectic alloys in powder form. Most investigations of eutectic
solidification in discrete particles have used molten droplets formed by
atomization, where heat extraction from the particle into a surrounding gas is
inefficient. Although rapid eutectic solidification still occurs, atomization
results in highly heterogeneous internal microstructures, which are undesirable
with respect to many technical properties. This research will employ particles
suspended in liquid or solid media that can extract heat much more efficiently
following pulsed laser melting. The suspensions will be volume-restricted such
that boiling of the media in contact with the molten particles is suppressed,
thereby maintaining effective heat dissipation. In addition, by controlling the
laser power and number of pulses, it is possible to partially melt a particle,
such that a small solid portion acts as a ready nucleation site, avoiding deep
undercooling. The experiments will examine these processes in metallic,
semiconducting and metal-oxide alloy powders. The dynamic rapid solidification
process in bulk and three-dimensional particles will be simulated in detail
using the phase field modeling approach. The stability of the nanoscale eutectic
structure during spark plasma sintering of the produced particulate material
will also be examined. The Broader Impact of this research will be the new
processing approaches that create tailored microstructures in feedstock
materials for use in sintering and additive manufacturing that will yield
improved technical properties in rapidly-manufactured componetns. This will have
significant direct benefits for the aerospace, automotive, medical products, and
defense industries.