* 1663511
* A Breakthrough Additive Manufacturing Method for High-Strength Lightweight 3D Micro-Architectured Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Rahul Panat, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 10/31/2017
* USD 309,943.00

The design and manufacture of lightweight materials having superior mechanical
properties such as high strength is one of the key challenges for scientists and
engineers. Current state-of-the-art materials show a drastic tradeoff between
weight and strength, while manufacturing strategies for porous lightweight
materials suffer from poor control over material architecture and limited
material choices. This project investigates a novel additive manufacturing (AM)
method that uses printing of nanoparticles to fabricate a new class of three-
dimensional (3D) micro-architectured materials, which will possess the desired
characteristics of low weight and high strength. The research will also
incorporate multi-scale mechanical models that consider the effect of
microstructures and length scales specific to AM. The research results will
advance the field of AM by enabling rapid fabrication of 3D structures with
custom architectures and materials that have a wide range of applications,
including biomedical implants, porous membranes, tissue engineering, and energy
storage. Minority and women undergraduate and graduate researchers will be
recruited to work on the project and periodic activities will be carried out
targeted to attract K-12 students into the manufacturing research profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the investigation of a novel
additive manufacturing method that involves printing of metal nanoparticles
dispersed into a solvent, followed by nanoparticle sintering to realize highly
intricate and controlled 3D metal architectures that are lightweight and strong.
The first objective of the project is to investigate the scientific principles
governing the printing process. Models will be developed that identify the role
of droplet condensation, solvent evaporation, and system dynamics in the
formation of the 3D architectures. The models will guide experiments that will
involve printing of 3D architectures from silver, nickel, or aluminum
nanoparticles dispersed into a solvent such as ethylene glycol, and using an
Aerosol Jet 3D printer. The second objective of this work is to identify the
micro and nanoscale deformation mechanisms governing the mechanical behavior of
the metallic 3D structures. Complex 3D lattices (with up to 94% porosity) and
micro-pillars will be fabricated by printing, and tested under compression and
bending. Multi-scale mechanical models will be developed that consider
dislocation motion, stress and strain gradients, and variability in the
microstructure. The models will predict optimal 3D designs that improve
strength-to-weight ratio dramatically, which will be verified through mechanical
tests. The result of this project will be a novel additive manufacturing
platform that can create strong lightweight structures with architectural
control of over five orders of magnitudes in length scale (tens of nanometers to
several millimeters), and will potentially open up new research areas in the
manufacturing of 3D architectures and modeling methods for mechanical behavior
of additively manufactured parts.