* 1663037
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Tunable Stiffness for Dynamic Adhesion Control at the Macro- and Micro-Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Kevin Turner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,982.00

Surfaces with dynamically switchable adhesion have a wide range of applications
in fields such as robotics and manufacturing. For example, surfaces with
switchable adhesion enable new types of gripping surfaces for use in climbing
and perching robots. This award supports research to realize a new concept in
switchable adhesive surfaces based on the use of composite materials where the
stiffness of one component of the material can be changed via the application of
an electrical signal. By modulating the stiffness of one component of the
composite, the manner in which force is distributed to the interface is altered,
and as a result, the effective adhesion strength of the interface is changed.
The underlying adhesion mechanics of these materials will be established through
modeling and experiments, thus enabling the optimized design of composite
structures with dynamically switchable adhesion. This project is a collaboration
between researchers at the University of Nevada, Reno and the University of
Pennsylvania and will result in the training of students in advanced materials,
mechanics, manufacturing, and soft robotics, thus contributing to the
development of the engineering workforce in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will realize new composite materials with dynamically tunable adhesion
through a research plan that includes the design, fabrication, and
characterization of two classes of elastomer-based composite materials with high
dry adhesion strength. Finite element-based multiphysics models will be used to
investigate the how the structure of the composite and the stiffness
heterogeneity contribute to the effective adhesion strength. Scalable routes to
realize flat and fibrillar surfaces made of these composite materials will be
developed by leveraging microfabrication techniques and recent manufacturing
advances from the field of soft robotics and electronics. Characterization
efforts will focus on establishing: (1) the mechanical and adhesion properties
of the constituent materials in order to inform the modeling and simulation
effort, and (2) the adhesion properties and performance of the novel composite
material systems that are fabricated. This research will lead to an improved
fundamental understanding of the mechanics and manufacturing of composite
material systems with tunable adhesion.