* 1663947
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: More resilient coastal cities and better hurricane forecasts through multi-scale modeling of extreme winds in the urban canopy
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* David Nolan, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2022
* USD 510,840.00

PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research&lt;br/&gt;More resilient coastal
cities and better hurricane forecasts through multi-scale modeling of extreme
winds in the urban canopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
1663978&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a hurricane arrives at
the coast, what happens to wind near the ground depends on what is covering the
ground. Whether that covering is grass, trees, pavement, a scattering of small
houses, or a densely packed cluster of skyscrapers will affect the wind?s speed,
direction, and gustiness. Such effects can vary from one part of a city to
another, even from one side of a building to another. Experts do not understand
such variations as well as they would like. Computer models used to forecast
weather have become more accurate and detailed over the decades but provide
little information about how wind speeds and wind gusts vary across city and
suburban landscapes. The goal of this project is to use state-of-the-art
computer models to learn more about and to improve our ability to predict how
buildings disrupt and modify the wind beneath landfalling hurricanes, from just
above the ground to near the tops of buildings. Results will foster better ways
to design and locate buildings and other infrastructure near coasts, better ways
to forecast hurricane-force winds, better ways to protect lives and property in
the face of impending landfall, and better ways to respond immediately
afterward. The project will include 1 graduate student to help provide for the
next generation of researchers in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
computer simulations during the project?s first phase, a range of standard
building types in different layouts will be subjected to strikes from archetypal
hurricanes. The simulations will reveal the most important, fundamental physical
processes at play on scales that are usually invisible to typical weather
forecast models yet are critical to the variation of wind in urban and suburban
landscapes. Armed with the knowledge gained in that first phase, during phase II
researchers will then improve the components of the industry-standard Weather
Research and Forecasting (WRF) Model that are most directly responsible for
predicting wind in developed areas. Those components were designed to work best
for the lower wind speeds typical of most weather, not for hurricane-force
winds. The improved WRF Model from phase II of the project will then be used in
phase III to simulate the actual landfall of at least one historical hurricane.
Researchers will retrieve records of the hurricane?s weather observations and
wind damage to validate the improved model, evaluating how its representation of
hurricane-force winds in urban and suburban areas has been enhanced. In phase
IV, researchers will review more past hurricanes that made landfall in the U.S.
and Mexico to select a subset of storms for additional simulations. Conditions
will be perturbed to change the characteristics of those actual storms,
generating a collection, often called an ensemble, of synthetic hurricanes that
spans a realistically wide range of types. Finally, in phase V of the project,
results from phase IV will be combined with socioeconomic information and
mathematical equations for wind damage to create maps of how the vulnerability
to high winds in hurricanes varies within the cities selected in phase IV.