* 1663726
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Chlorine Activation from Saline Playas
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Thomas Gill, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 18,822.00

Droughts mobilize natural dust from salt playas that can react with nitrogen
oxides, criteria pollutants that are emitted by combustion sources. This
reaction releases chlorine atoms that are potent atmospheric oxidants but are
neglected in models used to assess regional air quality because of lack of
measurements. The proposal will measure the fundamental rate constants of real-
world playa dust particles with nitrogen oxides to enable robust assessments of
regional air quality impacts in salt playas regions such as Texas.

Reactive chlorine (Cl) atoms when activated can serve as potent atmospheric
oxidants that would effect lifetimes of greenhouse gases like methane and also
tropospheric ozone abundance. The proposal hypothesizes that wind blown
chloride-containing dust from dried saline lake beds (playas) can be converted
to nitryl-chloride (ClNO2) by heterogeneous reactions with gaseous dinitrogen
pentoxide (N2O5). The ClNO2 photolysis produces Cl atoms that could alter the
ozone production photochemistry and the methane lifetime significantly. The
research will measure the kinetics of ClNO2 production from reactions of salt
with N2O5 in a trace gas-aerosol flow reactor. Chemical ionization mass
spectrometry will be used to monitor ClNO2 in the reactor and the playa dusts
will be analyzed using single-particle mass spectrometry, ion chromatography and
X ray diffraction. The in depth analysis of the chemical and atmospheric
conditions under which chlorine can be released from the saline playas will
provide a mechanistic framework that could be implemented in chemistry-climate
and air-quality models to make more robust predictions and assessments.