* 1663060
* Cybersecurity Fellows: The Scholarship for Service Program at Georgetown University
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Marcus Maloof, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 5,196,318.00

This project seeks to establish a new CyberCorpsÂ®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at Georgetown University to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity
professionals for entry into the federal, state, local, or tribal government
workforce. The proposal presents an innovative education program that takes a
multifaceted approach to cybersecurity. The Cybersecurity Fellows Program at
Georgetown will provide students with a broad view of cybersecurity. SFS
students will not only learn the technical aspects of cybersecurity but will
also understand domestic and foreign policy, politics, business, culture, and
ethics. It is this broad view that the graduates of the proposed program will
bring to Federal, State, Local, and Tribal Government organizations. The team
has extensive experience in multiple areas within cybersecurity and has an
established record of successfully engaging students in research, professional
development, and in placing graduates in government organizations. More of
Georgetown students have been choosing technical fields and the introductory
computer science course enrollment has almost tripled in the last four years.
The Cybersecurity Fellows program aims to diversify the cybersecurity workforce
by recruiting, graduating, and placing women and members of underrepresented
groups in government positions. The project will use Georgetown's relationship
with the Cristo Rey network of high schools to recruit underrepresented students
from urban schools to Georgetown. The Regents Scholars Program, a summer bridge
program for underrepresented students in STEM, will help usher in well-prepared
students for a rigorous science curriculum. The Cybersecurity Fellows program
will offer additional faculty mentoring, interdisciplinary academic programming,
and job placement services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown is designated as a
DHS/NSA Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research and its security
programs are highly interdisciplinary with other areas including policy, law,
international studies, and data science. The SFS students will be offered
cybersecurity degrees in Computer Science; Science, Technology, and
International Affairs; Security Studies; Public Policy; and Technology
Management. Some examples of the interdisciplinary nature of the program include
courses such as: Surveillance and Censorship; Information Warfare; Cyberspace
and American Power; Cyber Conflict and Policy Dilemma; and Cybersecurity
Conflict and Policy. Faculty members in the Computer Science department
regularly collaborate and maintain strong ties with government organizations,
including the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, the Department of Homeland
Security, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Naval Academy,
and the National Institutes of Health. Students will have an opportunity to
participate in applied and basic research on software security, system security
and software technology problems in Georgetown's Security and Software
Engineering Research Center.