* 1663311
* Continuum Dislocation Dynamics Modeling of Mesoscale Crystal Plasticity at Finite Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Anter El-Azab, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2022
* USD 430,000.00

Mechanical deformation of crystalline metals is caused by motion and
interactions of defects called dislocations under applied forces or stresses. As
the individual crystals deform, dislocation interactions lead to the formation
of self-organized dislocation microstructures or patterns. These patterns are
believed to control the mechanical strength and failure of metals. They are also
important in metal manufacturing as they provide the way to refine the material
behavior through combined mechanical deformation and heating. Although
dislocation patterns were observed long ago, there is currently no theoretical
or computational framework for predicting their formation in metals under
arbitrary deformation. This research aims to bridge this critical gap by
implementing a computational modeling framework that explicitly represents
dislocations and their interactions at the mesoscale based on the continuum
dislocation dynamics method. Such a generalization will enable accurate
prediction of material behavior in crystalline materials, and it will eventually
lead to realistic models of the manufacturing processes of structural alloys.
Scientific knowledge obtained in this research will be incorporated into
graduate curriculum and the developed tools will be disseminated to the wider
research community. A particular focus will be given to the training of female
and underrepresented students through graduate research
assistantships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collective dislocation mechanisms that
induce various dislocation microstructures in metal single crystals under
deformation will be investigated by computational modeling. A recently developed
computational framework based on continuum dislocation dynamics will be used as
the method of investigation after generalization to finite crystal deformation.
This modeling framework is theoretically founded to capture the full mesoscale
deformation response of single crystals from dislocation properties, which
includes the dislocation patterns, plastic slip distribution and crystal
distortion, internal elastic fields, as well as the overall stress-strain
response and average dislocation density evolution. The investigation includes
the following research tasks: formulating the governing continuum dislocation
dynamics equations at finite deformation and coupling these equations with the
stress equilibrium and deformation kinematics of crystals, solving the coupled
system of dislocation dynamics and crystal mechanics equations using the finite
element approach, building a community available code for mesoscale deformation
of crystals based on the above, and simulating the dislocation microstructures
of interest and validating the predictions using open literature microstructure
data obtained by Transmission Electron Microscopy and X-ray techniques.