* 1663298
* I-Corps: Multifunctional Ceramic Reactive Electrochemical Membrane Filtration
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
commercialization of a potentially game-changing filtration technology based on
the synergistic electrochemical reactions created on membrane surfaces. Membrane
filtration is indispensable for a wide spectrum of industrial applications such
as drinking water treatment, food processing, chemical purification, and
pharmaceutical engineering. This project will provide filtration users the value
propositions in saving capital costs on membrane cleaning, maintenance,
replacement as well as high quality products (e.g., filtered water). This
project will also impact membrane manufacturers by increasing the demand for
multifunctional and reactive membranes in the global market of membrane
filtration, which is estimated to reach $2.64 billion by 2018. Therefore, the
ultimate goal of this project is to upgrade and transform current membrane
industries from traditional physical filtration into advanced and chemically
reactive membrane systems. This process will also potentially lead to new
business opportunities and foster workforce development.

This I-Corps project addresses a long lasting goal of developing more efficient,
flexible, durable, and multifunctional membrane technologies. This project
investigates a novel reactive electrochemical membrane (REM) powered by electric
polarization. During REM filtration, electric current runs through the membrane
to generate highly reactive radicals (a chemical that rapidly react with organic
compounds and oxidizes them into carbon dioxide and water). Thus, the membrane
fouling due to organic matter accumulation or pore clogging can be effectively
mitigated. This invention will demonstrate multiple benefits through the
applications in algal biomass separation processes. Specifically, the project
will fabricate and test a suite of REMs to evaluate biomass separation
efficiency, permeate water quality, and anti-fouling properties and to elucidate
the underlying mechanisms of electrochemical oxidation and impacts on fouling
mitigation. The results will provide fundamental guidelines as to the rational
design of new-generation reactive membranes.