* 1663642
* Assessing the Influence of Cultural Variables, Perceptions, and Earthquake Hazard Information on Household Emergency Preparedness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michael Lindell, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2023
* USD 536,202.00

This project will examine the effect of cultural variables and different forms
of earthquake hazard information on seismic risk perception and preparedness in
the Portland (Oregon) Metropolitan Area. The potential societal impact of this
work is four-fold. First, the research findings will improve university teaching
by being incorporated into the investigator's course materials and textbooks.
Second, the project will recruit doctoral students from demographic groups that
are historically under-represented in scientific and engineering disciplines.
Third, it will involve members of the Latino community, thus increasing
community engagement. Finally, the collaborative relationship with local and
state emergency management agencies will provide a means of disseminating
improved hazard maps and other methods of communicating earthquake hazard
information to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three specific
objectives. First, it will assess the influence of media attention concerning
the Cascadia earthquake hazard on earthquake emergency preparedness by
households in the surrounding area. Second, it will assess the degree to which
different types of hazard maps are accessible and useful to local residents.
Third, it will examine the relative effectiveness of active and passive
communication strategies in promoting earthquake risk perception and household
emergency preparedness. To accomplish these objectives, residents in at-risk
areas study will complete a seismic risk perception and preparedness
questionnaire, and will have access to information sources to inform their
assessments of hazard risk. The effects of information use will be assessed and
compared with those collected from individuals attending in-person training
sessions based on active-learning techniques and goal-setting strategies. The
influence of cultural factors on preparedness attitudes and behavior will be
assessed by working with the Portland Latino population using the same materials
and approaches, provided in Spanish.