* 1663098
* Optimizing Wear and Corrosion Resistance of Superlattice Coatings through Atomic-Scale Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Wenjun Cai, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2018
* USD 394,927.00

The design of new engineering materials resistant to both wear damage and
corrosion degradation is in increasing demand for components in complex service
conditions, such as biomedical implants, hydraulic systems, nuclear power
plants, marine applications and offshore industries. Unfortunately, many
engineering approaches to increasing strength in alloys can result in reduced
corrosion performance. This award supports fundamental research to develop a
comprehensive understanding of effective design principles that can mitigate
wear and corrosion in metallic coatings. The research will focus on superlattice
coatings, which are layered metallic systems with individual layer thickness
below 10 nanometers, and offer great potential to provide both wear and
corrosion resistance. The knowledge developed from this research will lead to
design strategies for new metals and coatings with an optimal combination of
high strength and excellent wear and corrosion resistance. The use of such
materials may lead to significant economical savings in various industries. This
program will additionally provide students with a unique educational and
research experience. Outreach programs are included, which will help stimulate
interests in STEM fields among young students and broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superlattice coatings offer great opportunity to improve
wear and corrosion resistance simultaneously. Little is known, however, about
how key materials properties such as modulation wavelength, interface structure,
and residual stress affect deformation and degradation mechanisms. This research
is centered on a comprehensive study that integrates materials processing,
characterization, wear and corrosion testing, and computer simulations. A finite
element electrochemical model will be combined with experiments to design the
optimum superlattice architecture. Advanced materials characterization will be
coupled with atomistic and finite element modeling to understand the roles of
key microstructural parameters on wear and corrosion resistance. With greater
understanding of the deformation and degradation mechanisms, this bottom-up
design approach may pave the way for creating wear and corrosion resistant
structural materials needed in complex service conditions.