* 1663363
* Benchmark Study of Tornado Wind Loading on Low-Rise Buildings with Consideration of Internal Pressure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Darryl James, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2022
* USD 350,001.00

Tornadoes are historically among the most devastating natural hazards in the
United States, as observed by the damage and fatalities during recent major
tornadoes, including the Joplin, Missouri and Tuscaloosa-Birmingham, Alabama
tornadoes in 2011, the Moore, Oklahoma tornado in 2013, and the Dallas, Texas
area tornado in 2015. As post-tornado disaster surveys have repeatedly revealed,
tornado-induced losses and fatalities are often due to damage to low-rise
buildings. A critical factor contributing to such building damage is that many
low-rise buildings are designed only for winds that travel mostly along a
straight line near the earth's surface, and not for the rotating tornado winds
that are potentially more damaging, primarily due to inadequate understanding of
tornadoes and tornado wind loading on structures. The goal of this research is
to formulate computational models that comprehensively characterize rotating
tornado wind loading and the impact of such wind loading on low-rise buildings.
Such models can be used by engineers to conduct performance-based evaluation of
low-rise buildings subjected to tornado hazard as a way to reduce damage and
fatalities. To raise awareness of the impact of natural hazards, including
tornadoes, on buildings and communities, this research will be integrated into
education and outreach activities within existing programs at Texas Tech
University (TTU), such as courses offered by TTU's National Wind Institute Wind
Science and Engineering Ph.D. program and ongoing outreach activities, including
a 4-H Mentoring Program, Science Camp, and Lubbock's Annual Severe Awareness
Day. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this research goal, this project will test
models of low-rise buildings with two roof types in various types of tornadic
vortices simulated in a large-scale tornado simulator at TTU and straight-line
winds simulated in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) boundary layer wind tunnel at the University of Florida
to provide two benchmark datasets. These two datasets will be used to quantify
the differences between the loadings by tornado and boundary-layer-type
straight-line winds. The focus will be placed on the effects of building
internal pressure and the nonstationary and non-Gaussian nature of tornado
loading introduced by the translation of spatially varying wind speed and static
pressure deficit in tornado vortices. On this basis, an innovative approach
based on discrete wavelet transform and Gaussian filtering will be used to
characterize, model, and simulate nonstationary, dynamic tornado wind loading on
low-rise buildings to enable probabilistic evaluation of the loading effects.
Project data will be made available in the NHERI Data Depot at
https://www.designsafe-ci.org/.