* 1663763
* RAPID: Improving DMSP SSIES-3 data to level-2 quality
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* William Coley, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 11/30/2017
* USD 119,551.00

This RAPID award provides for the development and re-analysis of the database of
ionospheric measurement parameters (the three-dimensional ion flow, ion
temperature, ion density, election temperature, and ion composition) from the
Special Sensors-Ions, Electrons, and Scintillation(SSIES) instruments on
multiple Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) spacecrafts. Thus,
combining the output from the four SSIES instruments produces the complete
three-dimensional flow vector of the thermal plasma, the plasma density and
composition, along with the temperature of the ions and the electrons. The total
extent of these measurements from all of these satellites consists of over 90
satellite years of data from 1987 through the present. These results taken as a
whole represents an extremely valuable resource of scientific information for
ionospheric and magnetospheric physics studies. However, the DMSP data starting
in 2003 from the third generation of the instruments (SSIES-3 starting with F16)
that comprise over 30 satellite-years are only available to the geospace
community at a level-1 quality with no quality flags to identify bad data caused
by an incorrect assumption about the ion composition of the plasma sampled. If
these data were available at a reliable level-2 or level-3 quality that could be
used directly for scientific and modeling work without further need for any
processing, these new results would enable significant advances in research in
space science and space weather efforts. This is especially true for the case of
multiple DMSP satellites with level-2 quality data where the inclusion of data
over multiple orbits and multiple satellites would help enhanced the extended
coverage of the ionospheric and magnetospheric regions that might be achieved by
data assimilation combined with first-principle physics-based modeling. The
boarder impact of such a database is quite xtensive as many science studies are
expected to emerge once these Level-2 results have been transferred to the
database. The justification of this award as a RAPID award is the fact that the
two PIs are planning retirement within the next few months. Consequently, it is
expected that the work supported by this award would never take place. The
absence of these data products would then represent a major loss to the space
physics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two PIs propose a pilot study doing
the initial work to develop the improved data reduction code and quality flag
classification routines to produce level-2 quality SSIES-3 data for public
distribution and use. The effort would concentrate upon analyzing the data for
the year 2012 for the three satellites: F16, F17, and F18. This year is of
especial interest because it is the year of solar maximum activity. Moreover,
several major geomagnetic storms occurring in this year would be studied. These
improved analysis software routines would then be available for subsequent use
to apply to the remainder of the DMSP database. This initial effort would
provide the basis for estimating the expense required to apply these improved
codes to all of the remaining data. The results from this effort would be
distributed to the community through the Madrigal data base hosted by MIT
Haystack Observatory.