* 1663095
* Dynamic 3D Printing With In Situ Depolarization: A New Biomanufacturing Paradigm for Guided Cell-Cell Communication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Robert Chang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,001.00

In an electrohydrodynamics (EHD)-based additive manufacturing (AM) process, an
applied voltage pulls a cylindrical jet of polymer material from a needle to a
collector plate. The cylindrical jet forms a deposited fiber that acquires a
characteristic charge. Conventional EHD processesÂ enable direct printing of
materials at small scales, but are hampered by limited accuracy and pattern
control of the deposited charged fibers. To address this limitation, this
research focuses on the fundamental understanding of fiber charge effects
observed in EHD processes. It is hypothesized that restoring a neutral fiber
charge will enable fibers to be precisely deposited. In the absence of a net
charge, the fibers can be aligned and layered to produce a 3D biological
substrate for cells to attach and function. Specifically, this fundamental
knowledge will yield a biological substrate seeded with rat brain neural cells
and endothelial cells. In this two-cell culture platform, the morphology of the
neural cells are directed by the deposited fiber architecture to form physical
contacts with the endothelial cells. The results of this work can have a
significant impact on the life sciences by furnishing robust 3D cell culture
platforms for drug screening and fundamental cell studies. Moreover, the AM
methodology can be adapted for precision pattern control of polymer fiber
structures across a wide range of industries, including electronics and
medicine. The research outcomes will be integrated into the undergraduate
curriculum as well as introduce high school students to advanced manufacturing,
and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is EHD-based
additive manufacturing of biological substrates composed of discharged fibers.
Such fibers can be reliably oriented in prescribed directions and positions to
spatially guide cell morphology. Currently, the residual charge entrapped within
successively deposited EHD fibers yields electrostatic forces between fibers
that constrain the printed pattern resolution. The first research objective is
to understand the effects of print surface temperature on the residual fiber
charge. A PID-controlled thermoelectric printbed will be constructed to allow
fundamental investigations regarding thermal depolarization of the printed
fibers to a neutral charge state. A picoammeter will be integrated to enable in-
process fiber charge measurements. Temperature and time-resolved charge
measurements will be correlated to quantify the charge decay phenomena. Fiber
placement accuracy will be measured as a ratio of inter-fiber distance to fiber
diameter using scanning electron microscopy. The second research objective is to
test the effect of dynamic fiber placement accuracy on prescribed cell-cell
contacts in a two-cell culture model of rat brain neural cells and endothelial
cells. To accomplish this objective, the discharged fiber surface will be
patterned with growth factors along the layering direction. These growth factors
will stimulate the neural cells to project extensions that form contacts with
endothelial cells on the topmost layer. Immunochemistry of cell surface markers
and barrier permeability measurements will be conducted to confirm cell-cell
communication between the rat brain neural and endothelial cells.