* 1663315
* Collaborative Research: An Examination of Household Risk Assessment Judgments and Protective Action Decision during Tornado Threats
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Haley Murphy, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 04/30/2020
* USD 340,479.00

This project will improve understanding of the kinds of information people seek
when facing a tornado threat, how the information they obtain affects their risk
perceptions, and the way that their risk perceptions affect their protective
actions. This project will have a number of positive impacts to the broader
society. Experimental materials (including software) will be made publicly
available to a range of researchers, including those from under-represented
groups, so that other studies may augment and extend the approach developed
here. The project also includes extensive outreach to professional broadcast
meteorologists and to organizations such as the National Weather Service,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, and state and local government emergency
management agencies in order to inform how weather-related risks are
communicated to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce
two major innovations into research on protective action decision making (here,
in the context of tornado-related risk). First, in a departure from
conventional, exclusively survey-based studies, human-in-the-loop experiments
incorporating computer-based dynamic decision making exercises will be used.
Alternative protective actions (such as seeking additional information, shelter
in-place, or evacuating) will be investigated by examining detailed logs of
participant interaction with the computer-based simulation. Second, this project
will overcome a limitation of previous studies that have focused solely on
individuals by comparing decision processes by individual with those of pairs
(here, married couples). This work is therefore expected to reveal how
interpersonal ties help determine protective actions in households.