* 1663569
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Resiliency of Repetitively Framed Mid-Rise Cold-Formed Steel Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Tara Hutchinson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2023
* USD 680,683.00

The need for low cost, multi-hazard resilient buildings constructed of
sustainable, low-carbon footprint materials is urgent. Mid-rise buildings framed
from thin-walled, cold-formed steel (CFS) have the ability to support this
urgent need. The potential benefits of CFS-framed structures include low
installation and maintenance costs, high durability and ductility, lightweight
framing, and a manufacturing process using recycled material. In addition,
consistency in material behavior, high strength-to-weight ratio and stiffness,
and use of a non-combustibile material are added benefits compared with other
lightweight framing solutions. By using framing schemes with closely-spaced
vertical members repetitively placed in the walls, CFS buildings develop lateral
resistance through strap, sheet, or sheathing attached to these vertical
members. The response of these building systems under earthquake loads and, in
particular, the contribution of portions of the building system not specifically
designated by the design engineers to resist earthquake loads are not well
understood. This award will undertake a series of experiments and complementary
numerical modeling to characterize the relationship between the designated
lateral force resisting system, i.e., the shear walls, and the complete CFS
building system response, including the impact of the gravity walls, finish
materials, and interior partitions, during seismic events. Taken in totality,
this project will contribute to the nation's welfare by advancing fundamental
understanding and design methodologies for CFS building systems vulnerable to
extreme natural hazards. The research plan involves an integrated collaboration
among the University of California, San Diego (UCSD), Johns Hopkins University,
and relevant industry organizations. The research team will conduct education
and outreach to a diverse group of middle and high school students and teachers
and integrate, into the project activities, high school, undergraduate, and
graduate student researchers to help train the next generation
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The seismic resistance of repetitively framed
structures is unique due to the large overstrength and the significant
contribution of non-designated systems in the lateral response. In this project,
a set of experiments de-constructing the building into wall lines and separate
components will be conducted to provide unique information in understanding
benchmark full-scale shake table tests. The shake table tests will be conducted
on the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Large High Performance Outdoor Shake Table at UCSD. Using these experiments, for
the first time, all major components of nonlinearity will be captured in
complementary numerical building models that, when validated, will form the
basis for wider seismic studies and evaluation. Project data will be made
available in the NHERI Data Depot at https://www.designsafe-ci.org/.