* 1663562
* Online Nonintrusive Identification and Monitoring of Internal Weak Points of Electro Energy Devices Using Package Surface Temperature
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Wei Qiao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 05/31/2021
* USD 337,897.00

Electro-energy devices (such as batteries) play an essential role in modern
society with their wide spread applications that span various sectors such as
transportation, healthcare, communication and renewable energy generation to
name a few. Currently, assessing the longevity of such devices while they are in
operation is an extremely challenging task. As a result, there exists a huge
risk of untimely failure of such devices in critical missions and/or situations
leading to safety issues and financial loss. Currently, there are no general,
effective approaches to online identification of internal weak points and
monitoring of the aging processes and health conditions of different electro-
energy devices while in operation. This project formulates and demonstrates new
universal dynamic modeling and system identification methodologies for low-cost
online identification and condition monitoring of internal weak points of
electro energy devices using their package surface temperatures. The
methodologies do not intrude upon the devices or interrupt their operation. The
results of this research will enhance real-time, predictive condition awareness
and improve the understanding of aging and failure mechanisms of electro energy
devices, which will help in designing more reliable devices. Enhanced condition
awareness and design will greatly improve safety and reliability and reduce the
cost and financial risk of using electro energy devices. This project will
provide interdisciplinary research training for graduate and undergraduate
students and STEM education for K-12 school students focusing on dynamic system
modeling and identification for energy systems
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a new dynamic
modeling and system identification-based universal mathematical framework for
nonintrusive online identification and condition monitoring of internal weak
points of electro energy devices using their thermal signature. The framework
incorporates a new universal interpretation for the complex aging processes of
internal weak points via the changes in the three-dimensional electrothermal
dynamics of the devices estimated by measuring package surface temperatures.
Based on this interpretation, a new mathematical modeling approach will be
developed to adaptively characterize the aging-related electrothermal dynamics
of the devices via high-fidelity, physics-based modeling, automated model order
reduction with quantifiable error bounds, online parameter identification for
the reduced-order model, and high-order model reconstruction. The identified
parameters will contain information on locations, aging processes, and health
conditions of the internal weak points and therefore can be used for condition
monitoring of the electro energy devices. The framework will be validated by
computer simulation and experimental studies to identify and monitor internal
weak points of power semiconductor devices. In addition to electro energy
devices, the research will provide enabling capabilities for modeling and
diagnostics of other complex physical systems.