* 1663568
* Manufacturing of Metal Nanostructures by Tensile Deformation of Liquid Metal Arrays
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Golden Kumar, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2019
* USD 231,156.00

Metal nanostructures are essential for energy conversion and storage, sensors,
plasmonics, water purification, and biomedical applications. Despite growing
demand in these technologies, the manufacturing methods for metal nanostructures
have remained few and often complex. Polymer nanostructures can be massively
fabricated by nanoimprinting, template infiltration, and electrospinning. A
plethora of top-down (etching) and bottom-up (directed- or self-assembly)
techniques have been developed for semiconductor nanostructures to meet the
needs of microelectronics industry. In contrast, metal nanostructures still
require multiple lithographic and thin film deposition steps which are slow and
expensive. This award supports fundamental research in the rheology of liquid
metals to advance a new nanomanufacturing technique involving tensile
deformation and rupture of arrays of liquid metal. The research enables
nanolithography-free fabrication of controllable metal nanostructures assembled
on various substrates such as metals, glasses, polymers, and semiconductors. The
project provides education and hands-on training in metal nanomanufacturing to
undergraduate and graduate students and opportunities in engineering to minority
students and students with disability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of shapes
such as droplets, thin films, beads-on-a-string, conical structures, and long
fibers can be created by deformation of polymer liquids. This is enabled by
tuning rheological and interfacial properties of polymer solutions. However, a
similar approach is not applicable to liquid metals because of their low
viscosity, high surface tension, and lack of viscoelasticity. These challenges
of conventional metals are overcome by using amorphous metals or glass forming
metal alloys which exhibit a metastable supercooled liquid state that mimics the
rheology of thermoplastics. Effects of viscosity, surface tension, and strain-
rate on flow behavior of metallic supercooled liquids are systematically
studied. Such knowledge is used to manipulate the supercooled liquid state for
high-throughput manufacturing of metal nanostructures by mechanical means. The
research work involves extensional or tensile deformation of liquid metal arrays
to create high-aspect-ratio and hollow metal nanostructures which are not
feasible by existing embossing methods. The glassy or amorphous nanostructures
are subsequently devitrified or crystallized for applications which require
crystalline metal nanostructures. Besides leading to new applications, this
nanomanufacturing project enables fundamental studies on size effects in
metallic glasses through performance of thermal, electrical, and mechanical
tests on nanoscale specimens.