* 1663652
* Scale-Dependent Observability of Emergent Dynamics: Application to Traffic Flow with Connected Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Kshitij Jerath, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2019
* USD 259,749.00

Global emergent patterns are observed in several large-scale complex systems,
such as transportation networks, power grids, and financial markets. Gaining
understanding of these dynamically evolving behavioral patterns is very
important to solve problems associated with such systems. For example, in
transportation networks, these emergent patterns usually dictate congestion
dynamics and are poised to undergo a transformative change with the introduction
of connected vehicles that can communicate with each other. Consequently, our
ability to observe such patterns plays a critical role in effectively managing
the transition to a smarter transportation network as well as in improving
system performance and reducing congestion costs. This research seeks to answer
questions about the appropriate scale at which these patterns may be best
observed. Additionally, this work also seeks to assess the effect of varying
penetration rates of connected vehicles on the ability to observe emergent
patterns in traffic. This work has a great potential to significantly improve
our ability to monitor, predict and control the occurrence of emergent
congestion events. In the case of traffic flow applications, this study could
help reduce worldwide congestion costs that are estimated to be in several
hundreds of billions of US dollars annually. The techniques developed during
this study will enhance our fundamental knowledge about how to observe the
emergent behavior and use this knowledge to analyze and solve the problems
associated with several other complex systems. The project also has highly
innovative educational plan of creating visually appealing and lucid graphics
material to engage undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this research project is
to create a rigorous methodology to determine the spatial scale and model order
required to observe and predict emergent phenomena in complex systems. In a
narrower context of traffic flow, the project seeks to establish the modeling
requirements for observing emergent congestion events on a multi-lane highway,
and predicting such behavior with better accuracy than current prediction
models. The approach will modify existing Krylov subspace-based model order
reduction techniques by explicitly incorporating spatial scales into the
process. More importantly, the novel contribution of this work will be the
control-theoretic formulation of the renormalization group theory borrowed from
the field of statistical mechanics to gain an understanding of how the
observability of emergent dynamics depends on spatial scale. The research will
include the study of spatial dependence of observability in complex systems in a
control-theoretic setting. This work will also contribute to the study of how
penetration rate (i.e., the distribution of a sensor network in a complex
system) impacts the observability of emergent behavior in complex traffic flow
dynamics.