* 1663851
* Boosting New Careers in Advanced Manufacturing Industries
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Steven Davis, Grayson County Junior College District
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Because advanced manufacturing in the United States continues to evolve rapidly,
highly skilled technicians are needed to operate and maintain these modern
manufacturing facilities. In particular, the Texoma (northeast Texas Oklahoma
area) worker shortage in the advanced manufacturing sector is severe enough to
short-circuit both its own rebound and its contributions to local economic
growth. This project at Grayson College in Texas evolved following a 2015 study
commissioned by the regional workforce board and area economic development
corporations that was designed to identify best practices which could be
replicated to prepare the next generation of employees for advanced
manufacturing careers. In collaboration with the Texoma Manufacturing Steering
Committee, which is comprised of 30 industry and educational members, it is
designed to expand the pipeline of skilled employers by implementing the New
Blue Academy, a comprehensive career awareness and advanced technological
education initiative targeting dual enrollment high school students in rural
north Texas. During this project, perceptions of middle-skill jobs will be
enhanced through the promotion of technical careers among 9,200 high school
students in the Texoma area. It will boost the ATE pipeline by developing an
industry-designed dual-credit ATE curriculum offered in 21 high schools that
will permit students to simultaneously jump-start their college education and a
career. Successes will be shared with community colleges through conferences and
social media sources, such as the ATE Conference, Mentor Connect, Hi-TEC, and
ATECentral.com.

Upon completion of the program a student will receive 41 college credit hours, a
Basic and an Advanced Manufacturing Technology Certificate, an experiential
internship, and potential employment with an industry partner. A plan to
incentivize employers and students to complete the remaining 19 hours for an
A.A.S. Degree in Advanced Manufacturing Technologies will be developed.
Objectives are to: 1) change perceptions of middle-skill jobs and promote
technical career opportunities among high school students, teachers, and
parents; 2) design and implement an industry-driven curriculum that addresses
common technical skills across multiple manufacturing environments; and, 3)
pilot the dual-credit New Blue Career Pathway with two high school partners,
beginning in the tenth grade and culminating with an internship the summer
following high school graduation. Curricular materials will be adapted from two
ATE funded programs (the Florida Advanced Technological Education Center and the
360 Degree Manufacturing and Applied Engineering Center of Excellence in
Michigan) as well as those available from the database of state approved courses
in the Texas Workforce Education Course Manual. Existing manufacturing
activities will be broadened to promote ATE career awareness events among high
school instructors, counselors, and parents. The established steering committee
will ensure ongoing input into the array of elements to be implemented.
Evaluation will be guided by an experienced, external evaluator who will: 1)
examine the success of the project in relation to benchmarks achieved by
existing ATE models; 2) analyze the impact of awareness and recruitment efforts;
and 3) measure student success as its relates to completion, competency, and
employability.