* 1663264
* A Multi-level Dynamically Coupled Model for Evaluating Older Adults' Vulnerability and Resiliency to Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Zhen Cong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 10/31/2018
* USD 502,270.00

The overarching objective of this research is to attain a deeper understanding
of vulnerability and resiliency of older adults to natural disasters. A new
model will be constructed and validated to guide future disaster-related studies
in the presence of aging populations and emerging technologies. Included in the
research is the design and delivery of personalized assistance to older
individuals before, during, and after disasters to increase their survivability
and accelerate recovery. Fresh insights into how to effectively communicate
tornado warnings to older adults and how to best mobilize protective action and
mitigation behaviors will be provided. Activities are planned to promote
diversity, public outreach, and dissemination of research outcomes. A prototype
mobile app will be developed to educate the public on disaster preparedness and
mitigation as well as collecting supplementary data for research
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will systematically explain
fundamental differences between older and younger adults as well as disparities
among older adults in factors, processes, and outcomes with respect to
preparedness, action taking, and mitigation. It hypothesizes an underlying
selection, optimization, and compensation process in which older adults minimize
losses despite declining resources. A population-based stratified random
sampling strategy will be used to oversample older adults in a longitudinal
telephone survey of tornadic events respondents. Using latent class analysis,
multilevel analysis, and structural equation modeling, this research will
estimate the effect of multilevel factors on individual's decision-making and
different factors leading to outcomes including patterns of access to warnings,
decision-making patterns, physical and psychological impact, risk perceptions,
and preparedness and mitigation before and after warnings. Variables and
parameters will be mapped to visually present spatial distributions of
vulnerability and resiliency of older populations in various communities. As the
result, this research will add a more granular and textured depiction of older
adults under extreme stress to the current knowledge and explore future
opportunities and challenges presented by social media and other emerging
communication technologies.