* 1663657
* Real-time Management of Large Fleets of Self-Driving Vehicles Using Virtual Cyber Tracks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Pitu Mirchandani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,991.00

It is only a matter of time before the transportation infrastructure of
freeways, roads, and traffic control systems must accommodate self-driving
vehicles (SDVs) at the same time as manually driven vehicles (MDVs). In large
scale systems that exist in nearly all metropolitan areas, the question is how
can we efficiently, reliably and safely accomplish this? This project aims to
generate fundamental knowledge needed to design such a system. More
specifically, the project will study and develop decision models and algorithms,
and attendant decision-support systems to manage, in real time, large fleets of
SDVs and MDVs on the current infrastructure, without the need to construct
special roads or guideways. This project will assume that SDVs are cyber-
connected and that, through cyber mechanisms of computing and communication, it
is possible to guide these SDVs, both individually and in platoons, on our
transportation infrastructure efficiently, without sacrificing comfort, safety
and efficiency in mobility. The fundamental concepts in the decision-support
architecture are (a) controlling directions, speeds and stops to individual SDVs
in real-time, (b) grouping SDVs in platoons, (c) moving SDVs in platoons, with
short and uniform headways, using the concept of cyber-enabled virtual tracks on
the roads, and (d) providing traffic signals on the roads and blocking control
(platooning sizing and dispatching) on the virtual tracks to maximize throughput
and other desirable traffic performance measures. In addition to the tools
developed for operating SDVs in real time, this project will help transportation
agencies to efficiently satisfy increasing transportation demand with limited
road infrastructure expansion and constrained road capacity. Finally, the
research and tools will be integrated into the current and new courses and
laboratories for computer science, operations research, and transportation
engineering courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address fundamental
knowledge in networking self-driving agents at extremely large scales to meet
temporally and spatially distributed traveler demand. The goal is to develop a
set of new models for integrated traveler mobility optimization and multi-agent-
based control under the new environment of shared SDV networks. It will
investigate a novel cyber-track based concept and methods that optimally provide
real-time guidance to meet temporally and spatially distributed traveler demand
for SDVs (from origins, to intermediate platoons, to destinations), possibly
leading to new large scale nonlinear optimization methods that include vehicular
dynamics and safety/comfort consideration. By taking full advantage of
distributed computing power associated with connected SDVs, the dispatching and
operating system for SDVs will simultaneously route and control individual SDVs
and platoons on existing highways and streets. Based on a space-time cyber track
network modeling framework for representing physical transportation system with
constraints, the project will also develop real-time algorithms for proactive
control of traffic supply infrastructure (e.g., traffic signals, ramp meters,
and traffic information and congestion pricing) that optimizes delays and other
performance metrics for both SDVs and MDVs. The project will integrate parallel
computing and hierarchical system control, as well as a wide range of real-time
vehicle routing/scheduling algorithms, including vehicle routing for platooning,
block control and timetabling, to ensure the safety, efficiency and reliability
of SDV operations. The project will also study the computational tractability of
large scale deployment of SDVs using tools of cloud computing, big data
management and parallel computation. The project will develop protocols of
collecting steaming data from connected SDVs and managing, distributed
computing, and effective logistics for SDV fleets.