* 1663249
* Workshop on Improving the Diversity of Faculty in Electrical and Computer Engineering (iREDEFINE ECE)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Athina Petropulu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2020
* USD 99,856.00

As a field, Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) suffers from a lack of
diversity in the participation of women and underrepresented minorities (URM) at
the undergraduate, graduate, and professorial levels. This project aims to
capitalize on a unique opportunity to bring ECE department heads together with
women and underrepresented minority (W-URM) graduate students to help diversify
the ECE faculty. The project team, including ECE department heads and the ECE
Department Heads Association (ECEDHA) leaders, proposes iREDEFINE, an Annual
Workshop focused on increasing the numbers of W-URM holding tenure track faculty
or postdoc positions in ECE in the US. iREDEFINE capitalizes on the unique
environment provided by the ECEDHA Annual Conference and ECExpo to create a
mechanism to motivate and prepare graduate W-URM students for pursuing faculty
positions in US universities. The unique opportunity arises due to the high
concentration of ECE department chairs attending the event, most of whom are
invested in increasing the diversity of their faculty. The two day Workshop will
overlap with the ECEDHA Conference. The first day will be devoted to providing a
glimpse of the life and career of an ECE faculty, information on different types
of schools, tips on how to prepare for a successful academic position interview,
information on effective instructional techniques, information on seeking
research funding, how to build connections with industry, and how to build
confidence and negotiating skills. The second day will coincide with the first
day of the ECEDHA conference and all iREDEFINE attendees will have access to all
conference sessions. This day will provide an immersive experience on the issues
that are on the minds of ECE faculty, such as the latest technology and research
trends, the latest teaching innovations, and efforts to find solutions to key
problems, such as lack of diversity and shifting enrollment trends. The
iREDEFINE attendees will present posters on their work to the ECE department
chairs, which will give them the opportunity to closely interact with the very
people they will be contacting during their job search and also practice some of
the skills that they learned the day before. The poster session will feed into a
reception for Workshop attendees, ECE chairs and industry affiliates, which will
offer further networking opportunities. In addition to the Workshop, a mentoring
program will be established to extend beyond the workshop. The project will be
evaluated and fine-tuned after the first offering to maximize its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will have a significant impact on the
field of ECE and as a result the future of technology. Diversifying the faculty
will help enhance the diversity of the student population in ECE by providing
role models, and thus diversify the ECE workforce. As ECE is a major enabler in
technological discovery, a more diverse practitioner/educator pool will lead to
new perspectives on technological innovation and how that serves society. The
proposed project will serve as a potential model for improving diversity in STEM
disciplines in general.