* 1663227
* Probabilistic Design of Systems of Cyber-Physical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Yan Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2021
* USD 475,382.00

Cyber-physical systems are engineered systems that rely on a tight integration
of computational algorithms and physical components. Such systems are becoming
increasingly important in modern society. Examples include smart home and office
appliances, robotics, modern manufacturing equipment, medical devices, and
automobiles. In many cases, these systems are connected to Internet and form an
interconnected system, often referred to as the Internet of Things, with
advanced capabilities to sense the environment, exchange information, and
interact with humans. Given the rising importance of systems of cyber-physical
systems in engineering, business, and social environments, improvements in their
design can have major impacts on society. One challenge in designing such
systems is to ensure the system is resilient, meaning that it can recover from
major disruptions when a portion of the system fails to function or communicate.
Another challenge is how to take social behaviors into consideration in their
design so that people will feel comfortable to use such systems because they
constantly collect and share our information. The goal of this research is to
understand how to systematically design networked systems of cyber-physical
systems such that they are resilient and trustable. This will include new
techniques for measuring key properties of complex systems as well as techniques
to design them with better performance. Results will be shared, in part, through
open-source software created during this research to help engineers design
better systems. Web-based learning modules about cyber-physical systems intended
for the general public also will be created and shared
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create and
demonstrate a probabilistic design methodology for networked and deeply
interdependent cyber-physical systems that incorporates meta-modeling and
discrete-event fine-grained modeling. The methodology will enable the design of
system-of-system architecture that addresses functionalities of information
gathering and exchange under the challenges of resiliency, adaptability, and
trust. An information-based quantitative performance measure for resilience will
be created. Mathematical models will be formulated to analyze the information
interdependency between individuals. Quantitative measures of trustworthiness
will be developed to support trust-based strategic network design and
optimization. These novel approaches will be demonstrated and evaluated in a
design study of highly networked manufacturing machines in supply chains.