* 1663531
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the In-situ and Elemental Cyclic Response of Transitional Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Kenneth Stokoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2021
* USD 488,405.00

The consequences of earthquake-induced liquefaction are not trivial; for
example, $15B of damage was attributed to soil liquefaction resulting from the
recent Canterbury Earthquake Sequence in New Zealand. Large portions of the
United States, from Alaska to California and eastward to the New Madrid Seismic
Zone and coastal South Carolina and north to the St. Lawrence Seaway, are prone
to the impacts from earthquakes. Earthquakes such as those in New Zealand and
others have raised awareness about limitations in our understanding of the
cyclic response of natural soil deposits. These limitations have arisen through
continued use of the traditional practice of simplifying geotechnical analyses
by considering two main soil types: drained sands and undrained clays. Design
methodologies for nearly all geotechnical systems have developed along these two
distinct lines. However, many natural soil deposits do not fit into these simple
categories; transitional silty soils, the subject of this research, are an
example. This study aims to answer pertinent questions concerning the cyclic
response of transitional silty soils through systematic and coordinated field
and laboratory studies that will improve our understanding of the potential for
large deformations and loss of life and property during large earthquakes. The
findings of this research will have broad application across the nation and
globe. Furthermore, this research will have a parallel objective of inspiring
the next generation of STEM leaders. Collaboration with the Hatfield Marine
Science Center (HMSC) in Newport, Oregon will allow our outreach efforts to
reach 150,000 visitors and 40,000 K-12 students and teachers per year, through:
(1) public demonstrations of liquefaction and in-situ cyclic tests with a large
mobile shaker truck, (2) a compilation of video demonstrations, data, and
interviews with the researchers into a permanent interactive exhibit, and (3)
development of instructional modules for HMSC staff to help their established
outreach effort expand instruction to include coastal hazards such as the
Cascadia Subduction Zone and associated tsunami. The demonstrations will be
leveraged to form permanent exhibits and instructional modules, which will
greatly extend this outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
improve our understanding of the in-situ and laboratory cyclic response of silt
soils including nonlinearity, degradation of stiffness, triggering of
destabilizing excess pore pressures, and the corresponding post-shaking
consequences. Specifically, this study will: (1) narrow the threshold fines
content and plasticity separating "sand-like" and "clay-like" responses to
cyclic shear stresses/strains and identify critical threshold states; (2)
compare the in-situ, uniaxial and biaxial cyclic response of transitional soils
to understand how changes in strong ground motion directionality impacts
generation of pore pressure and volumetric strain; (3) determine the effect of
soil fabric, stress history, and degree of saturation on the cyclic and post-
cyclic response of transitional soils; (4) link the regional findings from this
work to previous efforts on transitional soils; and (5) inspire future
seismologists, geologists, earthquake engineers, and natural hazard and
resilience planners through a long-lived, coordinated outreach program. This
work concentrates on experiments that target small-to-large shear strains, using
techniques that range from in-situ cyclic loading from large mobile shakers and
blast liquefaction, to specialized and coordinated laboratory tests, allowing
the development of an unprecedented dataset critical for improving the
understanding of the in-situ and elemental level cyclic response to be bridged.