* 1663269
* GOALI: Multi-Scale Characterization and Modeling of Anisotropy and Failure of Aluminum Alloys for Automotive Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Raja Mishra, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 497,190.00

Increasing the fuel efficiency of automobiles is a major driver for the
automotive industry's recent efforts towards lightweight manufacturing. To
achieve this goal, industry has identified the use of aluminum alloys in vehicle
design and manufacture as an essential technology. Aluminum, with a density of
34 percent that of steel, is plentiful and recyclable, but has one-third the
stiffness of steel, is more expensive to produce, has more complex material
behavior, is less ductile with limited design experience within the automobile
industry. To understand these properties and overcome these challenges, robust
computational models of deformation and failure are essential. This Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award is a cooperative
project between Industry (General Motors) and University (University of Texas at
Austin) which supports fundamental scientific research aimed at developing
enabling simulation technology for aluminum alloys through experimentation,
modeling and validation. This will be achieved through a strong interaction
between the university and industry research teams, including graduate student
training through summer residency in General Motors labs and exposure of
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, to current
industry challenges. These interactions will provide broad impact by ensuring
that the research generates new scientific knowledge with long-term benefits to
engineering problems aligned with industrial needs, and will train future
leaders in academia and industry with the skills to lead scientific innovation
with engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental approach of
the research plan includes conducting custom designed biaxial tests on tubes
using two aluminum alloys to establish the evolution of plastic deformation up
to failure under a range of triaxialities and Lode angles, while monitoring the
deformation with three-dimensional digital image correlation. In-situ
experiments on small-scale specimens under electron microscopes will be
conducted, where the evolution of deformation under different stress states can
be quantified up to failure. Small-scale testing will be performed using
electron backscatter diffraction imaging in order to establish the evolution of
texture. The modeling efforts include calibration of state of the art
anisotropic yield functions and development of dependable failure criteria, and
enhancement of the failure criteria using results from the small-scale
experiments and establishment of the evolution of yield surfaces through crystal
plasticity. The integrated approach involving well-calibrated continuum level
plasticity and failure models, validated through their performance in simulating
independent axial quasi-static and dynamic tube crushing experiments, is the
major intellectual merit of the work. Transfer of the developed technology to
industry can be immediate, as the crushing simulations developed and enhanced
through this research are one of the most demanding tasks in automobile safety
assurance.