* 1663646
* Collaborative Research:  A Multi-Physics Approach to Advance Sustainable Engineering Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Christopher Shearer, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 208,000.00

Geopolymers have tremendous potential to be used as a sustainable material for
structural engineering applications. Compared to portland cement concrete,
geopolymers are more durable and less energy- and resource-intensive to
manufacture due to their use of waste by-product materials. However, their
widespread adoption is hindered due to a lack of understanding about geopolymer
formation. Using a nondestructive microwave technique coupled with materials
characterization methods, geopolymer reaction mechanisms can be studied and
modeled, especially those involving water. The outcomes of the project will
provide material design tools for geopolymers to become a staple material used
to build the nation?s future sustainable structures. This research will also
improve the prediction of strength, durability, and early-age properties of
current structural materials such as portland cement concrete and advance other
future materials with similar compositions. Further, the microwave-based
assessment technique evolved from this project will enable in-situ evaluation of
materials that undergo a hardening reaction after placement in the field thereby
offering structural health monitoring and enhancing the construction quality
control. This work will also include mentoring a diverse team of researchers and
development of outreach activities that support the success of Native American,
minority, female, and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will advance the fundamental understanding of geopolymer reaction mechanisms,
which is critical for the advancement of viable geopolymer compositions for use
as sustainable structural materials. Microwave techniques will be used to
discern changes in material properties through dielectric measurements.
Dielectric mixing models will be corroborated with multi-scale materials
characterization techniques to quantify changes in water binding and
corresponding phase composition transformations in geopolymers. This multi-
physics approach will culminate in two new material models. The first model will
link the phase formation mechanisms that occur during geopolymerization reaction
with setting, rheological, and mechanical behavior. The second model will extend
Powers Model for cement hydration to alkali-activated materials. Such a model
will allow materials engineers to optimize geopolymer microstructures based on
composition and curing inputs. These models can be extended for other materials
with calcium-silicate chemistries and variable water binding. This work will
also lay the groundwork for in-situ test methods suitable for assessment of
geopolymer maturity, thereby offering structural health monitoring and improved
quality control.