* 1663044
* Collaborative Research: A Framework for Assessing the Impact of Extreme Heat and Drought on Urban Energy Production and Consumption
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lance Manuel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 98,391.00

This research will produce novel, rigorous and integrative methods that will
contribute to society's capacity for effectively managing city-scale electricity
systems during periods of extreme heat and drought. The modern electric grid,
which includes both electricity consumers and producers, faces significant
challenges and uncertainties, including increased frequency and intensity of
heat waves and droughts. Concurrently, the processes underlying electricity
production and consumption are becoming more complex, due in part to advances in
electric grid-connected technologies and the demand-side management programs
that control them. This research will improve knowledge of city-specific future
extreme heat and drought scenarios, as well as quantification of the impact of
extreme events under these scenarios on a city's electricity consumption and
production. Findings from this research have the potential to significantly
impact the way cities and electric utility operators manage electric grids under
extreme heat and drought conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
vital links between climate modeling, consumption and production, and seeks to
contribute to the following scientific advancements: 1) development of effective
methods for generating refined future extreme heat and drought scenarios
utilizing disparate sources of data of varying fidelity, such as historical
observations; 2) development of a flexible electricity consumption model
integrated with demand-side management strategies using bottom-up energy and
demand modeling methods; 3) development of a data-driven stochastic optimization
method for robust power-generation decision strategies that considers various
sources of uncertainty, including weather and the consumption and production of
electricity.