* 1663513
* Human-Aware Environments for Distributed Building Systems Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Farrokh Jazizadeh Karimi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 383,661.00

Innovative management of urban infrastructure operations has a critical role in
enhancing their serviceability, sustainability, and flexibility in integration
of dynamic sources of energy. Buildings, a major component of the urban
infrastructure, account for majority of energy consumption. This project
investigates novel approaches for human-centered and distributed quantification
of thermal demand in buildings for efficient thermal energy management.
Conventional monitoring and control approaches in buildings are constrained with
limited feedback from an environment as well as conservative assumptions that do
not reflect the dynamics of their users. To address these limitations, this
project investigates a closer system integration between human body thermal
response and control mechanisms of building systems. Accordingly, the project
investigates non-intrusive sensing and inference methodologies that enable a
smart environment to infer the need of its occupants by considering the trade-
off between instrumentation, feasibility, and performance. Realization of the
research will provide the ground in identifying adaptation potentials at
building level and building networks at grid level to improve serviceability of
building infrastructure. By leveraging the cross-disciplinary nature of the
research, this project integrates findings in undergraduate and graduate
courses. It also contributes to the programs that encourage K-12 and
undergraduate learners from groups underrepresented in engineering to pursue
degrees in STEM fields in collaboration with Virginia Tech CEED center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human body responses to ambient conditions, which are
reflected in cardiopulmonary adjustments, act as a transmitter in an
environment. This characteristic is leveraged in this project to shift from
human-centric instrumentation for personalized thermal comfort assessment to
space-centric by a novel application of Doppler radar systems that act as the
sole transceivers. The fundamental requirements of feasibility and performance
for a system integration will be investigated through experimental and field
validation studies, mathematical modeling, and design of an alternative control
framework. Statistical inference techniques, coupled with specialized signal
processing frameworks will be developed to enable the application of human
physiological response as sensor proxies for distributed feedback in control of
building systems? operation. To this end, bio-signal feature engineering and
sensitivity analyses will be carried out to develop efficient probabilistic
models of thermal response feedback that account for environmental noise
interference. Parametric and non-parametric techniques for modeling thermal
response of human body will be also utilized to investigate new dimensions to
standard thermal sensation metrics. Alternative control scenarios that combine
real-time personalized feedback with existing control logic in building systems
will be evaluated to (1) assess the efficacy of the control feedback from
physiological responses and (2) identify potential energy efficiency
improvements in buildings as the main research hypotheses.