* 1663578
* Stampede 2:  Operations and Maintenance for the Next Generation of Petascale Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Kelly Gaither, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 03/31/2024
* USD 36,793,220.00

In 2016, the National Science Foundation funded the acquisition of a large new
forward-looking high performance computing (HPC) system, Stampede 2, by the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at the University of Texas at Austin. In
partnership with its lead system vendor (Dell), TACC will deploy the Intel-based
system in 2017, doubling the capacity of its predecessor, Stampede, by
introducing new memory, processor and interconnect technologies. As Stampede 2
nears its operational deployment, a proposal for operations and maintenance
(O&amp;M) of the system was submitted by the University of Texas at Austin. The
system is expected to be used as a national resource by thousands of
researchers, educators, and students annually. As a critical component of
academic infrastructure, it will advance fundamental knowledge in a wide variety
of science and engineering frontiers. In addition to continued partnership with
Dell, subawards to Clemson University, The University of Colorado, Cornell
University, Indiana University, and Ohio State University will ensure a broad
national research of innovative HPC to academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stampede 2 will operate within the larger landscape of the
nation's research cyberinfrastructure (CI). It joins the set of large scale
computing resources that rely on and benefit from the collaborative user
services model of the NSF-funded Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) project. These accompanying shared services provide for
systems allocations, user training, technical interoperability, research and CI
community engagement, and access to expertise. Stampede 2 doubles the computing,
storage and networking capacity of the current system, Stampede. Delivering on
the potential of this complex scientific instrument requires knowledgeable and
ongoing operations, which include: robust system maintenance, reliability and
availability; security; software configuration and management; efficient
utilization; and research workflow optimization. Most significantly, the
thousands of users who currently depend on Stampede rely on expert assistance to
help in the development of new skills in order to maximize the value of the new
technologies in Stampede 2. These technologies represent the future of large-
scale computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture of Stampede 2 reflects
community consensus about HPC's exascale future; while specific technologies are
in rapid flux, all paths indicate a transition to more explicit parallelism
within applications. Today's applications must adapt, and Stampede 2 offers a
bridge to exascale systems of tomorrow, providing capabilities for exploring new
approaches to multiscale (both temporal and spatial) simulations, many forms of
data intensive science, visualization, and data analysis. Stampede 2's
operations will also broaden the usage base of HPC, appealing to and supporting
a much greater depth and breadth of large-scale computational science for
research than any other national system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Stampede 2
Operations and Maintenance project plan includes world-class operations, user
support and training, application tuning and migration, education, outreach,
documentation, data management, visualization, analytics-driven application
support, and research collaboration. TACC and its team of partners are
established CI providers. Collectively the Stampede 2 operations team will
leverage a variety of other NSF-supported projects such as XSEDE, Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure Research and Education Facilitators (ACI-REF), and a broad
array of scientific software activities. With these complementary
collaborations, the value of the O&amp;M award is further increased.