* 1663435
* Multiscale Analysis of Residual Stresses with Novel Non-Destructive and Destructive Approaches using Surface Displacement Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Daniel McAdams, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2022
* USD 334,928.00

Engineered materials and parts undergo severe mechanical and thermal loads
during their development that result in the formation of internal residual
stresses. Residual stresses (nominally force divided by area) are caused by
internal forces that remain even after all external loads are removed. Despite
the fact that residual stresses can reduce the service life considerably,
comprehensive and practical methods to determine them without destroying the
parts do not exist. Current non-destructive techniques allow their
quantification on the surface of the parts only. Thus, development of new
materials or manufacturing techniques can be greatly helped by a thorough
estimation of residual stresses that might develop during the processes. For
example, residual stresses are extremely prevalent in additively manufactured
parts and strongly depend on process parameters in a complex way that are not
understood well. This award supports fundamental research in inverse
computational methods based on the mechanics of materials to estimate residual
stresses in both non-destructive and destructive fashions from the measurement
of forces and surface displacements. Advancement in residual stress analysis
will promote both opportunistic use and mitigation in the development of new
materials and manufacturing processes, which will greatly enhance automotive,
aerospace, defense, and nuclear industries. The research team will also promote
engineering and education through participation in the summer camp programs that
will involve female and underrepresented high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the development of the non-destructive
approach, surface displacements will be measured cost-effectively on varying
part sizes using digital camera images to trace speckle patterns. Mechanics-
based mathematical algorithms derived using adjoint equations will be
implemented to infer residual stress distribution from these measurements.
Validation on a 3D printed rubber like material will be conducted. For the
development of the destructive approach, very thin sectioned samples will be
retrieved from the polycrystalline specimens to relieve all residual stresses,
with the implication that the thin slices will deform as a result. Subsequent
loadings of the samples will be used to determine the heterogeneous, anisotropic
granular microstructure of the material using mechanics-based mathematical
models. Application of reverse deformation on the now known microstructure to
retrieve the original configuration can then be used to predict the residual
stresses in the given section of the material. The fundamental scientific issue
underlying both approaches is: What are the minimum number of experimental data
sets and deformation modes, i.e., experiments, required to uniquely map residual
stresses?