* 1663566
* Novel Topology Optimization Methods for Designing Multifunctional Heterogeneous Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kai James, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2021
* USD 284,484.00

New advances in additive manufacturing have enabled rapid and inexpensive
fabrication of complex designs containing multiple classes of materials, such as
metals, ceramics, and polymers, all within a single print job. This capability
allows manufacturers to produce heterogeneous, multi-component designs that do
not require assembly, thereby eliminating the cost and design constraints
imposed by the assembly process. It also can allow designers to produce higher-
performing and/or lighter-weight components than is possible through traditional
means. However, our capacity to manufacture such designs currently exceeds our
capability to optimize them. This research project will investigate novel
algorithms for generating optimal structural geometries and material layouts for
multifunctional, heterogeneous systems. These algorithms will consider the
behavior of the different types of materials used in a design and the
interactions among the materials. In this way, we will enable system-level
optimization of multicomponent designs that will exhibit cost and performance
properties far exceeding components created using traditional approaches. This
novel design approach has the potential for impacts across multiple research
communities and industries, with applications ranging from biomedical devices to
consumer electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this research, we will
introduce a new design formulation for handling multifunctional design problems
containing several classes of material. This objective will be achieved through
the development of novel topology optimization-based algorithms that will
combine nonlinear finite element analysis with an original parametric design
representation scheme, created specifically for heterogeneous problems. The
numerical optimization problem will be solved using gradient-based methods in
which function gradients will guide the optimization search of the design space.
These gradients will be computed using adjoint sensitivity analysis, and will
take into account the various sources of nonlinearity being investigated,
including hyperelasticity, plasticity, and material damage. The resulting design
algorithms will be validated using high-fidelity computational modeling of the
optimized designs, along with analysis of analogous commercially-available
designs, to quantify the performance gains generated by each algorithm.