* 1663133
* Conference: Managing Legionella and other Pathogenic Microorganisms that Colonize Plumbing Systems Date/Location: April 2017, Baltimore, MD
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Stan Hazan, NSF International
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,995.00

1663133&lt;br/&gt;Hazan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is comprehensive technical
conference developed to assess the management of regrowth of pathogens in
plumbing and distribution of drinking water, with emphasis on Legionella
pneumophila, and provide best available practical recommendations to water
suppliers and facilities to assist resolution. It is scheduled for April, 2017
in Baltimore, MD. Several technologies have been utilized in different
circumstances with variable success. The conference will assemble experts in all
of the key technical areas to provide essential practical information that can
be applied to reduce risks to the large populations at
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous microorganisms are known to regrow after the
treatment of drinking water and then colonize distribution, plumbing and cooling
water systems. Among these are: Mycobacterium avium, Legionella pneumophila and
non pneumophila strains, and Acanthamoeba polyphaga. These and other
microorganisms (e.g., protozoa, including Naegleria fowleri) colonize biofilms
where they can proliferate by being protected from disinfectant residuals.
Legionella pneumophila in particular has been shown to be a significant public
health concern. Numerous incidents involving thousands of cases of legionella-
associated respiratory disease and thousands of deaths have been reported in the
U.S. and Europe since the first identified legionellosis outbreak was detected
in Philadelphia in 1976. A portion of legionella cases have been directly
associated with distributed drinking water. Legionellosis became a reportable
disease in the U.S. in 2001. A recent Centers for Disease Control Mortality and
Morbidity Weekly Report for 2011-2012 demonstrated that water related
legionellosis is the most significant waterborne disease in the USA and also in
other developed countries. The report listed 431 cases of 10 microbial diseases.
Twenty-one of the 32 reported outbreaks were caused by legionella resulting in
111 cases and 14 deaths, and it was the only cause of deaths among the reported
waterborne outbreaks. Since the implementation of the updated Safe Drinking
Water Act regulations in 1982, there has been a general decline in reported
traditional waterborne disease outbreaks, but an increase of those associated
with water distribution rather than source water treatment. The conference is
appropriate and necessary because even though the continuing periodic reports of
legionella disease outbreaks associated with hospitals and cooling systems
attract national publicity, it is clear that the impacted communities of water
suppliers, building facilities, state regulators, health care, and plumbing
officials are still lacking adequate information and advice on the physical
plumbing water conditions, microbial monitoring and detection, and prevention
and mitigation opportunities that can reduce risks to the public. The federal
water regulatory issue has not been resolved partly because of some statutory
and regulatory complexities. To maximize the impact and audience and benefits to
be achieved by the conference and the valuable practical information it
produces, a no cost webinar will follow, as well as publication of a monograph
that will provide the collected information in a user accessible format for long
term future reference and access.