* 1663411
* Multi-scale Modeling of Crowdshipping as a New Form of Urban Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Bo Zou, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,339.00

E-commerce in the US has experienced explosive growth in the past decade,
resulting in a precipitous increase in truck traffic. The surge of truck traffic
has caused many negative consequences to the urban environment such as greater
traffic congestion and emissions, faster wear-and-tear on road infrastructure,
and more acute shortage of truck parking space. These consequences are
increasingly at odds with the need to develop livable urban communities which
requires significant reduction of truck traffic. Crowdshipping has emerged
recently as an alternative to truck-based delivery. Using a crowd of ordinary
individuals who walk, bike, or drive to perform delivery in urban areas,
crowdshipping presents considerable promise to reconcile the strong need for
livable community development with the rapid growth of urban freight demand.
This award develops theoretic foundations for modeling and improving the
efficiency of crowdshipping for urban delivery. Results from the research will
lead to a better understanding of the traffic, economic, and environmental
impact of crowdshipping and support urban freight policy making. Knowledge
gained from this project will also provide generic insights for other areas in
the increasingly crowdsourced and on-demand society, such as ride sourcing and
mobile sensing. By designing, delivering, and evaluating a pipeline of
engineering education activities, this award will further enhance the awareness
and understanding of freight transportation and urban delivery innovations among
diverse student groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are
organized around two thrusts. The first thrust establishes static and dynamic
mechanisms to address individual solicitation and shipment assignment problems
at the microscale. The properties of the mechanisms in incentivizing individual
participation in crowdsourced delivery and the asymptotics of an approximation
technique in shipment assignment will be investigated. The second thrust creates
a queueing network-based framework to characterize and improve system
performance of crowdshipping at the macroscale. Conditions for crowdshipping
system equilibrium existence and equilibrium flows of crowdsourced individuals
will be identified. Analytical capabilities will be developed to determine the
optimal pool size of crowdsourced individuals to meet given shipping demand and
improve delivery service fairness. The developed mechanisms, techniques, and
models will be evaluated using case studies informed by real world data. If
successful, this research will advance the knowledge and analysis capabilities
of crowdshipping for urban delivery, and enrich the literature of transportation
systems analysis and city logistics. Additionally, the PI will engage diverse
student groups (high school and community college students) to raise awareness
in understanding of freight transportation and urban delivery innovations among
diverse student groups.