* 1663345
* Mechanisms on Developable Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Spencer Magleby, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2021
* USD 441,001.00

There is an increasing demand for ultra-compact mechanical systems that are
capable of complex tasks. Developable mechanisms are envisioned as next-
generation mechanical systems to meet these needs. A developable surface can be
thought of as a shape that can be made from a thin sheet of material without
breaking or stretching. The term "developable mechanism" is coined to describe a
mechanism that conforms to or is created from a developable surface. Developable
mechanisms can be used in applications as diverse as spacecraft, automobiles,
ships, architecture, furniture, clothing construction, and medical devices. They
can also conform to or emerge from developable surfaces such as aircraft
fuselages and wings, submarine hulls, rocket cones, and minimally invasive
surgery tools. They make possible new mechanisms in highly constrained spaces
(such as medical implants, next generation electronics equipment, and deployable
aerospace components), and applications with limited manufacturing processes
available (such as high-volume production and cost-sensitive applications).
Results from this research will enable engineers to meet future and presently-
unfulfilled needs for hyper-compact mechanisms in several important application
areas. This will be demonstrated on industry applications. Although their motion
is mathematically complex, developable mechanism fabrication is increasingly
possible and accessible using 3-D printers and computer-controlled tools common
to maker spaces. This accessibility, combined with plans to distribute open-
source design materials, will make the research results useful to a broad
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to advance
understanding of developable mechanism fundamentals and use this knowledge to
create methods for their analysis and design. This will include a thorough
investigation of the properties, motion criteria and kinematics of developable
mechanisms on fundamental developable surfaces, such as generalized cylinders,
planes, cones, and tangent developable, and extensions to hybrid developable
surfaces. Design guides and engineering models will be verified and demonstrated
by designing and testing physical prototypes.