* 1663343
* Penn State's CyberCorps; Scholarship for Service Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2025
* Anna Squicciarini, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,514,971.00

The Pennsylvania State University (Penn State), a designated National Center of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education and Research, proposes to
continue and expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals
for entry into the government workforce. The project will increase involvement
of students in several cyber-relevant disciplines. The project will have an
immediate impact on the information assurance and forensics capabilities of the
federal workforce by developing well-trained cybersecurity professionals. The
project will increase interest in cybersecurity among students, both in
information sciences and in related interdisciplinary areas such as computer
engineering, computer science, social science, and risk analysis. To date, the
SFS program at Penn State has provided scholarships to twenty-six students and
each of them had at least one government job offer at the time of graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a multi-disciplinary environment
within Penn State's College of Information Sciences and Technology (IST) with
the opportunity to identify, analyze and solve real-world security and privacy
problems from technical, legal, ethical, policy, and business perspectives. The
program seeks to improve the cybersecurity posture of individuals and
organizations by creating innovative solutions for detecting and removing cyber
threats, recovering from cyber-attacks, protecting privacy, understanding
policy, enhancing trust, and mitigating risks. A critical feature of the SFS
program at Penn State is its interdisciplinary nature, which requires engagement
across the university. SFS students work on a variety of real-world projects
that connect cyber with diverse topics, like: assessing online terrorist
recruitment strategies or combating drug and human trafficking. Further, the
college hosts eight labs dedicated to innovative research in cybersecurity,
funded by government agencies and the private sector. Student professional
development covers the following topics: resumes; cover letters and interviews;
the internship as an extended interview; personality and leadership types;
surviving politics and criticism; effective meeting management; professional
presentations; career management skills; and emerging topics in national
security.