* 1663753
* Using Collaboratively Designed Research Based Courses to Develop Tribal College Research Capacity and Increase Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Brian Grebliunas, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2022
* USD 695,526.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover may prove to be a model for similar
engagement at other small community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
creates intensive research-based training courses in the life sciences for
students and faculty, using zebrafish as a versatile model organism for
classroom experiments. In Aim 1, a series of courses will be created, in
partnership between faculty at tribal colleges (A'aniiih Nakoda College, Chief
Dull Knife College, Little Big Horn College, and Fort Peck Community College)
and research faculty at Montana State University-Bozeman (MSU). Each set of
course curricula will reflect issues relevant to the specific faculty, students,
and community. Aim 2, through week-long intensive courses, lays the foundation
for tribal college faculty to develop or enhance their research mindset and
skills to mentor undergraduate research endeavors at their respective colleges.
Collaboration between tribal college faculty and the MSU scientists will
continue to support tribal college faculty as they develop new, or enhance
existing research projects and research-based courses. Aim 3 proposes that
students will attend courses and then participate as student TAs for deeper
engagement with the research mindset. Offering these courses at the tribal
colleges allows students to attend the courses within their communities and
permits these courses to act as stepping stones for future endeavors, including
research programs at their tribal colleges and programs at 4-year universities
like MSU.