* 1663105
* Collaborative Research: SFS Program: Strengthening the National Cyber Security Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Neslihan Alp, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,540,763.00

Data loss, cybercrimes, and security breaches have posed significant threats to
cyberspace, and many experts expect that the number and severity of cyber-
attacks will increase. The protection and security of computing systems,
critical infrastructure, and cyberspace are vital to nearly all aspects of our
society. To secure cyberspace, the nation needs capable, well-trained, and
responsive professionals and experts in the cybersecurity workforce. The
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC), in collaboration with the Tuskegee
University (TU), launches a new Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
graduate highly capable and talented cybersecurity professionals with Master's
degrees. Both UTC and TU host a Center of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance Education/Cyber Defense (CAE IA/CD), designated by the National
Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security. As such, both
institutions are well equipped to prepare SFS scholars for cybersecurity careers
in local, state, and federal governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed new
SFS program recruits exceptional students through academic and community
outreach initiatives. Strategies include recruiting from the Collegiate Cyber
Defense Competition (CCDC) team, Honor College, and outreaching to other
institutions. The SFS scholars will be selected based on a holistic
consideration of credential ranking and group diversity. The SFS program will
implement cohort programs, and students will gain common cohort experiences
including: taking common curriculum in each cohort; attending monthly forums or
field trips; conducting collaborative research; participating in security
conferences; joining CCDC; and conducting K-12 outreach. These strong and well-
designed academic programs, combined with high-quality student services, and
paired with a network of industry partnerships, will help prepare quality
professionals in cybersecurity. The SFS program will also assist scholars'
transition into government through mentorship and career planning efforts. This
project will strengthen the cybersecurity workforce by graduating well-trained
cybersecurity professionals to defend the cyber-infrastructure, critical
infrastructure, citizen privacy, and daily activities in cyberspace. The
partnership between UTC and TU (a strong HBCU school) will help diversify the
cybersecurity workforce. The knowledge and experiences gained through this
program will be disseminated in regional and national conferences, workshops,
and journals to inspire collaboration among institutions, government, and
industry in creating and training highly capable cybersecurity professionals.
Through outreach to local communities and K-12 schools, including those with
large populations of underrepresented groups in computing, this project will
promote awareness of the cybersecurity issues that the nation faces as well as
disseminate basic knowledge about information security.