* 1663399
* Collaborative Research: Acoustic Field-Assisted Stereolithography for Multi-Material Additive Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Yayue Pan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,481.00

The successful development of nanomachines is pivotal for the realization of
future intelligent nanorobots, nanofactories, and nanomedicine. Through
applications in nano and micro surgery, targeted drug delivery, and
environmental pollutant removal, the impact of nanomachines on every aspect of
daily lives as well as the global economy is expected to be significant.
However, the manufacturing of nanomachines is challenging due to the difficulty
in combining multiple materials or assembling multiple components into a three-
dimensional structure to achieve the desired functionalities. Most currently
reported nano and micromachines are limited to very simple designs with
spherical or cylindrical geometries and thus limited functions, while requiring
a large amount of labor, time, and cost for fabrication. This award investigates
the scalable and efficient manufacturing of multi-material three-dimensional
objects consisting of arbitrarily distributed nano-sized building-blocks. The
project studies the advent of multi-functionality by nanoparticle localization
through patterning and building 3D objects by solidifying particle-polymer
suspensions layer-by-layer. Furthermore, this research advances knowledge of
multi-material structure design and development, and paves the way for a new
scientific paradigm for the design, fabrication, and application of multi-
functional nanomachines. Course modules on additive nanomanufacturing are
planned for education in engineering both at the two collaborative universities
and at local middle and high schools. Special attention is given to encourage
the participation of women, persons with disabilities, and traditionally
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current manufacturing methods for
nanomachines are limited by scalability, efficiency, and material and geometric
diversity. To overcome these constraints, this project aims to establish a new
additive nanomanufacturing strategy for fabricating 3D multi-material particle-
polymer nanocomposites, and to test the hypothesis that the localized
nanoparticle distribution can produce multi-functionalities. The research
approach -- acoustic field-assisted stereolithography -- utilizes an acoustic
field to pattern nanoparticles with macro-to-nano scale resolutions and build a
3D object by solidifying the particle-polymer suspensions layer-by-layer. This
research integrates multiple physical phenomena with nanomanufacturing and
involves various disciplines of science and engineering including modeling and
simulation, process design and development, material and device
characterization. This project contributes to advances in additive
nanomanufacturing, nanotechnology, and innovations in nanomaterials and
nanomachines.