* 1663864
* Enhancing U.S. Membership in the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ourania Kosti, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 893,880.00

This award provides support to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to carry
out its responsibilities as the United States National Member Organization (NMO)
of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). These
responsibilities take two forms: participating in governance of the Institute
through participation in the IIASA Council and direct interaction with the
organization; and facilitating and encouraging U.S. interest in IIASA's
activities. The Board on International Organizations (BISO) of the National
Academy of Sciences (NAS) executes these responsibilities through the U.S.
Committee for IIASA. IIASA was established in 1972 as a multilateral, non-
governmental research institution devoted to interdisciplinary, policy-oriented
research. At IIASA, multidisciplinary, international teams of researchers
conduct research into the critical issues of global environmental, economic,
technological and social changes that we face in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal consists of the
work by the U.S. NMO, in collaboration with interested U.S. researchers and
Government agencies, to formulate U.S. views regarding IIASA's research, budget,
and administration. This helps to insure the integrity of the Institute and
guides the IIASA research program in ways that will maintain its quality and its
relevance to U.S. research and policy concerns. The NMO works to broaden the
impact of the Institute and its work by serving as a liaison to the U.S.
science, technology, and policy communities, with the goal of increasing
participation in and awareness of IIASA by Americans in academia, government,
business, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This includes recruiting
for and funding IIASA's Young Scientists Summer Program for advanced graduate
students; helping to find suitable candidates for IIASA's job vacancies; serving
as the hub of a national network of interested scholars and policymakers; and
helping IIASA find opportunities to participate in national policy debates. The
chairman of the U.S. Committee represents the U.S. NMO at IIASA's Council
meetings. The Council is composed of representatives from the 23 NMO's; each NMO
country pays an annual membership contribution. The U.S. Council member works
with the Director of IIASA, the IIASA Council Program Committee, and the IIASA
Science Advisory Committee to guide and strengthen the IIASA research program.
The U.S. national committee carries out an annual review of IIASA's research
progress, soliciting comments from academic, government, and other experts in
the U.S. scientific community.