* 1663770
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Comprehensive Hazard Analysis for Resilience to Geomagnetic Extreme Disturbances
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Daniel Welling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,183,666.00

Extreme solar storms threaten society, in part, via Geomagnetically Induced
Currents (GICs) which damage power transmission systems. A space weather extreme
event would devastate the US, costing more than $2T and leaving hundreds of
millions without electricity for more than a month. The National Space Weather
Action Plan calls for an immediate increase in research and improvements to our
predictive capabilities to address this threat. This proposed work will make use
of NSF funded data sources (AMPERE, SUPERMAG, and EarthScope) to improve
existing models with in the Space Weather Modeling Framework and to generate a
new tool for GIC prediction that could easily be transitioned to operations at
NOAA's Space Weather Prediction Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive
Hazard Analysis for Resilience to Geomagnetic Extreme Disturbances (CHARGED)
applies experts in various disciplines to create a fully coupled, physics-based
model of GICs that includes the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and solid Earth
together with validation against state-of-the art globally distributed
observations. The Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) will be improved with
realistic particle precipitation and ionospheric conductance physics. A global
3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) model will be used to propagate the
ionosphere signal through the ground while accounting for the oceans and
variable lithosphere conductivity. This model will be validated using the best
available in-situ and remote data to determine its predictive accuracy. The
relationship between solar driving and GICs will be explored for both historical
and idealized extreme events. The project will yield fundamental new
understanding of the processes leading to extreme GIC events (solicitation
target 1), and expand our capability to model and forecast GIC hazards (target
2). The resulting coupled system could form a natural extension to the
operational SWMF version currently at NOAA.