* 1663364
* Collaborative Research: Pore Formation Mechanisms in Laser Powder-Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing: Particle-Resolved Modeling and Fundamental Experimentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Alexey Volkov, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2019
* USD 110,640.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) has created a new paradigm of integrated materials,
design and manufacturing innovations for effective product development and
realization across a broad range of industries. Metal AM technologies such as
selective laser melting (SLM), which uses a powder-bed and a high power laser,
are especially beneficial in making complex-geometry, high-performance
components without incurring tooling costs, giving early adopters a competitive
advantage in the global market. One of the key challenges that hinder efficient
metal AM technology implementation in industry is part quality inconsistency
that is significantly affected by porosity in AM parts. Pores, with sizes of one
to one hundred microns, are internal defects generated during the process and
that cause large variations in part performance. Pore formation in metal AM is
complex and not fully understood, making it difficult to predict for quality
control. This award corroborates basic research needs of the porosity issue in
metal AM parts. The project tackles original research on the coupled multi-scale
and multi-physics process of heating, melting and solidification of numerous
microscopic metallic particles in SLM. Research findings will not only establish
correlations between the process parameters, material properties and pore
attributes, but may also lead to novel techniques for mitigating pore defects,
and thus, have a potential to accelerate metal AM adoption in U.S. industry. In
addition, this project will contribute toward workforce training for metal AM
industrial needs and attract high school students into advanced manufacturing
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to
distinguish pore formation mechanisms in SLM and to theoretically predict,
analyze and experimentally characterize the porosity in SLM parts. In this
collaborative research between the University of Louisville (UofL) and the
University of Alabama (UA), a hybrid numerical modeling technique will be
developed for particle-resolved simulations capable of capturing different pore
formation mechanisms in SLM. The model will be validated by SLM experiments of
small-scale specimen fabrications, incorporating an infrared thermal imager for
process temperature and melt-pool dynamics. The fabricated specimens will be
measured using micro-scale x-ray computed-tomography and analyzed to attain
statistical data of detailed porosity attributes for comparison with the results
from numerical modeling. The research efforts will be extended to study the
relationship between process parameters and morphology and distribution of
porosity in SLM, and to estimate process windows that minimize pore defects. If
successful, this study will distill knowledge of a convoluted multi-physics
phenomenon and will offer significant insight detailing the key to particular
mechanisms of different pore formations. The research results will be included
in the training materials for the Additive Manufacturing Competency Center on
the University of Louisville campus, providing practitioners of the SLM
technology with better understanding of the relationship between processing
parameters, porosity formation, and mechanical properties of critical AM-
fabricated components.