* 1663688
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Lars Bildsten, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2023
* USD 826,773.00

Stars are the most commonly observed celestial objects, and remain at the
forefront of astronomical research. The goal of this project is to sustain the
MESA software framework as a key piece of software infrastructure for the
astronomy community while building new innovative scientific capabilities and
educational networks. MESA (Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics) is
a software instrument that solves the equations governing the evolution of
stars. The MESA project 1) has attracted over 900 registered users world-wide;
2) has over 10,000 downloads of the source code; 3) has received over 12,000
archived and searchable posts about community discussions of MESA; 4) has been
cited about 1000 times and has a current citation rate of about 300/year; 5)
papers that cite MESA have themselves generated over 10,000 citations; 6)
provides a Software Development Kit to build MESA across a variety of platforms;
7) delivers an annual Summer School program that now has over 150 graduates; 8)
hosts a web-portal for the astronomy community to share knowledge and tools; 9)
offers a prototype of a cloud resource for education, MESA-Web. These metrics
provide evidence that MESA is becoming standard software for understanding
evolving stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the MESA software
framework and its user community. MESA provides solvers for one-dimensional
fully coupled structures and composition equations governing stellar evolution.
It is based on an implicit finite volume scheme with adaptive mesh refinement
and sophisticated time-step controls; state-of-the-art modules provide equation
of state, opacity, nuclear reaction rates, element diffu- sion, boundary
conditions, and changes to the mass of the star. MESA is an open source library
that employs contemporary numerical approaches, supports shared memory
parallelism based on OpenMP, and is designed with present and future multi-core
and multi-thread architectures in mind. MESA combines composable, interoperable,
robust, efficient, thread-safe numerical and physics modules for provenance-
capable simulations of a wide range of stellar evolution scenarios ranging from
giant planets to low mass single stars to massive star binaries. MESA?s domain
of applicability continues to grow, with recent extensions enabling users to
model oscillations, rota- tion, binary stars, and explosions. Recent technical
innovations allow for user plugins and provide bit-for-bit consistent results
across all supported platforms. The products of the MESA project has driven and
will continue to drive significant innovation in the stellar, gravitational
wave, nuclear, exoplanet, galactic, and cosmological communities.