* 1663919
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Agency among Early Career Engineering Education Faculty in Diverse Institutional Contexts
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2017
* Courtney Faber, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 06/30/2017
* USD 71,682.00

Faculty are at the center of many potential solutions to national and global
calls for transformative improvements in STEM education. The last 20 years have
seen significant advancement in understanding of how to create effective
learning environments for STEM education. While many individual faculty have
adopted new approaches to teaching, change has not been deep or widespread
enough to make a major impact across all of STEM education. Better understanding
is needed of how faculty can become change agents in order to effect this
change. This study focuses on exploring the experiences of early career
engineering education faculty as they attempt to impact the engineering
education experiences of students locally and more broadly. Engineering
education faculty are unique in that they have formal training in the types of
change desired, and are often embedded in disciplinary engineering departments
where they can apply their knowledge to create change. Understanding their
experiences and the academic cultures in which they are working will provide
information on they can and cannot influence education practices in their
departments. Doing so will enhance our efforts to train and develop faculty
prepared to drive change in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
first phase of a two-phase study, collaborative inquiry and collaborative
autoethnography methods will be used to systematically examine the PIs' own
experiences as six early career faculty members in diverse settings: this will
include scrutinizing acceptance of ambiguity, responses to disappointments and
challenges, willingness to adapt, and ability to collaborate. Subsequently, in
the second phase, the experiences of 12-15 additional early career faculty
members will be examined to refine and expand on the phase one results,
increasing their applicability to multiple settings. The results of this project
will (1) advance the engineering education community's understanding of existing
structures for facilitating change (or the lack thereof) in engineering
education (2) identify barriers and supports for making change as early career
engineering education faculty; and (3) develop a co-constructed understanding of
how to better prepare and support faculty to exercise agency as it relates to
impacting engineering education during their first few years in academic
positions. These advancements are critical because the calls for change in
engineering education will continue as technological advances are made and the
role of engineers in society continues to evolve. By identifying the barriers
and supports that affect early career faculty's abilities to take strategic and
intentional actions towards achieving impact, the results of this study will
enable engineering education graduate programs and national engineering
education organizations to make programmatic changes to benefit future faculty.
In addition, the evidence-based insights resulting from this study have the
potential to expedite the on-boarding process of new engineering education
faculty, promote improvements in STEM education nationally by faculty at all
stages of their careers, and support the development of the field of engineering
education research.