* 1663130
* Multi-Information Source Value of Information Based Design of Multiphase Structural Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2021
* USD 702,859.00

The goal of this research project is to create a multi-information source value-
of-information based framework for the design of complex, multi-component,
multi-phase advanced steels. In materials science a material design problem that
exploits the chemistry-processing-microstructure-properties paradigm is often
expensive, time consuming and limited by the available resources. Thus, to
achieve a design goal, one must carefully select the information source to
query, which could be an experiment, a computational simulation, elicitation of
expert opinion, etc., based on the value added to the design problem, as well as
the time/cost associated with performing the query. The complex microstructures
in advanced steels result in significant improvements in strength and ductility
compared to conventional steels. This makes such steels especially attractive
for automotive applications, where vehicle weight reduction and crashworthiness
are paramount. The approach is a completely new and potentially transformative
way of looking at materials design in general. Here, experiments, simulations,
and prior knowledge are accounted for at the same level, potentially alleviating
major drawbacks of established paradigms in that there is no longer any required
alignment between inputs and outputs of computational or experimental methods.
The information source fidelity is implicitly accounted for, and the design
framework can efficiently allocate limited resources to the materials design
task in an information-economic sense. The research will also be integrated with
the NSF Research and Traineeship Program at Texas A&amp;M and outreach to
broader communities through existing programs at Texas
A&amp;M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to exploit the
chemistry-processing-microstructure-properties paradigm in materials design
within a framework that facilitates the integration of multiple information
sources. It prescribes optimal information acquisition protocols that balance
exploration and exploitation of the design space. This framework will extend
state-of-the-art knowledge gradient policies for value of information based
optimal querying of information sources. Key contributions of the framework
include enabling parallel querying of correlated information sources by fitting
Gaussian process models to learned correlations; incorporation of information
sources with differing input/output spaces by leveraging high dimensional model
representations; and multi-objective policies that provide scalar indicators of
expected improvement through novel importance reweighting of prior queried
information into state-of-the-art hypervolume indicators. Contrary to many
existing materials design frameworks, the framework directly connects materials
chemistry/processing to property, avoiding issues related to discrepancies
between optimality and feasibility. The framework will be able to accommodate
predictions of mechanical properties with models of different resolution and,
more importantly, allows for the integration of experiments and prior knowledge
within the same unified framework. Although the demonstration focus is on low
alloy multi-phase advanced steels, the methodology is potentially applicable to
a wide range of materials systems.