* 1663128
* Hybrid Bioprinting of Regenerative Osteochondral (Bone-Cartilage) Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Sang Jin Lee, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2023
* USD 359,999.00

Regenerative tissue engineering combines medicine and engineering to develop
custom tissue structures that replace damaged tissue or organs. Over the last
two decades, research efforts have focused on the manufacture of tissue
structures by combining cells and biological nutrients. However, many of these
methods have limitations in their ability to precisely arrange cells and
nutrients as in natural tissue structures. To address these issues, this
research plans to investigate a hybrid bioprinting process, which can control
the three dimensional organization of cells and trigger specific cellular
activities. Cells from rat bone marrow will placed at target locations within a
scaffold structure. They will be further transformed into bone and cartilage
cell types by adjusting the bio printing process parameters and material
compositions. If successful, the research will be the first step in the
production of bone-tissue constructs, which could improve the quality of life
for osteoarthritic patients, sports injury athletes and accident trauma
survivors. Education and outreach efforts includes development of
biomanufacturing coursework that will impact underrepresented students at both
undergraduate and graduate levels. The PI will offer a summer camp for high-
school students on biofabrication at the STEM Early College within Guilford
County Schools. In addition, students will receive exposure to laboratories and
pre-clinical trials at the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate hybrid bioprinting to
control underlying pattern topology, mechanical stimuli and release of
biochemical agents for cell based regenerative tissue engineering. The
objectives of this research include: (1) computational modeling of the hybrid
bioprinting process using finite element analysis and molecular dynamics models;
(2) experimental investigation of different topological patterns, mechanical
stimuli and biochemical cues on cell-scaffold interactions; (3) response surface
optimization to establish relationships among interacting process parameters of
hybrid bioprinting processes for optimal tissue engineering. The differentiation
of rat cells into osteogenic (bone) and chondrogenic (cartilage) lineages will
be studied within vascularized hydrogel scaffolds for long-term viability. The
ability to manipulate bioprinting parameters and biomaterial compositions will
create an effective method to building biomimetic functionally-gradient
topographies. A model system will be developed to investigate the relationship
between placement proximity, mechanical loading and release kinetics of
bioactive factors on cell proliferation. Finally, biochemical assays
andÂ characterization of the regenerated bone-cartilage tissues will give insight
for neo-tissue regeneration.