* 1663692
* Diabatic Representations:New Tools, New Uses and their Application to the Study of Nonadiabatic Processes Influenced by Conical  Intersections
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* David Yarkony, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

David Yarkony of Johns Hopkins University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical tools to study chemistry that arises after
a molecule's electrons are excited by light energy from a laser, the sun or
another source. The use of light energy to do chemistry in solar energy
conversion, photosynthesis, vision and even the stability of human DNA against
ultraviolet radiation all involve what scientists call electronically
nonadiabatic processes, nonadiabaticity for short. Such processes involve the
intersection of two different potential energy surfaces representing different
electronic states. They are essentially quantum mechanical. While existing
computational tools allow the description of nonadiabatic processes for smaller
chemical systems, methods for treating larger, more complex systems with highly
accurate theoretical approaches are still lacking. Yarkony and his coworkers are
implementing techniques designed to extend the range of accurate descriptions to
larger, more complex systems. These techniques and their products, are freely
available to the scientific community. Perhaps ultimately even more significant
than these immediate benefits, the proposed work has the potential to transform
the way chemical physicists think about nonadiabaticity and compute its effects.
Yarkony has introduced a reformulation of the mathematical description of
nonadiabaticity by exploiting a seminal notion introduced almost 40 years ago,
with the scientifically apt, but otherwise arcane appellation, the Molecular
Aharonov Bohm effect. These more precise studies of nonadiabatic dynamics
leading to photo-stability impact the broader societal goal of understanding
societally relevant processes, such as how DNA protects itself against radiation
damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three goals: (a) to
develop a generally applicable procedure to incorporate the geometric phase into
the single state Hamiltonian governing adiabatic dynamics enabling determination
of the prevalence and magnitude of the Molecular Aharonov Bohm effect, the
effect of the geometric phase attributable to energetically inaccessible conical
intersections on single state nuclear dynamics; (b) to construct from an
existing algorithm and new tools, a general program for determining diabatic
representations for multi-state systems which incorporates in a general manner
properties based diabatizations within a framework which explicitly incorporates
derivative couplings and tests for spurious (also termed diabolical)
singularities that can invalidate the property based diabatizations; and (c) to
use existing code and the program developed in (b) to construct coupled diabatic
state representations from accurate electronic structure data to describe
dissociative photochemistry in bio-related systems, including initially aniline
and imidazole. . The freely available programs and high quality diabatic
Hamiltonians enable chemical physicists to use these deliverables to design
research efforts to make further progress in nonadiabatic chemistry. A github
domain provides free access to the published diabatic representations.