* 1663822
* OP-Molecular Radiative and Relaxation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Shaul Mukamel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 560,000.00

Shaul Mukamel, of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. Mukamel and his coworkers design cutting-edge
spectroscopy experiments and develop models and methods for interpreting the
results. Understanding and controlling the motions of electrons and nuclei in
molecules can determine the rates and outcomes of chemical reactions and energy
transfer processes. These include the conversion of solar energy into electric
energy in natural photosynthesis and in artificial light harvesting devices.
This program develops methods for studying these elementary events by measuring
the response of complex molecules to sequences of ultrafast optical laser
pulses. Such experiments are made possible by newly-developed laser sources.
Models and practical computational tools are developed for the interpretation
and analysis of these experiments and extracting the underlying molecular
information. Professor Mukamel and his research group collaborate closely with
leading experimental research groups all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel experimental techniques involving
carefully-timed pulse sequences are designed and broadly applied to molecules
and molecular aggregates as well as in the condensed phase. Spectroscopic
techniques that aim at the direct detection of electronic and vibrational
coherence, as well as nonadiabatic dynamics where the Born Oppenheimer
approximation breaks down, are developed. Broadband resonant and off-resonant
Raman techniques that can directly probe the passage of molecules through
conical intersections are designed, and adequate protocols for their simulation
are developed. A highly-intuitive, diagrammatic superoperator formalism is
developed for computing the response of molecules to quantum and stochastic
light and applied towards creating novel optical pulse sequences by utilizing
pulse shaping, phase control, and chiral polarization configurations.
&lt;br/&gt;New nonlinear signals aimed at providing unambiguous spectroscopic
signatures of conical intersections through electronic and nuclear coherences
are investigated. The quantum properties of light, such as photon entanglement
are used as additional tools for probing molecules and chromophore aggregates by
providing information that is not accessible by classical light. For example,
entangled and squeezed photons offer temporal and spectral resolutions not
achievable by other means. Detection schemes that combine coincidence
measurements of individual entangled photons and interferometry are explored and
used to investigate the elementary charge and energy migration processes in
light harvesting in photosynthetic antennae and reaction centers. Signals
involving multiple photon coincidence with temporal and spectral gating are
predicted. Photon statistics measurements and higher-order radiation field
correlation functions are calculated and shown to provide novel spectroscopic
tools for molecular dynamical processes. Incoherent detection schemes of
coherent optical signals by fluorescence or electric currents, which are very
sensitive and can allow the study of single molecules are developed and
investigated.