* 1663773
* CDS&amp;E: Method Development for Coupled Charge and Thermal Transport in Molecular Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* J. Daniel Gezelter, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Professor J. Daniel Gezelter of the University of Notre Dame is supported by as
ward from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new ways of understanding how energy and matter
move across the interfaces between materials. The immediate goal is to model how
motion of charged particles (electrons and ions) at gas-metal interfaces can
alter the physical and chemical makeup of the metal. These interfaces are of
significant technological importance because of their use in platinum-based
catalytic converters that are in every automobile. In addition, the new methods
can be used to study how heat is transferred out of metallic nanoparticles
(spheres of metal smaller than a millionth of an inch across). These particles
have been proposed for use in photothermal therapies for cancer, but exactly how
heat moves through the molecules that coat the surface of the particles is not
yet understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engines driving this effort are new
computational algorithms for investigating coupled charge and energy transport
properties (e.g. thermoelectric properties and electron-phonon effects). The new
methods allow simulating electrical current densities in computer models of
molecular motion using non-equilibrium molecular dynamics, as well as novel
potential energy functions for metals that feature multiple oxidation states and
fluctuating valence densities, and new methods to understand ion screening in
complex fluids. An integral part of this effort (and part of its broader impact)
will be the release of all of the algorithms and software to the public and
other researchers under a permissive open source license. Dr. Gezelter organizes
the Open Science Project, a website which highlights and makes available
examples of useful scientific tools and research codes as well as tools that can
be used by a broader audience (scientifically-inclined but non-expert).