* 1663914
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Inquiry-Focused Volumetric Data Analysis Across Scientific Domains: Sustaining and Expanding the yt Community
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Matthew Turk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,061,721.00

Scientific discovery across the physical sciences is increasingly dependent on
the analysis of volumetric - or three-dimensional - data, that may come from a
supercomputer simulation, direct measurement, or mathematical models.
Researchers typically seek to extract meaningful insights from this data by
visualizing and analyzing it in various ways. The ways in which scientists
process volumetric data are actually quite similar across domains, but cross-
disciplinary knowledge transfer and tool development is blocked by barriers of
terminology. This project seeks to enhance an analysis and visualization toolkit
named yt that is currently primarily used for astrophysical simulations. yt
allows scientists to access and analyze data at several different levels by
providing an interface that is designed to answer questions motivated by the
underlying scientific problem, while worrying less about details such data
formats, specific analysis techniques etc. yt's utilization in computational
astrophysics has dramatically increased access to advanced algorithms for both
visualization and analysis, and fostered the growth of a community of
researchers sharing techniques and results. This project seeks to make yt
available and adopted by scientists in other domains of science thus reproducing
its success in astrophysics in these other science domains. This project will
expand the yt community beyond theoretical astrophysics and enable and promote
collaboration and advanced data analysis in the fields of meteorology,
seismology and global tomography, observational astronomy, hydrology and
oceanography, and plasma physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to the yt
project will proceed along four principal technical avenues. The first is to
develop a system that adapts the way yt presents data via a set of domain
contexts that encode the ontology, domain-specific vocabulary, and common
analysis tasks for a given field of study. This will include creating a domain
context system as well as a set of five pilot domain contexts developed in
collaboration with domain practitioners. The second is to overhaul the yt field
system, adding more versatility and enabling significant optimizations. Thirdly,
the project team will implement non-spatial indexing schemes, providing methods
for accessing and analyzing data that is not organized according to the standard
spatial axes. The final improvement will be the development of a non-local
analysis system, allowing generalized path traversal as well as domain
convolutions. To ensure wide dissemination and use of these improved
capabilities, the team will design domain-specific documentation and training
materials, and organize outreach and training events for early-career
researchers. This will consist of both hands-on technical workshops and
curricula developed in collaboration with Data Carpentry for utilization at
other institutions. This combination of technical developments and social
investments has been designed to ensure both readiness of the software and
engagement of the targeted research communities.