* 1663214
* Manufacturing of Self-Powered Nanosensor Systems by Pulsed Laser Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Wenzhuo Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2020
* USD 337,217.00

Economically viable self-powered micro and nano devices promise to revolutionize
technologies in healthcare, environmental, consumer and military applications.
Piezoelectric nanowires can convert mechanical energy into electrical power, and
extend the applications for implanted biomedical devices. They can be used where
solar energy is unreliable. However, there are significant roadblocks for nano
and micro systems to realize their full potential. Current methods used for
making these systems require many discrete processes, expensive equipment in
addition to a clean room environment resulting in prohibitive cost. Each process
requires long preparation, handling and processing times. For faster throughput,
huge investments must be made for automation, justifiable only for mass
production. In general, cost has become a roadblock against capturing the
benefits of most nanotechnology innovations. Therefore, a need in
nanomanufacturing is to develop innovative flexible processes that enable
integration for efficient small and medium lot size production. This award is to
work on a single equipment that can perform multiple tasks required for
processing heterogeneous nanomaterials and integrating them into a device. The
non-cleanroom method is scalable and has shown more than two-orders-of-magnitude
improvement in zinc oxide nanowire performance, reduction of six processes in to
one, and reduction of equipment investment by a factor of ten. This research
advances the fundamental understanding of the capabilities and performance of
this single-step approach for processing and integrating heterogeneous materials
and devices. The project plans to recruit female and under-represented minority
graduate students, use the research results in new coursework and organize
symposia as a platform for stimulating and exchanging new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to study and
develop a novel integrated nanomanufacturing process for self-powered nanosensor
systems. The research involves understanding the process-structure-properties-
performance relationships in these materials and systems. The objectives of this
research project are to uncover the correlations among the nucleation density,
growth and morphology of the ZnO nanowire arrays produced by a pulsed laser; the
correlation of the piezoelectric properties and the morphology of the ZnO
nanowire arrays; the correlation of the performance of the piezoelectric
nanogenerator subassembly and the piezoelectric properties, and the integration
of a nanosensor into the self-powered nanogenerator system. The main outcome of
this research is the understanding of the mechanisms and relationships among
pulsed laser parameters, crystal nucleation and morphology control of ZnO
nanowire arrays, and its impact on the material properties and performance in
self-powered nanosensing systems.