* 1663502
* Functionally Graded Adhesive Joints with Improved Strength and Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Daniel Schmidt, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2022
* USD 350,491.00

With greater reliance on fiber-reinforced composites as lightweight alternatives
to metals, structural adhesives are increasingly important for joining materials
in high performance applications such as airplanes, space vehicles, wind turbine
blades, sporting goods, and motor vehicles. In a typical adhesive bond, the
outside edges of the adhesive carry most of the peeling load and are the most
likely point of failure. By creating a functionally graded adhesive joint with
soft, flexible edges and a stiffer core, the stress may be distributed more
evenly, increasing joint strength substantially; indeed, enhancements of up to
60 percent have been reported via this approach in the limited testing conducted
to date. While such results are highly promising, no one has identified a means
of creating functionally graded adhesive joints whose properties are stable over
time. This work seeks to investigate the basic science behind functionally
graded adhesives whose properties are controlled by adjusting exposure to
radiation. Epoxy resins will be formulated for this effort; their thermal and
mechanical properties will be measured, and adhesive joints based on these
materials will be graded via exposure to varying doses of gamma rays and tested
for strength. In tandem, computer simulations will use the measured properties
to predict joint performance, with actual joint performance data used to
validate the simulations. The resultant computational design tools will provide
information on how best to design functionally graded joints. The efforts will
open up an almost entirely unexplored field related to the preparation and study
of functionally graded adhesives by removing key barriers that currently prevent
such investigations. The success of this work will enable engineers to create
stronger, lighter, more reliable adhesive bonds, and make more efficient use of
high performance composites. The most immediate impact is likely to be felt in
sectors where composites and lightweight metals are heavily used - aerospace,
ship-building, ground transportation, and wind energy - with many other areas of
application to follow as the implications and benefits of these efforts become
apparent. Furthermore, results will be integrated into both undergraduate and
graduate courses, work will be carried out to demonstrate applications through
undergraduate engineering capstone projects and extracurricular activities (such
as Formula SAE Competition team), and graduate students along with REU students
will be trained and integrated into the research effort,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural adhesive joints suffer from stress
concentrations at their edges, while sensitivity to manufacturing flaws has made
many reluctant to use them. The gradual introduction of load through a
functionally graded adhesive (FGA) - soft at the edges, stiff in the middle, for
instance - addresses both issues. Recent theoretical work predicts dramatic
gains in joint strength using FGAs, a conclusion confirmed by the few
experimental efforts reported in literature. The slow progress in this area
stems from the difficulties in making consistent, stable, robust FGAs. Coupled
with a lack of validated knowledge in the area, this has precluded their
application. The overall objective is to understand how to design, create,
characterize and predict the properties of FGA joints, with the long-term goal
of increased joint performance, stability, and reliability. The central
hypothesis of this work is that stable property gradients designed using
predictive models will enable stronger, more stable bonded joints. This work
will provide a fundamental understanding of the design, creation and behavior of
FGAs. Design rules for FGA joints will be identified, general methods to create
and characterize FGAs and FGA joints will be realized, and predictions of FGA
joint properties will be validated. This effort will expand our ability to model
complex joints and make and characterize functionally graded materials in
general. The efforts will open up an almost entirely unexplored field related to
the generalized preparation and study of FGAs by removing key barriers that
currently prevent such investigations. They will also provide industry with new
options that promise a significant advance in capabilities as far as bonding is
concerned, leading to safer, stronger, lighter structures that make more
efficient use of limited resources.