* 1663305
* Bimodal Ligand Architectures for (Nano)particle Assembly Structures with Increased Strength and Fracture Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Michael Bockstaller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2021
* USD 345,000.00

When matter is confined to a very small volume in the form of "nanomaterials",
novel physical properties emerge. For example, nanomaterials have been shown to
exhibit tunable optical, electronic or magnetic properties that could transform
technologies ranging from energy storage and generation, electronic products,
chemical industrial processes or medical diagnostics. It is still difficult,
however, to fabricate products or devices out of nanoparticles due to the
present rudimentary knowledge of how nanoparticles interact. This difficulty in
processing nanomaterials presents a barrier to their industrial utilization in
new nanomaterial technologies. This award supports fundamental research to
provide the needed knowledge for the fabrication of nanomaterials that can be
readily processed into technology relevant form. The research involves the
development and modification of particle surfaces that allow particles to form
stronger and fracture resistant material products. In collaboration with a PA-
based start-up company, such new nanomaterial assemblies will be utilized and
tested through the fabrication of luminescent panels that are important for
next-generation active displays. The program will broaden the participation of
minority students and provide cross-disciplinary training for one graduate and
several undergraduate students in the critical area of nanotechnology that is of
key strategic relevance for securing the future innovativeness and economic
strength of the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assembly of nanoparticles into
solid assembly structures, which are often referred to as "particle solids",
plays a central role in the integration of nanoparticle systems into device
architectures for applications ranging from photovoltaics to solid state
lighting. A major barrier in the scalable production of self-assembled particle
solid structures is the brittle nature of particle solids that promotes crack
formation during the processing and integration of particle assemblies. The goal
of this project is to test the hypothesis that that the grafting of bimodal
polymeric ligands provides a path towards particle solids with high inorganic
content and significantly enhanced mechanical properties and processibility. The
research plan is organized into three subsequent research thrusts that will
successively focus on (1) the synthesis of a library of bimodal polymer-tethered
particle model systems, (2) the elucidation of the effect of bimodal brush
composition and chain asymmetry on the mechanical and structural characteristics
of particle solids, and (3) the extension of the bimodal brush approach to
quantum dot (QD) systems to facilitate the solventless forming of polymer-
embedded quantum dot heterostructures with enhanced structural control. The
extension of the bimodal brush particle concept to QD-solids will test the
generalizability of results and provide a foundation for the future development
of QD/polymer-composite technologies.