* 1664348
* Grammar and multilingual practices through the lens of everyday interaction in two endangered languages in the East Tukano family
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Barbara Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 364,404.00

Little is known about how and why speakers alternate among multiple languages in
highly multilingual contexts. This project will advance scientific understanding
of multilingualism by documenting everyday interactions among multilingual
speakers in one such regional system. The project will produce a richly
annotated audiovisual record of language use in everyday conversation as used in
an extremely complex linguistic environment. Results will increase scientific
understanding of bilingualism and multilingualism, advancing the national
interest in multiple fields, including linguistics, psychology, neuroscience and
education. Broader impacts of the project are extensive. There are international
fieldwork opportunities for a full-time post-doctoral researcher and two
graduate students and language documentation training for a team of indigenous
researchers. Language maintenance materials will be collaboratively produced for
two endangered language communities. The project will advance the discipline by
its development and dissemination of language documentation methods for
documenting conversational interactions. Fostering a new international
collaboration between U.S. and Brazilian academic institutions will also be a
result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first of its kind to
focus on multilingualism and everyday interaction in the Vaup√©s region of
northwestern Amazonia. The research team will collect extensive amounts of
primary video data among multilingual speakers of two endangered East Tukano
languages, Kotiria (Wanano) and Wa'ikhana (Piratapuyo). Data will be collected
across three regional subsites, combining spontaneous recording of naturally-
occurring conversations, planned sessions with two or more speakers conducting
interactive tasks, and semi-structured sociolinguistic interviews. A team of
indigenous researchers will be trained to collect, process, and annotate video-
recorded conversations using the innovative oral annotation method, both
participating in analysis and helping to expedite processing of the primary
data. The resulting multilingual audiovisual corpus will reveal to what extent
and for which purposes speakers of Kotiria and Wa'ikhana employ elements of
multiple languages in everyday conversation. The team's analysis of these data
will contribute to the development of a more robust theoretical framework for
understanding and documenting multilingual practices in small-scale systems and
endangered language contexts. The documentary record will also facilitate more
fine-grained investigation of aspects of grammar that may be shaped by face-to-
face interaction, such as the use of evidentials (obligatory markers expressing
the speaker's source of knowledge about an event), thus adding to theoretical
accounts of their meaning and functions. Integrating methods from conversation
analysis (sequential analysis of conversation), linguistic anthropology
(ethnographic description), language documentation (corpus creation), and
typologically-informed grammatical description, the researchers will provide
expanded and enriched analyses of grammatical structure and create a pioneering
profile of conversational interaction in the multilingual northwest Amazon.