* 1664900
* RUI: Microsolvation and halogen substitution effects in weakly bound complexes and carbocations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Rebecca Peebles, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 229,282.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Sean Peebles and Professor
Rebecca Peebles of Eastern Illinois University are using microwave radiation and
computational techniques to study how carbon dioxide (CO2) can, under certain
conditions, act like a solvent in much the same manner that water can dissolve
other molecules and ions. Highly compressed CO2 behaves as a fluid, and is more
environmentally friendly and more versatile than many petroleum-derived solvents
used in industrial processes. However, the reasons for CO2's versatility are not
well understood. In the Peebles' laboratory, a single molecule of solute is
isolated with one or a few CO2 solvent molecules. By probing these small
clusters with microwave radiation, the arrangement of solvent molecules can be
determined. Systematically varying the number of CO2 molecules builds
understanding of its unique properties as a solvent. In a second related area of
research, electrically charged molecules (carbocations) are generated and their
structures are studied via interactions with microwave radiation. As with the
CO2 clusters, this provides information about the arrangement of atoms, in this
case helping answer questions about the specific steps by which atoms rearrange
during a chemical reaction. Both aspects of this research also utilize
computational studies to provide more information about the arrangement of
electrons within the chemical structures. The results of this research may
advance the use of CO2 as a solvent in important chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses Fourier-transform microwave
spectroscopy for investigating structures of unstable chemical species. A theme
is the effect of halogen atom substitution within the chemical structures
studied. In CO2 microsolvation studies, clusters are generated using a
supersonic expansion into a vacuum chamber. Examination of clusters with varying
amounts of fluorine substitution builds towards an understanding of why
fluorinated species have unusually high solubility in supercritical CO2. Varying
the number of CO2 molecules in a cluster allows observation of how weak
intermolecular interactions vary as solvation occurs. The knowledge gained from
these studies may also help in understanding and building CO2 sequestration
frameworks using custom designed molecules. In the second part of the research,
carbocations are generated using a pulsed discharge nozzle or electron gun
together with the supersonic expansion. Probing with microwave radiation then
provides structural information, helping scientists to understand whether
carbocations exist in cyclic or noncyclic forms, and how structures change as
halogen substitution is varied. In addition to implications for industrial use
of CO2, broader impacts are hands-on education of undergraduate students in
Chemistry and other STEM fields. Students gain significant practical, problem
solving and computer skills and improve their critical thinking abilities.