* 1664228
* Learning from Engineers to Develop a Model of Disciplinary Literacy in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Angela Minichiello, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 334,882.00

Many students, especially those from underrepresented groups, opt out of
engineering-related coursework because they do not believe that engineering is
for them. Consequently, more effective K-16 instructional approaches are needed
to help make engineering accessible and interesting to broader populations. This
study draws from previous research in disciplinary literacy instruction, a
promising teaching approach that has led to positive outcomes among
underrepresented students in disciplines such as history and science. Under a
model of disciplinary literacy instruction in engineering, students learn to
read and write like an engineer through guided practice in evaluating and
creating authentic texts in the service of engineering design activity. The
purpose of this foundational research is to advance knowledge by developing a
robust model of disciplinary literacy in engineering. To achieve this goal, the
study will identify the common literacy practices used by engineers from four
different sub-disciplines (aerospace/mechanical, biological,
civil/environmental, and electrical/computer) who each work at different
engineering companies. This study will describe the ways in which these
engineers use shared frameworks to evaluate and create texts. This study will
use these findings to develop a model of disciplinary literacy and curricular
materials for use in K-16 classrooms. The exploration will establish the
foundation for a trajectory of future research that will ultimately test the
model of disciplinary literacy in engineering in diverse K-16
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although disciplinary literacy instruction has
been shown to produce positive outcomes for underrepresented students in several
academic disciplines, empirically-based models of disciplinary literacy
instruction have not been developed and tested in the discipline of engineering.
The purpose of this early stage design and development research is to advance
knowledge by developing a robust model of disciplinary literacy in engineering
that can be tested in diverse K-16 classrooms. A multiple, comparative case
study will describe how eight engineers from varied companies and sub-
disciplines (aerospace/mechanical, biological, civil/environmental, and
electrical/computer) use literacy practices to solve problems through
engineering. A constant comparative analysis of think-alouds, observations, and
interviews with each engineer will result in the identification of common
cognitive frameworks that engineers use while they interpret and generate core
texts. These findings will be translated into a model of disciplinary literacy
in engineering, with accompanying leveled classroom materials, designed to
support K-16 students in thinking like an engineer as they read and write
authentic genres in the service of engineering design activity. This
instructional approach is expected to broaden participation by providing
underrepresented students with literacy instruction designed to support their
engagement with engineering. Future studies will test whether disciplinary
literacy instruction leads to positive outcomes, such as an improved ability to
engage in complex engineering design processes, among underrepresented K-16
students.