* 1664823
* Investigation of Semiconductor Surfaces and Catalyst Interfaces for Water Oxidation with Solar Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Thomas Hamann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Sunlight is the largest energy resource available on Earth. Harvesting even a
small fraction of the sunlight striking the United States would help our country
become energy independent. There are several factors which limit full
utilization of sunlight to meet our energy needs. For example, sunlight is
intermittent while our energy demands are nearly constant. Also, it is difficult
to use solar energy directly to meet some of our needs, such as transportation
fuels. These factors motivate efforts to convert solar energy into chemical
fuels, often referred to as solar fuels. Water is one of the most abundant
chemicals available on Earth, and a reaction known as oxidation enables the
energy of the sun to convert water into useful forms of energy (electrons and
protons). Scientists currently do not fully understand the processes which
control solar-powered water oxidation. In this project, Dr. Hamann is
investigating the fundamental steps of water oxidation on semiconductor surfaces
that absorb sunlight. Catalysts deposited on those surfaces use the absorbed
solar energy to oxidize water. Dr. Hamann is also engaged in several outreach
activities that leverage his research activities. These activities engage the
public and students at all levels in the scientific challenges associated with
solar energy capture and conversion to useful forms of energy (like solar
fuels). These activities include participation in the Michigan State University
Science Festival, a series of Science Café's focused on sustainability, the
Midwestern Symposium on Undergraduate Research, and the American Chemical
Society (ACS) Project SEED for economically disadvantaged high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Hamann of Michigan State University (MSU) is
investigating photo-induced water oxidation with metal oxide semiconductors.
Surface states, both defect and photo-induced species, play a dominant role in
controlling the efficiency of water oxidation on metal oxide semiconductors. A
suite of electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, spectroscopic and operando
measurements are being carried out to elucidate the nature and behaviour of
these surface states during solar water oxidation on ternary metal oxide
electrodes, including copper tungstate, CuWO4. Integration of water oxidation
catalysts on semiconductor surfaces is a promising method to improve the water
oxidation efficiency, however the nature of the interface that develops between
semiconductor and catalyst, and its effect on the electron-transfer reactions
occurring at this interface, is not well understood. Several
semiconductor/catalyst combinations are also being investigated to develop a
general and detailed understanding of the role of the interface in controlling
the overall water oxidation reaction. The knowledge gained from this research
allows the development of efficient conversion of solar energy to high energy
density chemical fuels, which is a significant benefit to society. Additional
broader impacts of this research derive from Dr. Hamann's outreach and
educational activities at all levels. These activities increases interest,
understanding and participation of underrepresented minorities in this area of
science. Specific outreach efforts include participation in the MSU Science
Festival, the Midwestern Symposium on Undergraduate Research, a series of
Science Café's focused on sustainability, and the ACS Project SEED.