* 1664999
* Linear Heterotrimetallic Coordination Compounds: Metal Atom Core and Axial Site Manipulation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* John Berry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John F. Berry of the University of Wisconsin - Madison is
studying metal compounds that feature a linear chain of three metal atoms
supported by nitrogen- or oxygen-donor groups (ligands). Compounds with chains
of metal atoms find applications in in biological and synthetic catalysis,
materials chemistry, energy conversion, molecular magnetism, and single-molecule
conductance. The project develops the preparation of compounds that have never
before been prepared and thus their reactivity is unknown. The three atom units
can be envisaged to possess important magnetic and electrical properties.
Professor Berry is strongly committed to communicating science to the general
public through several major outlets. Professor Berry is a Fellow of the
Wisconsin Initiative for Science Literacy (WISL) and has been involved in many
WISL events. He and his group participate in "Concert at Chemistry" presenting
musical compositions to the general public, and commenting on the strong
connections between science and the arts. Professor Berry has also participated
in "Conversations in Chemistry", a televised public lecture for an audience of
K?12 science teachers in which the topic was the connections between chemistry,
music composition and the arts. The Berry lab is also involved in outreach
programs at the graduate, college, and high school levels that engage
underrepresented minority students. At the graduate and college level, Berry is
an active participant in the Chemistry Opportunities (CHOPS) program. CHOPS
brings 20 highly qualified undergraduates to campus in which they are exposed to
the graduate school experience by being paired up with graduate student hosts.
These students typically come from underrepresented backgrounds.

The project involves planned, hypothesis-driven, systematic synthetic, physical,
and spectroscopic studies that give insights into important structure/property
relationships in heterotrimetallic compounds that contain a metal-metal multiply
bonded unit and a third metal from the f-, late d-, or main group elements. In
particular, the project focuses on: (1) redox chemistry, (2) magnetic behavior,
and (3) electron transport properties. The methodologies include organic
synthesis, high-temperature synthetic techniques, manipulation of air sensitive
compounds, spectroscopic and electrochemical characterization methods, and the
use of density function theory to model electronic structure. This project
offers excellent training for the graduate students and undergraduates who work
on this project. This training and learning is intimately integrated with
discovery of novel compounds and exploration of their properties. This project
provides excellent training for the graduate students and undergraduates who
learning a multitude of synthetic, characterization, and computational
techniques.