* 1664368
* EAGER: Wearable Nanofabrication Designs Create Better Fitting Intelligent Prosthetic Sockets
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Hongping Zhao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The past decades have witnessed great progress in the prosthetics field through
new materials and technologies such as targeted muscle reinnervation, powered
knee, and ankle prosthesis. However, the biomechanical load due to the unnatural
mechanical interaction between the soft tissues of the residual limb and the
prosthetic socket is still not fully understood and needs to be further
investigated. This interdisciplinary research project will create new sensing
and computational methods enabling knowledge discovery for better prosthesis
fitting quality with the goal of enhancing the design, fit, usability, and
interface of prosthetic limbs for individuals with amputation in practice. The
objective of this project is to investigate force distribution between the stump
and socket by developing a wireless sensing device and a force visualization
system. This proposal explores an accurate force-sensing design using a unique
three-dimensional nanowall network structure, which allows the fabrication of a
robust sensor array on a flexible platform for quantitative pressure and shear
force measurement. This interdisciplinary research project consists of sensor
material synthesis, device fabrication, platform and signal processing unit
design for the stump-socket interface application, and a machine learning-based
solution to analyze the information that affects the sense of comfortable fit.

The proposed research is multidisciplinary, bringing together the fields of
digital design and test, human machine interface, sensors, and signal processing
and extending the impact of mobile sensing and health technology to the
prosthetics research. A team of investigators and students from Case Western
Reserve University and the Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center with
complementary expertise will carry out this collaborative project. The proposed
solution is expected to help prosthetists to design better devices and make the
fitting procedure convenient and straightforward. Students working on the
project will receive training across multiple disciplines.