* 1664609
* RUI:  Mechanistic Investigation of Photochemical Products from Iron-Iron Hydrogenase Model Compounds; Insight into the Catalytic Generation and Activation of Molecular Hydrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Carmen Works, Sonoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Professor Carmen Works is supported by the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in
the Division of Chemistry to conduct research at Sonoma State University to
elucidate the mechanism of iron-iron hydrogenase model compounds. Iron-iron
hydrogenase is an organometallic enzyme that catalyzes the reversible oxidation
of molecular hydrogen. The detrimental effects of fossil fuel usage on our
global ecosystem as well as ever increasing energy demands have inspired much
research towards the development of clean and renewable fuels. Hydrogen is seen
as an ideal carbon-free energy source as its only combustion product is water.
Unfortunately, the best catalysts for hydrogen generation and usage are based on
the rare and very expensive platinum metal, presenting a significant economic
obstacle for the large-scale production of hydrogen to meet our energy demands.
However, Nature has provided efficient and robust Earth rich metal enzymes, that
are able to produce hydrogen cleanly. Due to the potential importance and
utility of this natural process, the present work is focused on understanding
the catalytic chemistry that occurs in these enzymes in order to advance the
design of new and inexpensive technological systems for hydrogen use.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The approach in this project is to make small
organometallic molecules that are both structural and functional models of the
enzyme active site and to use spectroscopic and kinetic techniques to
characterize their photochemical and thermal reactivity. The working hypothesis
is that light produces the active catalysts in solution. This work is leading to
a deeper understanding of the fundamental reactivity. The strategy used in this
proposal is to synthesize a range of molecules that vary in both electronic and
steric properties but have the general di-iron core, and to study the
photochemistry under CO and H2. In addition, the thermal reactivity of the
photoproducts with hydrogen as a function of solvent is being studied to
understand catalysis. Experimental results are being compared with theoretical
calculations. In addition, this project has a large educational impact and is
providing training in the area of inorganic synthesis, spectroscopy, catalysis,
photochemistry and exposed undergraduate students to theoretical chemistry.
Outreach to both the scientific and local community is including undergraduate
students specifically through presentations at regional and National meetings
and publications.