* 1664040
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: Subgrid-Scale Corrections to Increase the Accuracy and Efficiency of Storm Surge Models
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrew Kennedy, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2022
* USD 932,525.00

When a hurricane approaches land, forecasters predict its effects on the coastal
ocean, such as how high the water will rise above the normal tides (in a process
called storm surge) and which regions are likely to be flooded. These
predictions require many computer simulations to account for uncertainties in
the storm's size, track, and intensity. To be fast, these simulations use
simplified representations of the coastline and the ocean physics. Simulations
with fine-scale representations have been shown to be more accurate, but they
are far too slow on current supercomputers to use when time is limited to
achieve reliable predictions. This trade-off has limited the accuracy of real-
time simulations and increases the uncertainty for decision-makers and coastal
residents. This project will develop, test, and implement ways to embed fine-
scale information into coarse-scale storm surge models using high-resolution
elevation maps to correct mass balances, bottom friction, and other quantities.
The resulting models will keep most of the high-resolution accuracy while having
speeds comparable to the simpler coarse models which will lead to more accurate
pre-storm simulations, improving decision-making for policy-makers, emergency
management personnel, and coastal residents. The work performed in this project
will not only enable increased accuracy in ensemble surge forecasts, but will
also decrease computational costs for a given accuracy in higher resolution
studies. It will enable entirely new types of studies including decadal-level
simulations using reanalysis products or climate model outputs. This approach
also opens the way for dynamical global surge/tide simulations, which do not
presently exist. Results will add little to costs, while significantly
increasing accuracy. The project team will ensure adoption of these results by
implementing findings into two widely-used storm surge models, by working in
concert with a governmental-academic-industry advisory committee, and by
disseminating results through existing model code repositories. Three graduate
students and three undergraduate students per year will be trained. An immersive
fluid mechanics theater will be developed both for undergraduate teaching, and
as part of outreach programs for local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parameterizations for unresolved processes in
numerical models are standard in fields as far ranging as turbulence and porous
media transport, but are sorely lacking in coastal flooding applications. As in
those fields, rigorous development of up-scaled models holds the potential for a
transformative leap in the way surge models are used to forecast coastal
inundation. By building a framework on a sound physical foundation, and by
incorporating and adapting ideas from other fields, the project team will
develop novel sub-grid methods that will be physically consistent, robust, and
thus flexible for widespread use. Using established theoretical methodologies
coupled with existing high-resolution data and new numerical simulations, the
project team will develop scale-dependent closure corrections to mass and
momentum balance equations. Sub-grid closures will span a hierarchy of three
approaches with increasing complexity, ranging from hand-calculable simple
closures to high-order multiscale numerical corrections. This will allow for a
user-chosen compromise between speed, accuracy, and data availability. By
rigorously addressing this closure hierarchy, this project will develop a much
stronger physical understanding of how very specific flow and land features
impact hydrodynamics at different scales. Specifically, this research will lead
to new insights on how coastal flooding is controlled by unresolved flows
through marshes, natural channels, and man-made canals, and how best to model
these unresolved scales. This will assist not only in forecast operations, but
also in understanding and designing protective infrastructure.