* 1664250
* Representation of Engineering Concepts in Academic and Engineering Workplace Settings: How situated are engineering concepts in these contexts?
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Shane Brown, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 419,995.00

The purpose of this project is to examine how building design concepts are
represented in academic and workplace settings. Concepts are basic ideas that
are often the foundation of academic courses. Examples of concepts are an
understanding of the stresses and strains that occur when a structural member,
such as a beam or column is loaded. Common practice in academic settings is to
present concepts as the relation between relevant variables and understanding
how to determine unknown variables in close-ended problems. In engineering
practice, however, concepts are utilized to conduct engineering design, within
project constraints. Engineering concepts can be embedded in design codes,
design software, and in other ways where the characteristics of the concepts are
not represented in the same way as the academic setting. This project will study
how concepts are represented in academic and workplace settings. Research
findings will be used to iteratively develop engineering design problems that
are relevant to engineering practice and useful to civil engineering
instructors. These problems will be actively disseminated through the civil
engineering and engineering education communities. The results will inform
current educational approaches to preparing engineers for the workforce by
studying the fundamental concepts that make up engineering
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate
the nuanced and complex ways of knowing, representing, and communicating
concepts of structural and geotechnical engineering concepts specific to
building design in both civil engineering practice and academic settings using
robust, in-depth, and iterative educational research methodologies. The project
will examine and test theories of situated cognition in an engineering work
setting, as well as challenge the fundamental premises of engineering education
that tend to isolate concepts from application. The research objective will be
achieved through three efforts: 1 - Develop a prioritized list of structural and
geotechnical engineering concepts related to building design with practicing
civil engineers and civil engineering faculty using the Delphi method, 2 -
Understand and compare the representation of structural and geotechnical
engineering concepts in building design within authentic workplace and academic
settings using ethnographically informed research methods, including participant
observation, formal and informal interviews, and document analysis, and 3 -
Iteratively develop problems and solutions that structural and geotechnical
engineers and faculty deem as authentic to building design, and that faculty are
willing to adopt into their curriculum. This study will be the first to compare
the representation of concepts in academic and workplace settings, specifically
within the interdisciplinary environment of building design. The expected
outcomes of this project are detailed accounts of differences in concept
representation of academic and workplace settings and what they mean for
theories of situated learning and for the preparation of engineers for the
workplace. Homework, in-class, and test problems created will enhance
engineering students' awareness of concepts as they apply them to multiple
practical contexts.