* 1664231
* The Formation of Undergraduate Engineers as Engineering Leaders
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2021
* William Schell, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2021
* USD 329,557.00

Today, leaders of industry and government are calling for increasing numbers of
engineering graduates to maintain the nation's economic competitiveness.
However, the expected positive impact from increasing the number of engineering
graduates will be limited, unless the full capabilities of these graduates are
harnessed. Specifically, solving today's complex challenges will require
cooperation among experts from many fields. In order for these collaborations to
be successful they must harness the diverse capabilities of members of these
groups. For that to happen, practicing engineers must exercise technical
leadership. Therefore, undergraduate engineering students need to learn how to
be effective leaders during their formation as engineers. Unfortunately,
engineering educators do not currently have sufficient understanding of how
engineering students develop into leaders. This project seeks to improve our
understanding of the role leadership plays in the process of becoming an
engineer and how to develop an engineering identity in undergraduate engineering
students. The project proposes that seeing oneself as an engineering leader
requires both the development of an engineering identity in combination with the
development of a leadership identity. This project investigates the process of
becoming an engineering leader given the central role identity plays in
learning. By understanding the relationship between a leadership identity and an
engineering identity, this work will provide a foundation for improving the
leadership skills of undergraduate engineers during their time in college using
cross-ethnic notions of leadership to serve a diverse student
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches in engineering education to
develop leadership skills in engineers do little to understand how leadership
fits into the broader picture of the heterogeneous nature of engineering work,
or the role leadership plays in the formation of an engineering identity. This
project seeks to address this gap through a sequential, mixed-methods study
resulting in development of a grounded theory of engineering leadership for
undergraduate engineering students. The study will answer three research
questions: 1) How does leadership identity in engineering students compare to
those in other fields? 2) What is the relationship between leadership identity
and engineering identity? 3) How do engineering undergraduates define
engineering leadership and develop a sense of engineering leadership identity?
This work recognizes that formation of engineers is fundamentally an identity
development process. This project combines two models: Lave and Wenger's
communities of practice model to understand development of an engineering
identity and Komives, et al.'s Leadership Identity Model to understanding how
engineering students cultivate a self-concept as a leader. Using these two
models, this project seeks to understand how the separate components of
engineering and leadership identity converge in the development of a combined
engineering leadership identity among undergraduate students. Informed by an
analysis of national data, a grounded theory approach will lead to an
explanatory model of engineering leadership identity development. As an initial
application of the model a series of educational interventions will developed
and tested, enabling engineering educators to more effectively train engineering
students in leadership.