* 1664642
* CSEDI:   Geochemical Evolution of the Earth's Mantle Constrained by Observations and Dynamical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Erik Hauri, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 293,800.00

This project seeks to advance scientific knowledge about how the Earth's
interior has changed over geologic time, due to the very slow motions caused by
the sinking of tectonic plates into the interior and the rise of hot buoyant
material from the deep Earth, all of which work to mix the Earth's mantle. These
convective motions have the potential to move tectonic plates from the surface
all the way to the core-mantle boundary (CMB), and to return material from the
CMB where it can contribute to near-surface melting that produces volcanoes at
mid-ocean ridges and at oceanic hotspots (such as Hawaii and others). The
investigators will use high-performance computer simulations of these convective
motions to study the flow of the Earth's interior and how this flow is modified
by changes in mineralogy that occur at the high pressures of the Earth's deep
interior; the computational models will be enhanced by the inclusion of millions
of passive tracer particles that record changes in geochemistry that occur when
the mantle melts at the surface, when plates sink and mix into the Earth's
interior, and when sediment eroded from the continents is brought into the
Earth's interior by these processes. The geochemical changes recorded by the
tracer particles will be compared with geochemical data from volcanoes to test
whether the flow in the deep Earth continues all the way to the core, or whether
the interior flows as separate layers with minimal mixing between them. The
knowledge gained from this project will provide information on how the tectonic
motions at the surface of the Earth affect mixing in the interior, and how this
mixing in turn has altered the flow of various elements from the interior to the
continents thus providing information on how the continents have grown and
eroded over Earth's geologic history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the
investigators will focus on documenting the geochemical evolution of the mantle
in a series of high-resolution numerical convection models that examine the
degree of mantle layering, stratification, and convective isolation that occur
when realistic compressible equations of state are used to describe the physical
properties of the mantle. The use of a compressible mantle will allow us to
model mineralogical phase transitions in a rigorous way. When combined with
laboratory data on the P-T-strain rate dependence of mantle viscosity,
conductivity and thermal expansion, these features of the model will produce the
most physically realistic description of the extent of mantle layering that can
occur due to depth-dependent density and viscosity associated with known phase
boundaries. The model series will be further constrained to only those models
that match the known ranges in major geophysical and geochemical observations
(convective vigor, mantle temperature, heat flow, plate velocities, rate of
internal heating, composition and mass of the atmosphere and continental crust,
etc.). The geochemistry of the model space will be calculated from millions of
active numerical tracers embedded in the mantle flow, that will each record the
trace element fractionation and associated isotopic evolution they experience
when their evolution is punctuated by melting, degassing, and continental
extraction events that occur at the surface of the model. The team will model
explicitly the evolving isotope geochemistry of both lithophile and noble gas
isotope systems in the convecting mantle, continental crust and atmosphere, and
quantitatively compare the model output with geochemical data to test the
viability of our models.