* 1664308
* Facility Support: For The Northeast National Ion Microprobe Facility (NENIMF)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Brian Monteleone, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,100,649.00

This grant supports the continued operation of the Northeast National Ion
Microprobe Facility (NENIMF) as a National Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry
(SIMS) Facility serving the geoscience community. The principal strengths of
SIMS relative to other micro-analytical techniques are its high spatial
resolution and the capability for high-precision measurements of both
concentration and isotopic composition of light elements such as hydrogen,
lithium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. The analytical capabilities and
expertise of the NENIMF are focused in two areas: determination of magmatic
volatiles in silicate glasses and analysis of biogenic carbonates as records of
climate change and its impacts on marine organisms, making the NENIMF a unique
interdisciplinary resource to the geosciences community, with minimal overlap to
the other National SIMS Facilities. Since January 2011, the NENIMF has
accommodated 93 users from 47 different institutions, including 14 users from
institutions outside the United States. Over the past 22 years, a total of 328
peer reviewed scientific papers have been published using data collected at the
NENIMF for an average of 15 publications per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NENIMF is equipped with two Cameca SIMS instruments: an IMS 1280 and an IMS 3f.
The IMS 1280 is a double focusing mass spectrometer with a large radius magnetic
sector (585 mm), and ion optics optimized to attain a mass resolving power (MRP=
M/delta M) of 6,000 without significant loss of secondary ion intensity. The IMS
3f is a double focusing mass spectrometer with a small radius magnetic sector
that has been used for a wide spectrum of geochemical studies since 1978 and has
been upgraded to Linux-based computer control of many components via Labview-
based software (LabSIMS). The combination of these 2 instruments and the
technical and scientific expertise of the NENIMF provides the geoscience
community with a unique resource. Publications related to magmatic volatiles
comprised 69% of the NENIMF total over the past 5 years, while 13% were focused
on biogenic carbonates. In addition to these areas of specialization, NENIMF
users have taken advantage of the Cameca IMS 1280 to work on a range of topics
that include B isotopes in MORB glasses and subduction zone minerals, Zr in
rutile geospeedometry, Ti diffusion in quartz, and U-Th-Pb dating of monazite
and zircon. New analytical protocols developed at the NENIMF over the past few
years include high-precision analysis of the isotopic composition of boron in
low concentration basaltic glasses, and determination of D/H in the accessory
mineral apatite. Support for the NENIMF meets the NSF Broader Impacts criteria
in several different ways. Discovery and understanding are advanced while
promoting teaching, training, and learning and participation of underrepresented
groups is broadened through the involvement of undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs. WHOI Undergraduate Summer Student Fellows, Postdoctoral
Scholars, and WHOI/MIT Joint Program graduate students are specifically targeted
for involvement in research projects with NENIMF personnel and WHOI faculty in
which they are intimately involved with SIMS techniques. Involvement of young
scientists in SIMS-based research is encouraged through annual short-courses.
Infrastructure for research and education are enhanced through making both our
existing analytical platforms, and those to be developed by the NENIMF personnel
during the funding period, available to scientists and students from diverse
disciplines. Research results are disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and
technological understanding through an average of 15 publications per year that
result from use of the facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.