* 1664175
* PREEVENTS Track 2: A fast-response wildland fire modeling framework for prediction and risk assessment
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Jan Mandel, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2022
* USD 2,024,452.00

Wildfires are increasingly common throughout the US and have significant impacts
on populated areas. Current rapid-response management is based on empirical or
semi-empirical models developed more than 40 years ago. The focus of this
project is to create a Multistage Wildfire Research and Prediction System
(MWRPS) that links several existing community, open source models developed.
This new model has the potential to change how fire is studied, and
significantly improve operational wildfire and smoke forecasting. MWRPS will
serve as tool for fire professionals, urban and environmental planners, and
disaster managers who need to determine the societal and ecological impacts of
wildfire and smoke. As a community model, MWRPS will be available to the public
to examine a variety of hazard-related issues. In addition to graduate student
and postdoctoral training, the project includes a plan for K-12 outreach through
the Hi-GEAR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sudden changes in flow at the fire
line are crucial to extreme fire behavior and associated hazards. Because flow
at the fire line can significantly impact fire spread and subsequently all
wildfire behavior, prediction and simulation of coupled atmosphere-fire flow
must be accurate from synoptic down to fire line scales. Accurate prediction
requires the ability to model rapid synoptically-driven changes in local winds,
realistically render flow in complex terrain, and capture the impacts of the
fire itself on local weather. To meet this challenge, the Multistage Wildfire
Research and Prediction System (MWRPS), a multi-scale model, 3D model will be
developed based on fundamental fluid dynamical principles. MWRPS will have the
ability to resolve buildings, trees, and land cover, to incorporate the effects
of complex terrain, different vegetation types and geometries, to disperse
smoke, and to represent radiation, sensible, and latent heating in the wildfire
environment. Predicted wildfire properties from this model will include high
resolution temporal and spatial evolution of the fire perimeter and intensity;
behavior for both surface and crown fires; smoke production and dispersion in
the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) or through tree canopies (crucial for
planning a proposed prescribed burn); and impacts of smoke concentrations and of
heat flux in safety zones and on WUI structures. In addition to the model
development, three aspects of extreme wildfire behavior will be addressed: the
roles of (1) fuel heterogeneity, (2) complex topography, and (3) fire
interactions. A data-driven system will be developed for atmosphere-fire models
to steer simulations from a multitude of sources including: weather data,
sensors, airborne fire images, and satellite remote sensing in a statistically
sound manner. &lt;br/&gt;