* 1664373
* CSR: Small:Taming Small Data Writes to Block Storage Devices for Higher I/O Efficiency
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Song Jiang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 456,397.00

Storage systems are one of the most critical infrastructures in large-scale data
centers. Much effort has been directed to allow data to be scalable and
efficiently accessed on storage devices. While big data poses big challenges to
storage systems, small data presents equally serious access efficiency
challenges and begs for innovative research solutions. Almost all storage
devices use block interface, which can hardly be replaced. Accessing small data
potentially results in wasted device bandwidth and significantly reduced
input/output (I/O) efficiency which leads to substantially higher hardware and
energy costs and compromised service quality to end users. This research
project, based on preliminary results that have shown consistent effectiveness
in various application scenarios, will employ a disruptive process using data
compression techniques to hide or remove small data writes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of demand on immediate data persistency, writes of
the small-data continue to be the Achilles' heel of block devices. There are
multiple software layers across the I/O stack interacting with the block
interface, where small-data writes can inflict a substantial performance
penalty. The layers include virtual block devices, I/O schedulers, and file
systems. Instead of relying on special hardware support or demanding interface
changes, the proposed solution leverages data compression techniques. It allows
small data to efficiently pass through the rigid but necessary block interface
adopted by almost all storage devices to provide persistency and atomicity
without extra block write and flush operations. The proposed strategy would
effectively address the issue with small writes to a great extent and profoundly
benefit the industry. The expected software artifacts will be built into Linux
and file systems such as Ext3, and be open to the community for sharing.