* 1664353
* I-Corps: Polymer-based drug delivery system
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Meng Deng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
safe and effective therapies for patients suffering from obesity and its
associated risks of chronic diseases, including type 2 diabetes. Obesity is a
complex disorder that is characterized by greater energy intake than
consumption, resulting in excessive lipid storage in the white adipose tissue.
The proposed innovation offers a polymer-based nanoparticulate technology
platform that enables targeted 'burning' of 'bad fat'. Successful completion of
the proposed activities will enable promising market opportunities,
understanding the most critical needs of customers and strategic partners, and
determining the potential for commercialization. This controlled release
technology platform can also be readily adapted to treat a broad spectrum of
diseases such as fatty liver disease and atherosclerosis.

This I-Corps project is built upon a novel biodegradable polymer-based
nanoparticulate drug delivery system that targets white adipocytes and enables
sustained intracellular release of Notch inhibitors to induce transformation of
white adipocytes into beige adipocytes to raise energy expenditure and reduce
adiposity. The technology combines advances in polymer-based drug delivery with
an understanding of the role played by Notch signaling in adipocyte plasticity
for the development of effective and safe therapeutic strategies to reduce
adiposity. Obesity is triggered by the systemic energy surplus that is stored as
lipids in white adipocytes, whose expansion leads to obesity. The newly-
identified beige adipocytes in white adipose tissue are capable of actively
metabolizing lipids to generate heat. This technology offers several potential
advantages over conventional drug delivery including continuous and lower dosage
drug release, reduced cost, decreased off-target side effects, increased patient
compliance, and avoidance of expensive surgical procedures.