* 1664269
* From Direct Instruction to Authentic Learning: A Shift to Increase Academic Success and Engineering Competencies among Youth of Color
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Erika Kitzmiller, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 346,361.00

Evidence shows that low-income youth of color are significantly underrepresented
in postsecondary institutions and engineering-related fields. Many believe that
these findings are connected, at least in part, to the emphasis on direct
instruction that persists in many American urban high schools today. This
project, based in an urban public high school, aims to support teachers as they
move from direct instruction, which stresses content-based learning and rote
memorization, to authentic learning, which focuses on project-based approaches
and engineering literacies. During the grant period, we will observe classroom
practice, create teacher inquiry groups, and conduct semi-structured interviews
with teachers and students to understand the effects of this pedagogical shift
on classroom learning and student outcomes. The project will demonstrate the
instructional practices and pathways that are most likely to increase academic
outcomes and college placement, which will ultimately create a more diverse
group of individuals with the skills, literacies, and competencies to pursue
careers in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to validate
that authentic learning is directly tied to college placement and success in
engineering careers and seeks to explore the reactions among the students and
teachers who are committed to moving their curricular and pedagogical approaches
from direct instruction to authentic learning. Through a mixed-methods approach
that combines classroom observations, student/teacher interviews, textual
analysis of student work, and analysis of student-level data, the study will
examine the ways that teachers and students react to these instructional
changes, and how these shifts affect students' academic outcomes and diversify
the pathways to and through engineering. The research will have broad
implications to understanding and replicating instructional practices and
learning processes that best prepare urban youth of color for postsecondary
success and engineering careers by fundamentally restructuring the way that
instruction is delivered. It will leverage the Next Generation Science Standards
and the Engineering Habits of Mind to explore the development of engineering
literacies. The findings from this study will generate a framework for
understanding school reform and instructional change that takes into account
teacher and student identities and perspectives, and outline the most promising
ways for urban public high schools to increase academic engagement, engineering
competencies, and college persistence among youth of color.