* 1664375
* Workshop: Addressing the Nexus of Food, Energy and Water in the Context of Societal Challenges, Mar 1-3, 2017, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Chittaranjan Ray, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 09/30/2018
* USD 25,399.00

1664375 Ray

Food security is civilization's next critical challenge, as the current world
population of seven billion is projected to increase to more than nine billion
by 2050. The United States (US) will face pressure to produce more food and feed
for export, straining its energy and water resources and impacting ecosystem
services. This three-day workshop will bring together experts from the fields of
agronomy, agricultural economics and trade policy, water resources
science/engineering, atmospheric sciences, and natural resource management to
further investigate the issues and to develop new recommendations in the context
of sustainability and water productivity. The workshop will be held in
Bangalore, India (at the campus of the Indian Institute of Science), March 1 -
3, 2017.

Intensity of agriculture, excess pumping, and climatic (rainfall) shifts are
straining many regional aquifer systems in the US and around the world. This
workshop will address the pressing questions of how to better balance demands on
these aquifers under the current pumping stresses, and help identify the
cropping management systems that will be necessary to cope with future climatic
shifts. The collaboration will enable US and Indian researchers to share
research and expertise aimed at solving the challenges of producing more food
with less water and energy, while protecting the quality of scarce freshwater
resources for human consumption and ecosystem services. The researchers will
benefit from receiving international science perspectives as well as socio-
economics perspectives at the nexus of food-energy-water. The outcomes of the
workshop will advance national discussion about innovations at the nexus of
food-energy-water, for which NSF has committed significant investments. The main
goal of the proposed workshop is to address societal challenges in feeding
humanity in the coming century and how the nexus between food, water and energy
can be exploited to address sustainability challenges. Although these challenges
are different in India and United States because of the scale of mechanization,
resources availability, and other factors, the workshop will address differences
and similarities in these challenges to develop mutually beneficial solutions.
The specific objectives of the workshop include: 1. Identify innovative methods
to improve water and energy use efficiency in the context of the nexus in both
Indian and US settings, 2. Understand how the nexus concept in the food, energy
and water systems can be a driver in economic and social decision making. To
address food security issues, researchers have started to estimate current yield
gaps, which represent the difference between current yield and the maximum yield
that can be obtained under optimum management conditions. Efforts are underway
to develop a yield gap analysis on a global scale to delineate areas where there
is potential to increase crop yields. In order to analyze the sustainability of
enhanced production of food crops (whether in the U.S. or elsewhere in the
world) one needs to do the following in a step-wise manner: (1) analyze the
yield gap for a given crop or suite of crops through crop modeling with optimal
management scenarios and selection of proper crop hybrids; (2) for various
scenarios in yield gap, estimate the water and nutrient fluxes leaving the root
zone; (3) using appropriate numerical models, estimate the groundwater level
changes, stream depletion, and changes in water quality in the aquifer based on
the pumping needs and return fluxes of water and nutrients; and, (4) simulate
optimal power use for irrigation systems. This workshop will lead to development
of realistic and transferable management scenarios, tools and technologies to
address societal challenges in food, energy and water security. Graduate
students and postdocs as well as researchers that are in early stages of their
careers will be encouraged to participate. The proceedings from the workshop
will be published in electronic form, and widely shared by the Nebraska Water
Center with potential stakeholders through newsletters, press releases and two
annual sponsored faculty retreats.