* 1664380
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of the Human Genome Project on Scientific Discovery and Industry Evolution
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michelle Gittelman, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 21,650.00

In March 2000, the Human Genome Project (HGP), the world's largest, publicly
funded, collaborative biology project sequenced and released the first map of
the human genome. This important development in human biology was aimed at
revolutionizing our understanding of basic biological mechanisms, change how new
drugs were discovered and improve medical care. The human genome is a digital
map of 3 billion DNA base pairs revealing the location and identity of genes,
which encode various proteins in cells and allow for a high level of specificity
in the search for disease targets. The scientific approach was radically
different from existing discovery paradigms. The attractiveness of a free genome
map along with its predictive search capabilities lowered barriers to entry,
leading to a sharp increase in new firm formation and entrepreneurship. The map,
in effect, changed how firms searched for drugs and altered the competitive
nature of the industry. Changes in the nature of discovery due to the Human
Genome Project provide a unique opportunity to study the process of
technological search under different informational and technological contexts
and can inform the role of government-funded projects in providing economic and
public health benefit.

This study analyzes incumbent firms, new entrants and universities, and their
R&D projects in granular detail to shed light on how the human genome map
impacted the exploration of new drugs and diseases, and trajectory of the
biopharmaceutical industry. The project constructs an original and unique
database of small molecule drug patents to trace the trajectories of search and
evolution of R&D projects before and after the HGP. The project links powerful
computational techniques from text-mining and chemical/bio informatics with
genomics and clinical trial databases to provide a rich, multi-level analysis of
firm search behavior in the context of technological change. The project
demonstrates how the availability of predictive, large-scale search capabilities
changed firm?s innovative behavior.