* 1664851
* Mechanisms of Peroxyl Radical Addition Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Libin Xu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 485,965.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Libin Xu of the Department of
Medicinal Chemistry at the University of Washington aims to develop chemical
tools to understand the reactivities and reaction mechanisms of oxidation of
biologically important lipids. Understanding the fundamental chemistry
underneath lipid peroxidation has broad impacts because lipid peroxidation plays
significant roles in human pathologies, such as aging, atherosclerosis, and
degenerative diseases. The project lies at the interface of physical organic
chemistry and bioorganic chemistry and utilizes modern analytical chemistry
techniques, and is well suited to the education of scientists with different
training backgrounds. This research group also aims to integrate education with
the research plan by disseminating the knowledge of lipid peroxidation through
outreach to high school students and teachers and attracting undergraduates from
diverse backgrounds to the research field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rate-
determining step in lipid peroxidation is the propagation step of the peroxyl
radical, where generally two types of reactions occur: a) hydrogen-atom transfer
from a donor to the peroxyl radical; b) peroxyl-radical addition to a carbon-
carbon double bond. The hydrogen-atom transfer mechanism is well studied, but
much less is known about the reactivities and products of peroxyl-radical
addition reactions. The goal of this project is to elucidate factors governing
the reactivity of peroxyl-radical addition to a double bond and the contribution
of this mechanism to peroxidation of a number of biologically important lipids,
including cholesterol biosynthetic precursors, fat-soluble vitamins, and
polyunsaturated fatty acids. There are three research objectives: 1) Establish a
"radical clock" to measure the rate constants of both hydrogen-atom transfer and
peroxyl-radical addition; 2) Evaluate factors controlling the reactivities of
peroxyl-radical addition to a double bond; 3) Elucidate the products and
reaction mechanisms of free radical peroxidation of biologically important
lipids.