* 1664967
* INFEWS N/P/H2O: Collaborative Research: Catalytic Dephosphorylation Using Ceria Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Chao Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Phosphorus (P) is a crucial element for sustaining life and is economically
important in agriculture. The current production of P fertilizers, however,
relies on depleting limited feedstocks such as phosphate rocks. With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Chao Wang
from Johns Hopkins University and Dr. Ye Xu from Louisiana State University are
collaborating to develop chemicals, known as heterogeneous catalysts, which
promote the removal f phosphorus of renewable biomass to produce phosphorous
which can be used to synthesize fertilizers. In Dr. Chao Wang's group, advanced
synthesis techniques, X-ray and molecular spectroscopic characterization, and
catalytic studies are combined to explore novel dephosphorylation catalysts
based on rare-earth oxide "nanocrystals" whose dimensions are on the order of
0.00000005 inches. Meanwhile, Dr. Ye Xu's group creates atomic -scale
theoretical models for these catalysts using density function theory (DFT) to
calculate the reaction pathways and barriers that control the reaction rates and
energy consumption. of the phosphorus removal processes. The experimental and
theoretical approaches are integrated to develop fundamental understanding of
the catalytic mechanisms. Both Dr. Wang and Dr. Xu are actively engaged in
outreach programs for promotion of education in the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These investigators have
incorporated undergraduate students in their research and are involved in
outreach with local schools. Professor Wang has been active through a STEM
Achievement program in Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES) project and with
other schools in Baltimore in addition to the Woman in Science and Engineering
(WISE) program at the university. Professor Xu works with the Louisiana State
Science and Engineering Fair competition and local schools.

This research develops innovative and renewable methods for phosphorus (P)
production. This is important because phosphorous is a crucial element for
sustaining life and is widely employed in fertilizer production crucial to
modern agricultural practices. To tackle this challenge, Dr. Chao Wang from
Johns Hopkins University and Dr. Ye Xu from Louisiana State University are
collaborating to explore catalytic dephosphorylation using ceria nanocrystals.
By integration of advanced nanomaterial synthesis, X-ray and molecular
spectroscopic characterization, catalytic studies and density functional theory
(DFT) calculations, the project identifies the important ceria surface
structures, such as crystal facets and defects (cerium cation (Ce3+) and oxygen
vacancies), and systematically evaluates them to establish the structure-
property relationships and identify the active sites. Para-nitrophenyl phosphate
(p-NPP) and monomethyl phosphate (MP) are first used as model molecules to
perform comprehensive studies of the reaction kinetics, and the studies are then
generalized to various types of phosphate ester molecules, including aryl and
alkyl phosphates, nucleotides and phospholipids. The research enables the
efficient recovery of phosphorus from biomass for the renewable production of
phosphorus. This phosphorus can then be used in the production of fertilizers
that are necessary for economical and productive agriculture. This work gains
new, fundamental knowledge about the structure-property relationships of the
ceria catalysts, particularly at the nanoscale and in aqueous solution
environment. The two investigators are actively engaged in outreach programs for
promotion of education in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities include training graduate students with
state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical skills and developing their
independent research philosophy, providing undergraduate students with hands-on
experiences at the cutting edge of science and engineering research, and
engaging middle- and high-school students from diverse backgrounds to work in
the investigators' laboratories as summer interns.