* 1664700
* CIF: Small: Student Travel Grants for IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 2017
* CSE,CCF
* 11/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Shalinee Kishore, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) is a major
conference of the IEEE Communications Society. It has been held continuously
since 1999. It covers a broad range of topics in wireless communications and
networking including advanced cellular systems, device-to-device communication,
multi-antenna communication schemes, channel modeling, interference management,
and wireless energy transfer. The conference brings together industry, academia,
and government and regulatory bodies. The technical program for WCNC 2017 will
feature numerous technical sessions including physical layer fundamentals,
medium access control, cross-layer design, wireless networks, emerging
technologies, architectures, and services, as well as tutorials, workshops, and
technology/business panels.

WCNC 2017 will be hosted by the city of San Francisco and Silicon Valley from
March 19th to 22nd. Historically, the conference has had approximately 10%
student participation. A goal of the organizing committee this year is to
increase student participation to 15%. To do this, the organizing committee
created two Student Outreach Chairs positions and has planned four specific
student outreach activities. This grant provides travel assistance to
approximately 50 deserving US-based students to allow for increased student
participation and engagement at WCNC 2017. The Student Outreach chairs will
support applications from a diverse mix of students and will make efforts to
draw applications from female students and students from underrepresented
minorities. After the 2017 WCNC event is complete, the Student Outreach Chairs
will email student attendees a short online survey to assess the effectiveness
of the outreach events as well as the travel grant application and award
process.