* 1664061
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Cyberinfrastructure for Advancing Hydrologic Knowledge through Collaborative Integration of Data Science, Modeling and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Martyn Clark, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,809,998.00

Researchers across the country and around the world expend tremendous resources
to gather and analyze vast stores of hydrologic data and populate a myriad of
models to better understand hydrologic phenomena and find solutions to vexing
water problems. Each of those researchers has limited money, time, computational
capacity, data storage, and ability to put that data to productive use. What if
they could combine their efforts to make collaboration easier? What if those
collected data sets and processed model outputs could be used collaboratively to
help advance hydrologic understanding beyond their original purpose? HydroShare
is a system to advance hydrologic science by enabling the scientific community
to more easily and freely share products resulting from their research, not just
the scientific publication summarizing a study, but also the data and models
used to create the scientific publication. HydroShare supports the sharing and
publication of hydrologic data and models. This capability is necessary for
community model development, execution, and evaluation and to improve
reproducibility and community trust in scientific findings through transparency.
As a platform for collaboration and running models on advanced computational
infrastructure, HydroShare enhances the capability for data intensive research
in hydrology and other aligned sciences. HydroShare is designed to help
researchers easily meet the sharing requirements of data management plans while
at the same time providing value added functionality that makes metadata capture
more effective and helps researchers improve their work productivity. This
project will extend the capabilities of the HydroShare cyberinfrastructure to
enhance support for scientific methods, advance the social capabilities of
HydroShare to enable improved collaborative research, integrate with 3rd party
consumer data storage systems to provide more flexible and sustainable data
storage. and establish an application testing environment to empower researchers
to develop their own computer programs to act on and work with data in
HydroShare. Empowering HydroShare users with the ability to rapidly develop web
application programs opens the door to unforeseen, innovative combinations of
data and models. WRF-Hydro, the framework for the NOAA National Water Model,
will be used as a use case for collaboration on model development. Since WRF-
Hydro is used by NOAA as part of the National Water Model (NWM), this
collaboration opens possibilities for transfer of research to operations.
Collectively, this functionality will provide a computing framework for
transforming the practice of broad science communities to leverage advances in
data science and computation and accelerate
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HydroShare is a system for sharing hydrologic
data and models aimed at giving hydrologists the cyberinfrastructure needed to
manage data, innovate and collaborate in research to solve water problems. It
addresses the challenges of sharing data and hydrologic models to support
collaboration and reproducible hydrologic science through the publication of
hydrologic data and models. With HydroShare users can: (1) share data and models
with colleagues; (2) manage who has access to shared content; (3) share, access,
visualize and manipulate a broad set of hydrologic data types and models; (4)
use the web services interface to program automated and client access; (5)
publish data and models to meet the requirements of research project data
management plans; (6) discover and access data and models published by others;
and (7) use web apps to visualize, analyze, and run models on data. This project
will extend the capabilities of HydroShare to: (1) enhance support for
scientific methods enabling systematic data and model analysis and hypothesis
testing; (2) advance the social capabilities of HydroShare to enable improved
collaborative research; (3) integrate with 3rd party consumer data storage
systems to provide more flexible and sustainable data storage; and (4) establish
an application testing environment to empower researchers to develop their own
computer programs to act on and work with data in HydroShare. Under development
since 2012 and first released in 2014, HydroShare supports the sharing and
publication of hydrologic data and models. This capability is necessary for
community model development, execution, and evaluation. As a platform for
collaboration and cloud based computation on network servers remote from the
user, HydroShare enhances the capability for data intensive research in
hydrology and other aligned sciences. HydroShare is innovative from a computer
science and CI perspective in the way computation and data sharing are framed as
a network computing platform that integrates data storage, organization,
discovery, and programmable actions through web applications (web apps). Support
for these three key elements of computation allows researchers to easily employ
services beyond the desktop to make data storage and manipulation more reliable
and scalable, while improving ability to collaborate and reproduce results. The
generation of new understanding, through integration of information from
multiple sources and reuse and collaborative enrichment of research data and
models, will be enhanced. Structured and systematic model process
intercomparisons and alternative hypothesis testing will be enabled, bringing,
through user friendly CI, the latest thinking in advancing hydrologic modeling
to a broad community of earth science researchers, thereby transforming research
practices and the knowledge generated from this research. Interoperability with
consumer cloud storage will greatly ease entry of content into HydroShare and
support its sustainability. This meshing of the rigorous metadata model of
HydroShare with consumer file sharing will enhance reproducibility as well as
provide an innovative mechanism for sharing and collaboration. Empowering
HydroShare users with the ability to rapidly develop web apps opens the door to
unforeseen, innovative combinations of data and models. WRF- Hydro will be used
as a use case for collaboration on model development. WRF-Hydro provides a
reach-based high resolution representation of hydrologic processes, and offers
the potential to bring together scientists working at scales from research
catchments on the order of 1 to 100s of square kilometers as well as those
working at regional to continental scales and cut across disciplines from
environmental engineering to aquatic ecologists. Since WRF-Hydro is used by NOAA
as part of the National Water Model (NWM), this collaboration opens
possibilities for transfer of research to operations. This project will adapt
current best practices in CI for interoperability and extensibility to serve
this multidisciplinary community of scientists. HydroShare has already had a
broader impact, with documented rapid growth in use and uptake by other projects
including in EarthCube. It will become sustainable community CI through
operation as part of the Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of
Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) Water Data Center (WDC) facility. The use of
WRF- Hydro/NWM, as a driving use case, will advance CI for community based model
improvement. Through the Summer Young Innovators Program at the National Water
Center (NWC), supported by the National Weather Service (NWS) and operated by
CUAHSI, a pathway already exists to translate research findings to the
operational needs of federal agencies participating in the NWC. HydroShare
already touches a broad and diverse community, with user base including Native
American tribes, hydrologic science students, and faculty researchers across the
U.S. This proposal builds on the success of HydroShare to extend its
capabilities and broaden model hypothesis testing, collaborative data sharing,
and open app development across earth science research and education.