* 1664998
* Computational Characterizaion of Non-covalent Clusters with New and Existing Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 374,939.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) and Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) programs of
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Greg Tschumper of the University of
Mississippi is using computational tools based on quantum mechanics (QM) to
model and study clusters of molecules held together by weak interactions. It is
weak interactions that cause atoms and molecules stick to each other without
actually forming chemical bonds. Weak interactions include hydrogen bonding,
halogen bonding, and London dispersion forces. These computations complement
ongoing experimental investigations ranging from fundamental studies of
solvation to the design, synthesis and characterization of new molecules, nano-
scale assemblies and materials. More broadly, the impact of this work includes
accelerating the development of novel materials with potential societal benefits
(e.g., clean energy, drug delivery, and compact flexible electronics). This
research program has a positive impact on the education and training of science
students from underrepresented groups at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
Through a collaboration with Professor Jeremy Carr of Central Alabama Community
College (CACC), Professor Tschumper provides research experiences for community
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into two parts,
the first of which employs well-calibrated methods based on both density
functional theory (DFT) and wave function theory (WFT) to a series of
computational investigations devised to facilitate experimental
characterization(spectroscopic, crystallographic, etc.). The methods make
reliable predictions that can aid efforts to design and synthesize new
molecules, nano-structures and materials. The second aspect of the research
concentrates on the continued development of the N-body : Many-body integrated
QM : QM methodology to enable the routine application of high-accuracy QM
techniques to larger non-covalent clusters with modest computational resources
like those often found in individual research labs or small departments.
Emphasis is placed on evaluating spectroscopic properties (e.g.,anharmonic
vibrational frequencies and NMR chemical shifts) of non-covalent clusters with
systematically convergent techniques within the N-body : Many-body framework as
well as extending the accuracy and efficiency of the approach to molecular
aggregates containing open-shell, ionic and excited state species.