* 1664565
* Regio- and enantioselective electrophilic aromatic substitution on drug-like molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jeffrey Gustafson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 390,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gustafson. Professor Gustafson is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry at San Diego State University. He is developing new classes of
catalysts for electrophilic aromatic substitution. The goal of this research
program is to design new catalysts that allow for the direct functionalization
of both simple and complex aromatic molecules, including pharmaceuticals and
proteins. Lewis basic groups are capable of activating electrophiles and are
readily incorporated into catalyst structures, allowing for modular catalyst
design. The project lies at the interface of catalytic, synthetic and physical
organic chemistry. Therefore, it is well suited for the education of scientists
at all levels. Professor Gustafson's group is well positioned to provide the
highest level of education and training for students underrepresented in science
due to San Diego State University's unique and diverse student population.
Outreach activities involving underrepresented students at community colleges
are part of the project.

Lewis bases can catalytically activate diverse electrophiles towards
electrophilic addition reactions. The Gustafson group has recently demonstrated
that Lewis bases such as thioureas and phosphine sulfides can catalyze the
halogenation or sulfenylation of aromatic feedstocks under very mild conditions.
Preliminary mechanistic studies suggest this chemistry proceeds through a
covalent halenium-catalyst adduct, and that the structure of the catalyst can
influence the reaction outcome. The proposed research involves both in-depth
mechanistic studies and the development of new catalysts to extend the project
to more complex systems. There are three major questions this proposal strives
to answer: How do Lewis base catalysts control the regioselectivity of phenol
chlorination, and can this selectivity be extended to other classes of arenes?
Second, how do Lewis bases conjugated to Bronsted acids catalyze the mild
sulfenylation of heterocycles, and can this reaction be extended to peptides,
proteins, and natural products? Furthermore, can changes in the Lewis base lead
to chemoselectivity towards other classes of arenes? Finally, can chiral Lewis
base catalysts be designed to effect enantioselective halogenation and
sulfenylation? The educational plan includes outreach to underrepresented
students at local community colleges to introduce them to research opportunities
available to undergraduates. This outreach activity includes hands-on
presentations at local community colleges that introduce students to
computational chemistry in the context of the conformational analysis of butane.