* 1664926
* Development of Bio-inspired Synthetic Metallohydrolases Based on Theoretical Insights
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Rajeev Prabhakar, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 415,000.00

Development of Bio-inspired Synthetic Metallohydrolases Based on Theoretical
Insights

The breaking of chemical bonds in peptides (small proteins) and other
biologically-important molecules by reaction with water is important. This
reaction, known as hydrolysis, plays a critical role in a wide range of
biological, biotechnological, and industrial applications. Nature has devised
highly specialized enzymes known as metallohydrolases to enable these reactions.
However, most of the natural enzymes work only under specific conditions. The
development of efficient, environmentally-friendly, and economical molecules
that mimic the natural enzymes is highly desirable. Their design and synthesis
is challenging topic of research that requires interdisciplinary cooperation. In
this project, Professor Prabhakar, University of Miami, is developing a
fundamental understanding of hydrolysis and applying it to the design of
synthetic metallohydrolases. This research links the basic chemical reactions
involved in these processes to potential biological, biotechnological, and
industrial applications. Dr. Prabhakar is also providing educational and
research opportunities to members of minority groups at the high school and
undergraduate levels. These outreach activities include the Honors and Executive
Internship Program (HEIP) of the Miami-Dade County Public Schools, the American
Chemical Society's Project SEED (Summer Experiences for the Economically
Disadvantaged), a summer workshop (CATCH: Computational and Theoretical
Chemistry for High School) and a High School Research Newsletter (HRN).
Additionally, undergraduate students are conducting research through two
specialized courses and a summer research program.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Rajeev Prabhakar of the University of Miami is deriving guiding
principles of peptide (-(O=)C-NH-) and phosphoester ((O=)(RO)(RO)(P-O-R))
hydrolysis for the development of efficient bio-inspired synthetic
metallohydrolases. These analogues are likely to offer the following advantages
over natural enzymes: (1) inexpensive and recyclable, (2) smaller in size with
little or no steric constraints, and (3) tunable for specific functions.
However, the critical structural and mechanistic information required for their
development cannot be readily obtained through existing experimental techniques.
In this research, several state-of-the-art theoretical and computational
chemistry techniques involving molecular dynamics, quantum mechanics (QM) and
hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) are integrated with
experiments to first derive the guiding principles of peptide and phosphoester
hydrolysis and then apply them to design inexpensive, environment friendly,
efficient, specific, and catalytic analogues. These calculations are also
validating the applicability of different Density Functional Theory (DFT)
functionals, force field parameters, and hybrid QM/MM and QM/QM/MM methods with
mechanical and electronic embedding schemes on metallohydrolases and their
synthetic analogues. In support of the broader impacts of the project, Dr.
Prabhakar is actively training and engaging current and future generations of
students at the graduate, undergraduate and high school levels from socio-
economically- and educationally-disadvantaged families through the Honors and
Executive Internship Program (HEIP) of Miami-Dade County Public Schools, the
American Chemical Society's Project SEED (Summer Experiences for the
Economically Disadvantaged), a summer workshop called CATCH-Computational and
Theoretical Chemistry for High School and a High School Research Newsletter
(HRN). The undergraduate students are involved in research supported by the NSF
and an existing summer program and specialized courses at the University of
Miami.