* 1664885
* Characterizing Mesoscale Thermospheric F-region Winds Associated with Quasi-steady and Transient Nightside Auroral Arcs
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Yukitoshi Nishimura, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 10/31/2019
* USD 271,638.00

The magnetosphere is a leading source of auroral energy and momentum transport
within the high-latitude thermosphere. Winds at these so-called 'meso' scales
play a crucial role in the transport processes, yet have never been
systematically characterized due to lack of observations. The PIs will
statistically catalog mesoscale F-region (150-600 km above Earth?s surface) wind
occurrences, structure and evolution. The proposed efforts leverage substantial
NSF assets to lay the ground for inferring winds from auroral morphology. This
work will inform efforts to model magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere
interaction at mesoscales. Its broader impacts include support for young
scientists and a female postdoc, and publicizing auroral events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will categorize mesoscale winds according to
different auroral arcs and geomagnetic and solar conditions. They will synergize
European satellite wind data with several datasets that are closely spaced
and/or observe common volumes over Alaska and western Canada. The spatial scales
and direction of thermospheric winds provide information on underlying forcing,
and serve as indicators of the efficiency of ionosphere-thermosphere
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.