* 1664520
* Using Contemporary and Historical Resources to Document Three Indigenous Languages of Oregon:  Hanis, Milluk and Siuslaw
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Heidi Helms, Confederated Tribes of Coos, Lower Umpqua, & Siuslaw Indians
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 114,015.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. All Native American languages are endangered, and a number
of these are known as 'sleeping' languages, when there are no or perhaps only a
few remaining fluent first language speakers. Many Native American communities
are seeking to re-awaken these languages, using linguistic documentation and
tapping into the knowledge of elders who grew up in homes where use of Native
American languages was rapidly shifting to English. Where Native languages are
under-documented and existing documentation is difficult to access, language
learning efforts and scientific research are hampered. This project will focus
on three Native American languages that are culturally related, but which have
unclear genetic relationships. This project will conduct the first fieldwork on
these languages in approximately fifty years, with interviews of tribal elders
designed to elicit words, phrases, places, context, stories and songs from these
three languages. Investigators will create intergenerational opportunities that
will encourage youth to be present during the interviews. Broader impacts
include empowering young tribal members as Native American citizen scientists
and as heritage language learners, the development of indigenous language
curriculum from these archival and new documentation efforts, and the resulting
publicly accessible documentation, of value to linguists, historians,
geographers and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hanis,
Milluk and Siuslaw are three indigenous languages of Southwest Oregon coast and
among the ancestral languages of the Confederated Tribes of Coos, Lower Umpqua,
and Siuslaw Indians and the Coquille Indian Tribe. This will shed new light on
the languages and their genetic relationships to each other and to other Oregon
Coast indigenous languages, highly important given the linguistic diversity of
the Pacific Northwest. Virtually the only ongoing linguistic investigations into
these three languages occur in these two communities, by a team of tribal
members with linguistic training and linguists. This will enable a better
scholarly understanding of the connection between reclamation activities and
scientific engagement with archival language resources. This increased
scientific engagement will enhance discoverability of the field notes, texts and
recordings, as well as the analysis of the content of those materials. The
project will also record ethnographic interviews of elders from the two tribal
nations, focusing on topics to elicit latent memories of the indigenous
languages, places, context, stories and songs. Novel approaches for working with
elders in communities with sleeping languages will be valuable to other
communities and linguists working in similar contexts. This project will also
build capacity within the community by sending the team to key language
institutes, such as CoLang 2018 (the Institute on Collaborative Language
Research) at the University of Florida, and the University of Oregon's Northwest
Indian Language Institute (NILI). Products include a searchable digital database
for making language data accessible for the three languages, newly digitized
archival data, and recordings and transcriptions of the interviews with elders.