* 1664595
* Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 437,828.00

Advances in disciplinary tools and major infrastructure efforts have fueled
impressive progress in our ability to probe the interior of the Earth. New data
sets and new methodologies offer valuable insights, yet many of the fundamental
processes in the Earth's interior are still poorly understood. Part of the
impediment to progress is the disciplinary nature of research conducted so far.
A more integrated approach that leverages the knowledge and latest achievements
in each of the relevant disciplines is needed to generate new ideas and to
identify new observations that distinguish between competing hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a training program for the
Cooperative Institute for Dynamic Earth Research (CIDER) on the theme of
relating geochemical and geophysical heterogeneity in the Earth's interior. The
six-week summer program will bring together a cohort of senior graduate students
and postdocs from institutions across the country to tackle important and
unsolved research problems in Earth Sciences research. The senior participants
are experts from different disciplines relevant to the theme and serve as
instructors and mentors for group research projects. CIDER addresses the
barriers to more integrated research by promoting cross-disciplinary education
for researchers at all career levels. The central aim of the program is to
develop a workforce that can more effectively engage in interdisciplinary
research and accelerate progress on unsolved problems of long-standing
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIDER summer activities will address two issues
of great societal relevance. One issue deals with natural hazards such as
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. A better understanding of these hazards will
be linked to the broader context of the Earth's overall dynamics. The second
issue deals with the Earth's budget and cycling of volatile elements,
particularly water and carbon dioxide. The long-term stability of climate on our
planet is regulated by these processes. CIDER contributes to the following
broader impacts: (1) it facilitates the cross-disciplinary education of earth
scientists at all career levels; (2) it aims to educate a new generation of
Earth scientists with a breadth of competence across disciplines, which is
crucial for solving many of the important and outstanding research questions.
CIDER's web resources include posting and webcasting of lectures given during
the summer programs, as well as planned web forums and open publications. The
site is designed to reach the entire community of earth scientists. CIDER will
impact undergraduate education by producing a more broadly knowledgeable faculty
cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.