* 1664510
* Understanding Learning Mechanisms and Language Acquisition through Intergenerational Conversations in Southwestern Ojibwe, a Native American language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Mary Hermes, Grassroots Indigenous Multimedia
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2021
* USD 173,566.00

Historically, the indigenous languages of the United States were acquired in
homes and everyday life through intergenerational interactions between children,
parents, grandparents and community members. However, the interruption of this
naturalistic acquisition and intergenerational transmission means that today,
many Native languages are being acquired in schools or other environments,
rather than the home. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of Native American languages. This project will use the language
sciences and the science of learning to analyze and understand the linguistic
patterns and learning processes of children acquiring a Native language in these
other contexts. Using forest walks as a way to analyze points of view, this
project will pair together dyads of fluent elders with children learners.
Theories of second language acquisition draw on learners of English and other
European languages, but there is very little learning data from Native American
languages, which often have very rich grammar in areas like morphology and
animacy. This study will analyze potential differences in perspective that are
encoded in communicative practices, focusing on communicative practices in
indigenous languages. Scientists from the fields of linguistics, cognition,
education and learning science will collaborate on this interdisciplinary
project. Documentary linguistics methods will create an annotated multimedia
corpus, available to learning scientists for investigation following similar
studies previously conducted in English. Broader impacts include a publicly
available corpus of unique and valuable language acquisition data, the training
of indigenous scholars (who are underrepresented in the language sciences),
support for language revitalization and the potential positive impact on
intergenerational transmission of a Native American
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southwestern Ojibwe, an endangered Algonquian
language, has extraordinarily complex polysynthetic constructions, an area of
grammar underdocumented in acquisition. Following findings that suggest the
study of everyday language is essential for understanding categories and
worldview, this study is the first known attempt to document intergenerational
language in Ojibwe, thereby contributing to a more complete record of the
language. By recording adult-child interaction, the project augments the
documentation of fluent elders, while also creating data sets relevant to second
language acquisition, the science of learning and the cognitive sciences. This
project will adopt methodologies from learning science in English that have
contributed to scientific knowledge of the ways Native American elders and
children understand the natural world. Although the data collection and process
is similar, this project will crucially use medium of communication as Ojibwe
rather than English. The resulting corpus of linguistic data and analyses will
contribute to the ongoing effort to understand cross-cultural differences in
language socialization and in an understanding of the natural world.