* 1664906
* Multi-scale simulation methods for energy transduction and macromolecular assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Qiang Cui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

Qiang Cui, of the University of Wisconsin, is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop effective
molecular simulation methodologies to tackle important and challenging
biophysical and chemical problems that involve multiple length scales. The award
is cofunded by the Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biology. Bioenergy transduction, a type of energy transport in which the form of
the energy also changes, is one of the most fascinating aspects of life.
Biomolecular motors and pumps transduce energy from one form to the other with
remarkable efficiency. The study of energy transduction in biomolecular ion
pumps involves developing quantum mechanical and classical models that properly
describe the energetics and efficiency of ion transport through the interior of
a transmembrane protein. The problem of macromolecular assembly, which underlies
many fascinating biological processes such as the formation of muscle fiber,
requires the development of effective coarse-grained models that strike the
balance of computational efficiency and biophysical specificity. The project
offers research opportunities for students at all levels who wish to work at the
intersection of chemistry, biology and engineering. Dr. Cui is actively engaged
with programs aimed at broadening participation in physical and biological
science by members of under-represented minorities.

For the problem of ion pumping, by adopting the minimum free energy path
approach and a multi-layer Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QMMM) model,
Cui and co-workers can significantly improve the accuracy and sampling for the
study of long-range proton transfers in complex biomolecules compared to
previous efforts. By adopting the chemical potential equalization scheme to
represent the polarization of different QM regions, they can properly describe
ion transport through the interior of a transmembrane protein that is rich in
polar and charged motifs. This computational framework represents the first
attempt to include the membrane potential in QM/MM type of simulations. For the
problem of coiled-coil assembly, which describes a broad class of problems in
which the proper assembly of biomolecules relies critically on a limited degree
of flexibility in their structures, their proposed multipolar coarse-grained
model makes a natural connection between atomistic and coarse-grained
representations with a transparent framework for parameterization. Compared to
continuum mechanics models, this model can access similar length and time scales
but can be efficiently studied using standard molecular simulation software.