* 1664818
* SuSChEM: GOALI: Enabling Photoredox Catalysis in the Industrial Setting
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Gary Molander, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gary Molander. Professor Molander is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania. He has developed a
new way of making carbon-carbon bonds. The research is of broad scientific
impact since carbon-carbon bonds are used in chemicals produced by the
pharmaceutical, agrochemical, fine chemical, materials, and commodity chemical
(e.g., display devices, cosmetics, etc.) industries. Using this new method for
making carbon-carbon bonds, the Molander group is working toward more
sustainable approaches to the construction of complex molecules. Central to this
method is the fact that the reactions are driven by visible light, require no
heating of the chemical reaction. The reactions can also be conducted in the
absence expensive, precious metals. The simple reaction conditions make the
method not only more sustainable, but also more economically viable. This
potential has attracted the chemical company, Novartis as a partner. Working
together, Novartis and the Molander group are developing industrial applications
of the new reaction methods. The project lies at the interface of organic and
inorganic chemistry. With insight into industrial research provided by the
project, students gain for important perspectives on the industrial job market.
Outreach activities involving both academic and industrial partners in the
project are targeting underrepresented groups.

Photoredox/nickel dual catalysis provides a means to form new carbon-carbon
bonds in new ways. This paradigm, combined with carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
functionalization, provides a powerful combination for the sustainable synthesis
of complex organic molecules. In the research, the following lines of inquiry
are pursued: 1. Can conditions be found wherein acyl and alkyl radicals can be
generated through visible light photocatalysis and engaged in nickel-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions? 2. Can intramolecular hydrogen atom transfer be
controlled in a manner that allows arylation at specific sites along an alkyl
chain? 3. Can the specificity be changed through polarity reversal by adding
amine-boranes or NHC-boranes to the reaction mixture? 4. Can these new synthetic
methods be translated to large scale synthesis using photoflow techniques with
partners at Novartis? This last aspect provides outreach possibilities and
translation of basic science to the industrial setting.