* 1664362
* Modeling the Census of Stellar Explosions in Galaxies across the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 08/13/2016,08/31/2018
* Ralf Kotulla, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2018
* USD 487,651.00

Stellar explosions are a critical component in the evolution of the universe:
they influence the evolution of entire galaxies and are the source of all
elements heavier than helium, including oxygen, carbon, iron, and all other
matter that make up planets like Earth. Many of the processes leading up to
these explosions are understood in principle, but much can be learned about the
progenitor stars of these explosions by studying how different classes of
explosions are distributed across galaxy types, galaxy environments, and cosmic
age. The team will build upon the successful Galaxy Evolution (GALEV) stellar
population models and study, for a variety of stellar explosions, how each of
them depends on the age, mass, and chemical properties of their host galaxy. In
addition to advancing our understanding of where most of the vitally important
elements come from, this will also greatly benefit the full scientific
exploitation of major US investments, such as the Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope and the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory.
A connected public education and outreach effort focuses on demonstrating how
astronomers extract scientific insights from "pretty pictures." Supplemented
with public talks and stargazing events, this generates enthusiasm amongst young
students for the science fields.

Explosive transients such as Supernovae and Gamma-Ray Bursts are tracers of the
final stage of stellar evolution that shape the evolution of the host galaxy by
regulating the gas inflows and outflows and by enriching the interstellar medium
with metals. Observationally, recent and future advances in instrumentation --
many with major US support such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope and
Advanced-LIGO -- allow us to gather sizable samples of these rare events across
a wide range of host galaxy properties. Though the qualitative theoretical base
for most events are well established, current theoretical models cannot yet
predict a priori the distribution of events across redshift, galaxy type, galaxy
mass, etc. In this project, the team will extend the successful Galaxy Evolution
(GALEV) synthesis code to model the rate of events from single- and binary-star
progenitors, fully and self-consistently accounting for both the evolution of
metallicity and stellar populations in galaxies. This approach allows the
researchers to study the host galaxies of explosive transients individually and
hence to better constrain the physical processes underlying these events. The
team will develop a series of presentations for the Manfred Olson Planetarium
aimed at school groups, the campus community, and the general public to
illustrate astronomical methods and techniques in an easy-to-understand,
audience-appropriate way. Members of the team will also run astronomy shows by
taking telescopes to parks and public events in the south-east Wisconsin region
to offer stargazing and casual interactions with fellow citizens across all ages
and backgrounds.