* 1664995
* Model Inverse Nanocluster Catalysts: The Role of Size, Shape and Composition on the Catalytic Activity of Small Metal Oxide Clusters on Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Horia Metiu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Chemical catalysis involves a chemical substance, called a catalyst, which
lowers energy costs and creates more selective product distributions by
providing another pathway for the chemical reaction of interest. Catalysts are
often employed to generate environmentally friendly fuels, such as hydrogen
which burns cleanly to water, and are also used to produce value-added
chemicals, like carbon monoxide and methanol which can be made from sustainable
crop sources. Because of the importance, catalyst function is a major driving
force of research in the chemistry community. Transition metals and transition
metal oxides possess many of the desired chemical properties for catalysts that
can activate the bonds in CO2, H2O and CH4, which are particularly promising
feedstocks for a more sustainable production of fuels and value-added chemicals.
These metals and their oxides can be especially active as small atomic clusters
in the 0.00000005 inch or nanometer size range. Nanoclusters exhibit enhanced
reactivity due to their unique geometric and electronic characteristics such as
under-coordinated surface atoms, modified inter-atomic spacings and large
surface to volume ratio. In this project, Drs. Buratto, Bowers and Metiu produce
model catalysts of both metals and metal oxides by deposition of well-defined,
atomically-precise nanoclusters from the gas phase onto metal and metal oxide
supports. These model systems are then tested for their reactivity in the
production of hydrogen and methanol, important as both clean-burning fuels and
chemical feedstocks. The research team's unique capability to control
nanocluster composition atom-by-atom provides the requisite level of detail to
understand the chemistry on the atomic level and provides important insight into
the development of new catalytic systems. Drs. Buratto, Bowers and Metiu and
graduate students supported by this project are active in outreach to high
school students in the Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties to discuss their
research and its impact as well as promote science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Buratto, Bowers and Metiu prepare, characterize,
and test two new classes of nanoscale catalysts based on the atom-by-atom
assembly of small bimetallic and metal oxide clusters having one feature in
common; they have very small, isolated, well-defined, catalytically-active sites
and enhanced catalytic activity. The research centers on the preparation of
well-defined PdAun and PtSnm clusters supported on single crystal TiO2(110) and
well-defined FexOy supported a single crystal Pt(111) in the inverse catalyst
geometry. These model systems are prepared by depositing mass-selected clusters
from the gas phase onto single crystal surfaces to control catalyst size and
composition. Samples are then studied in ultra-high vacuum by x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to
determine composition and structure. Temperature programmed reaction (TPR) is
used to probe the activity to the water gas shift reaction, CO oxidation, and
methanol synthesis. Density functional theory (DFT) is used to calculate the
structure of the clusters, their XPS spectrum and their chemical activity, and
these data are then compared to experiment. The results are used to develop a
detailed fundamental understanding of the catalytic chemistry at the atomic
level that will in turn help optimize important industrial processes, and
improve the performance of the existing catalysts or uncover new ones. The
research groups of Drs. Buratto, Bowers and Metiu are committed to K-12 outreach
and the promotion of science in general. They are incorporating their research
in heterogeneous catalysis into the University of California Santa Barbara's
(UCSB's )5th grade outreach program. This program brings 5th grade students from
elementary schools in the Santa Barbara area to the UCSB campus for hands-on
science activities. The research team is also working with the teachers to
develop a lesson in catalysis that is appropriate for the 5th grade curriculum
and then incorporate it into the outreach program. In addition, graduate
students supported by this project are active in outreach to high school
students in the Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties to discuss their research and
its impact, as well as to promote science education.