* 1664828
* SusChEM: Interfacial Interactions and Electron Transfer in Dye-Sensitized Systems for Photovoltaics and Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Kristin Wustholz, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 10/31/2022
* USD 286,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program
(CSDMB) of the Chemistry Division is supporting the research of Professor
Kristin Wustholz of the Department of Chemistry at the College of William and
Mary to study organic dye-sensitized systems for use in next-generation solar
energy conversion materials and devices. Organic dye sensitizers are molecules
that can be used to harvest sunlight for energy related applications. They work
by absorbing the light needed to excite an electron in the dye to a higher
energy level. This high energy electron is then transferred to a semiconducting
material. The use of an organic dye sensitizer for this effort is particularly
attractive because they are made of earth-abundant, inexpensive materials.
However, their use also comes with a cost in that their use is frequently
complicated by the low efficiency of electron-transfer between the dye and the
semiconductor and the poor long-term stability of the dye-semiconductor complex.
The goal of this project is to solve these problems by learning how to optimize
the light-harvesting ability of organic dye sensitizers while maintaining both
the electron-transfer efficiency and stability of the dye-semiconductor
complexes. By addressing these problems, the Wustholz group is contributing to
efforts to address current issues related to the growing demand for renewable
energy. At the same time, the research is providing meaningful research and
developmental experiences for undergraduate and master's degree students who are
being trained in physical, analytical, and materials chemistry. During the
budget period, the Wustholz group is continuing its efforts to develop the
research and communication skills of underrepresented students through long-
term, mentored research experiences, as well as outreach activities that are
aimed at increasing the number of such students that are exposed to meaningful
scientific experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project
is to understand the interfacial interactions and electron-transfer processes
occurring in organic-dye-based systems for dye-sensitized solar cells and
photocatalysis. Organic dye sensitizers consist of earth-abundant elements,
possess high absorption coefficients, and have the potential for enhanced light
harvesting through controlled surface aggregation. In this work, the Wustholz
group will pursue three main strategies to understand and optimize the optical
and electronic properties of organic-dye-based systems for solar-to-electrical
and solar-to-fuel conversion: 1) determine the structure-activity relationships
of surface-aggregated organic dyes, 2) elucidate the interfacial electron-
transfer processes and kinetic dispersion at the molecular level, and 3) probe
the impact of operational variables on molecular aggregation and interfacial
kinetics for surface-anchored organic dyes. This project contributes to our
fundamental understanding of solar energy conversion and to the development of
new approaches to efficiently convert solar photons into chemical energy.