* 1664182
* Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Molecular and Cluster Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,11/30/2020
* Kit Bowen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2020
* USD 604,422.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kit Bowen of Johns Hopkins
University is using anion photoelectron spectroscopy to study a variety of
molecular and cluster anions. Photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) entails the use
of high energy light (for example ultraviolet or x-ray light) to eject electrons
from atoms, molecules or solids. The energy of the ejected electrons reveals
information about how strongly the electrons were bound to a molecule as well as
the type and strength of chemical bonds within the molecule. Clusters are
aggregates of atoms or molecules held together by the same cohesive forces
responsible for the existence of solids and liquids. Anions of molecules and
clusters are negatively-charged ions of these entities (i.e., they have more
than the needed number of electrons). This project uses PES to characterize the
extra electrons on these species as these extra electrons can lead to major
changes in their chemical properties. This research is providing new insights
into the basic nature of chemical bonds. It may also have implications in other
areas of science, for example in radiation biology, oncology, and
astrochemistry. Graduate students involved in this research project are
receiving training not only in the PES technique but in the theoretical aspects
of molecular structure. The Bowen group is working with secondary school science
teachers to help bring enthusiasm for science into their classrooms. The group
offers lab tours and classroom presentations for elementary and middle school
teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to
knowledge and understanding in chemistry and related fields in several ways. (1)
Halogen bonding plays important roles in supramolecular chemistry, crystal
engineering, and molecular recognition. This work aims to explore bimolecular
halogen bonding interactions in anionic complexes, i.e., at the molecular level.
(2) Electron-induced proton transfer (EIPT) is a fundamental process in both
chemistry and biology. This work focuses on inter-molecular EIPT among
carboxylic acids and triazoles and within hydrated N-heterocyclic molecules. It
investigates the relationship between excited state intra-molecular proton
transfer (ESIPT) in electronically-excited neutral molecules and intra-molecular
EIPT in ground state molecular anions. It also explores the role of inter-
molecular EIPT in hydrogen halide-water cluster anions. (3) There are several
different interactions between electrons and molecules/clusters that result in
diffuse electron states. Binding may have its roots in electron-polarizability,
electron-dipole, or electron-quadrupole interactions, or it may derive from
correlation effects alone. Even more subtle interactions result in the formation
of double Rydberg anions. Professor Bowen's new apparatus combines Rydberg
electron transfer and anion photoelectron spectroscopy as a tool for making and
studying these entities. (4) Molecular activation is often a prerequisite for
reactivity. This work aims to explore electron-assisted molecular activation
processes in a variety of systems.