* 1664745
* SusChEM: Electrocatalysis with Butterfly [2Fe-2S] Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Pyun, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 571,386.00

SusChEM: Electrocatalysis with Butterfly [2Fe-2S]
Clusters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of hydrogen, the simplest molecule,
is a multi-billion dollar industry today that provides hydrogen primarily for
combination with nitrogen to produce ammonia fertilizer needed to grow
sufficient food for the world population, for removal of sulfur from fossil
fuels, and for industrial applications needed to produce the materials for a
modern society. Furthermore, one of the grand challenges facing the world today
is the need for sustainable, clean, and cost-effective sources of energy and
fuels. Hydrogen is a high energy fuel that on burning (or in fuel cells) simply
has water as the exhaust product. Unfortunately 96% of the hydrogen produced
today is obtained from the expensive action of extremely high temperature and
pressure steam on hydrocarbons, a process that is wasteful of both energy and
raw materials. Analysis shows that 2% of the world energy is used in these
processes and half the world population would not be alive today without the
process that uses hydrogen to produce fertilizer for food production. This
research project, funded by the Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, is
exploring the use of electricity to produce hydrogen directly from water in an
efficient, clean and sustainable process. To effect the production of hydrogen
from water at low temperature and pressure, an inexpensive, readily available
catalyst is required. Professors Dennis L. Lichtenberger, Jeffrey Pyun and
Richard S. Glass of the University of Arizona and Professor Dennis H. Evans of
Purdue University are investigating the production of hydrogen from water using
electricity and catalysts composed of inexpensive and plentiful iron and
sulfur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalysts in this study are inspired by an
enzyme found in anaerobic bacteria that produces hydrogen from a [2Fe-2S]
cluster site that has a structure denoted as a ?butterfly? type. Although the
enzyme generates hydrogen very rapidly, the organometallic butterfly [2Fe-2S]
clusters prepared in this project are orders of magnitude faster. The high rates
of hydrogen production observed in this project indicate different factors are
at play compared to both the biological enzyme and to other inorganic catalysts.
This project is exploring the synthesis of new organometallic [2Fe-2S] cluster
catalysts and investigating (1) the mechanism that allows for such fast
electrocatalytic hydrogen production, (2) the incorporation of the [2Fe-2S]
clusters into metallopolymers for increased water solubility and durability of
the catalysts, and (3) approaches to achieve high stability of the reactive
catalysts in air. The project combines expertise in synthetic organometallic
chemistry, polymer chemistry, electrochemistry, and computational chemistry
directed toward the fundamental understanding needed to devise efficient
electrocatalytic production of molecular hydrogen from water, and educates
students in the multidisciplinary and team approaches needed to address complex
scientific challenges in the future.