* 1664646
* Photoelectrochemically Driven Water-Oxidation Catalysis by Perylene Diimide Plus Cobalt-Oxide Based Photoanodes: Fundamental Studies En Route to Second-Generation Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Richard Finke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Richard G. Finke. Professor Finke is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University. His research is focused on
developing cheap, efficient, earth-element-abundant and hence low cost materials
that can collect solar energy, and then use that energy to oxidize water into
its oxygen and hydrogen components. The hydrogen then serves as a renewable
energy source. The project involves the use of cheap, robust perylene diimide
dyes (used, for example, in red to black car paints) to capture the solar
energy, plus earth-abundant cobalt oxide as the water-oxidation catalyst. The
project is at the interface of inorganic, organic, and materials chemistries
plus chemical catalysis, making it ideal for training the next generation of
broad-based scientists able to perform energy-related research. Outreach
involving college students at the minority serving institutions of Fort Lewis
College, a Hispanic Serving institution, and the University of Northern
Colorado, a primarily undergraduate university with 15% Hispanic and 34% first-
generation students, is an integral part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Looking deeper technically, three main questions
are addressed as part of the three specific aims of the research: First, which
of seven perylene-type dyes, carefully selected for further investigation,
yields the best photoelectrolysis cell and why? Importantly, are phosphonate
functional groups present in the perylene diimide dye employed crucial for
coupling the organic dye film to the inorganic cobalt oxide water-oxidation
catalyst? Second, is the photoelectrolysis cell performance greatly improved if
one employs a dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis cell architecture in which a
perylene diimide dye monolayer can be adsorbed onto a high-surface-area sintered
nanoparticle film of semiconducting metal oxides based on titanium, tin, and
tungsten? Or, does the alternative hypothesis prove true that enhanced
hole/electron recombination dominates in the dye-sensitized photoelectrolysis
cell architecture? If so, why? Third, do organic light-harvesters possess
sufficient stability against oxidation to merit an important position in future
water-oxidation catalysis and other such photoanodes? Organic dyes have notable
advantages over other materials including low cost, synthetic flexibility and
easily tunable properties. What are the deactivation pathways active in these
photocells and, thus, best strategies for longer photoanode lifetimes based on
such organic light-harvesting materials? The education outreach includes
lectures that Professor Finke gives to undergraduates and first-year graduate
students, at multiple institutions he has been invited to visit, addressing the
crucial topic of "Critical Reading and Analysis Skills via a Proper Scientific
Method."