* 1664566
* SusChEM:  The Use of Ti-C Bonds for RNC Insertions and Dynamic Kinetic Resolutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jack Norton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 440,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, & Mechanisms B
Program of the National Science Foundation, Professor Jack R. Norton at Columbia
University leads a team exploring fundamental issues in organotitanium
chemistry. Titanium, inexpensive and nontoxic, offers sustainable ways of
carrying out a variety of chemical transformations. This project aims to use
inexpensive titanium-based reagents for the synthesis of valuable organic
compounds - not only heterocycles but also the enantioenriched compounds
essential to the pharmaceutical industry. This project involves a mixture of
inorganic, organometallic, and organic chemistry, and is therefore ideal for
training young workers for careers in science. Students in the research group
are encouraged to interact with both academic and industrial scientists, better
preparing themselves for permanent positions on either side of the
academic/industrial divide.

More specifically, the project addresses three fundamental questions in
organotitanium chemistry: (1) The insertion of isonitriles into titanium-carbon
(Ti-C) bonds. The insertion of carbon monoxide (CO) into Ti-C bonds has served
as a powerful synthetic tool. In principle CO can be replaced by any of the
isoelectronic isonitriles (RNC), giving transformations that could be as useful
as CO insertion; (2) Dynamic kinetic asymmetric transformations. Chiral
titanaaziridines and titanaoxiranes undergo rapid enantiomer interconversion, a
property which makes them potentially useful for dynamic kinetic asymmetric
transformations. In principle, this approach can generate enantioenriched
chemicals from inexpensive racemic starting materials; and (3) Replacement of
cyclopentadienyl ligand based Ti reagents with less expensive and more abundant
alkoxy ligand based Ti reagents.