* 1664425
* Hyperbolic Structures from Link Diagrams
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Anastasiia Tsvietkova, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2019
* USD 38,674.00

Thurston's Geometrization conjecture prompted the study of one of the main
objects in topology, a manifold, from a new perspective: using geometry. Soon it
was noticed that hyperbolic manifolds formed the largest and the least
understood class of manifolds. Informally, a hyperbolic 3-manifold is an object
modeled locally on 3-dimensional space that has hyperbolic metric. An important
subclass of such manifolds are knot and link complements in 3-sphere.
Additionally, knots and links are an object of study on their own, and knot
theory has a number of applications in pure mathematics, as well as in applied
fields of study. A knot is easy to draw as a planar diagram with information
about underpasses/overpasses at crossings. However, establishing the connection
between the diagram and geometric properties of the corresponding 3-manifold is
a hard task. This is the first main goal of the proposal. The other goal is
exploring the relation between geometric invariants and invariants that come
from other areas of mathematics. The PI is engaged in mentoring student research
and developing software that helps to use the geometric perspective, and will
continue these activities.

With M. Thistlethwaite, the PI made progress towards the first goal by
suggesting a new method for computing the hyperbolic structure directly from a
link diagram. With W. Neumann, she generalized this approach to parameterize
hyperbolic structure of a cusped 3-manifold. This project blends the new method
with various techniques for a systematic study of the intrinsic geometry of
hyperbolic links and its connection with a combinatorial picture. Among the open
problems considered are questions about the canonical cell decomposition,
hyperbolic volume, lengths of various arcs, geometric triangulations, etc. While
these questions are interesting a priori, a significant part of the project is
concerned with immediate applications of the geometric insight obtained. For
example, the PI will explore the relation between geometric and quantum link
invariants, investigate the connection between the geometry and arithmetic
invariants of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, approach tangle tabulation using geometry
and computer calculations, and tackle some other open questions.