* 1664340
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: GPS observations of post-seismic deformation from the 3 Sep 2016, Mw 5.8, Pawnee, Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 10/31/2018
* USD 5,286.00

We propose to use GPS technology in the area of the Pawnee earthquake to measure
slow movements of the ground caused by the earthquake that are expected to occur
there during the next 1-2 years. One of the causes of these so-called ?post-
seismic? movements after natural earthquakes is the readjustment of fluids
around the fault to the new crustal stress field generated by the earthquake.
The injection of wastewater in Oklahoma from oil production has increased from 5
to 10 times since 2009, and this increased injection rate is thought to have
induced a concurrent 450% increase in the number of earthquakes in this state.
The Pawnee earthquake is the largest historical event in Oklahoma and, if
confirmed that it is induced, among the largest induced earthquakes to date
worldwide. The proposed work will provide the first capture of the postseismic
deformation field of an earthquake not associated with a seismically active
plate boundary such as the existing in California, and if confirmed that it is
induced, a human induced earthquake. Analysis of the post-seismic signal will
contribute to understanding the role of fluid, and the injection of fluid, in
both natural and possibly induced earthquakes, and guide development of
strategies to mitigate damage from earthquakes induced by fluid
injection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose installing 8 geodetically monumented,
Continuous GPS (CGPS) stations to perform post-seismic deformation measurements
in the epicentral region of the 3 September 2016, M 5.8, Pawnee, Oklahoma
earthquake. In addition to being intraplate, and the largest historical
earthquake in Oklahoma, this event also occurred within a region experiencing an
exponential increase in seismic activity since the start of 2009 that we think
is related to a significant coincident increase in the rate of disposal by
injection of wastewater from petroleum production. An earthquake this size
should produce a measurable postseismic deformation signal over a period of a
few years that can provide important information about the event and the
properties and state of the crust and faults in the epicentral region. The CGPS
measurements will complement seismic and other geophysical studies of this
earthquake by providing data on post-seismic crustal deformation, especially the
fluid poroelastic component, caused by the earthquake. Such data will be
essential for modeling crustal and fault properties, potentially contribute to
improving our understanding the role of fluids in the earthquake process, and
reducing seismic hazard from induced earthquakes.