* 1664580
* Manipulating Ligand Fields: Can 1st Row Transition Elements Behave as Their 2nd Row Congeners?
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Peter Wolczanski, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry supports Prof. Peter
T. Wolczanski, Chemistry Department, Cornell University, for research into
imparting properties associated 2nd transition elements to 1st transition series
elements. Many important commercial applications of transition metals use
expensive, heavier elements that often pose significant health risks. This
proposal seeks replacement compounds that contain earth abundant, less toxic,
base- metals, hence first row transition metal complexes are the general focus.
A significant product of this research is the human element; the generation of
independent, versatile PhDs capable of adapting to a challenging market, which
encompasses academic, industrial, government, and entrepreneurial occupations.
The work will be disseminated through the scientific literature, in professional
meetings, in the patent literature should the situation arise, and via other
appropriate public forums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Iron is targeted specifically
for utilization in olefin metathesis, and "redox non-innocent" (RNI) organic
ligands are also featured, due to their ability to enhance chemical reactivity
by giving or taking electrons from the metal. Special emphasis is given to
compounds and transformations that pertain to future catalytic and
environmentally friendly applications. A fundamental understanding of ionic vs.
covalent character is naturally addressed via the studies of RNI, and
comparisons of transition metal reactivity. The scientific product of the
research is the expansion of general knowledge regarding first row transition
metal electronic structure, and concomitant reactivity. A desktop methodology
for determining chemical stability, which provides insight into differences
between first row transition metals and their heavier congeners, is under
development, thus providing an additional pedagogical product.