* 1664471
* CSEDI: Compositional heterogeneity and seismic anisotropy near the 410 km discontinuity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 12/31/2022
* USD 369,931.00

The mantle is the largest compositional layer within Earth and it is continually
mixed by thermal convection associated with the movement, creation, and
destruction of tectonic plates. It is clear from volcanic rocks that this mixing
has not resulted in a homogeneous mantle composition, however, there are few
observational constraints that allow mapping of the compositional variations
within Earth's mantle. This project seeks to measure the range of compositional
variations in the mantle and map their spatial distribution across the globe.
The focus will be variations in the fraction of the mineral olivine because it
is the most abundant mantle mineral and variations in its local abundance change
the properties of a seismically reflective boundary at about 400 km depth. The
interface represents a change in the crystal structure of olivine, which
transforms to wadsleyite as pressure and temperature increase with depth.
Laboratory mineral physics experiments to determine the seismic properties of
olivine and wadsleyite will be combined with analyses of seismic data from dense
regional arrays to infer compositional variations. In addition to estimating the
fraction of olivine, the project will also estimate the abundance of hydrogen
defects in olivine, which represent a potential geochemical reservoir of water
in the deep Earth. The combined studies will provide novel insights into global
mantle mixing and spatial variations in the ability of the mantle to generate
volcanic activity. Grant funding will primarily be used to support research
training and education of student scientists using modern mineral physics and
seismic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of the
petrological simplicity of the 410 km discontinuity, which is the boundary
between the upper mantle and the transition zone, to investigate spatial
variations in the bulk and volatile composition of the mantle. The olivine-
wadsleyite transition is the only phase transition that can cause the globally
observed 410. Wadsleyite has about five times greater water storage capacity
than olivine and the existence of structural water can profoundly affect sound
velocities of minerals. Therefore the magnitude of the 410 provides a good
estimation of the olivine content and water concentration near 410 km depth in
the Earth's interior. High olivine content in the source rock results in less
capability of producing magma, thus olivine content is a good indicator of
mantle petrology. In addition, olivine is also strongly anisotropic relative to
wadsleyite, so depending on the olivine content and strain-induced lattice-
preferred orientation of olivine polymorphs, the 410 can be a sharp anisotropic
boundary as well. The investigators will also use broadband P to SV/SH
scattering signals collected by a global compilation of dense regional seismic
arrays to better assess the isotropic/ anisotropic seismic structures near the
410. The results will be compared with new laboratory single-crystal high
pressure-temperature sound velocity measurements. The ultimate goal of the
proposed study is to estimate the lateral compositional variations in terms of
olivine content and water concentration near 410 km depth, and the anisotropic
velocity jumps across the 410 discontinuity. The majority of project funding
will support an interdisciplinary team of students supervised by two early
career PIs. This project will create unique opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, especially underrepresented minority students, to
participate in scientific research both on campus and at the state-of-the-art
synchrotron facilities.