* 1664260
* Engineering Dissent: Moving Political Engagement for Social Justice from the Vanguard into the Mainstream of the Engineering Profession
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Shawhin Roudbari, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 10/31/2021
* USD 369,480.00

Engineers design projects that improve social equity (by, for example, bringing
clean water to disadvantaged communities) while simultaneously shaping
infrastructure that causes injustice (through, for example, dams that displace
entire populations). Throughout the history of the modern engineering
profession, small groups of engineers have fought for social justice issues.
These engineers took on the roles of activist, reformer, or advocate as they
struggled to steer the direction of their profession. In contrast to their peers
- the majority of the leaders and members of the profession - these champions of
social justice causes were "dissenters". They challenged the status quo of
engineering practice. Today, more engineering students and young professionals
enter the field with a concern for social justice. Yet many graduate into the
ranks of a profession that is not as politically engaged as they hoped. This
project is motivated by the desire of a growing number of engineers to see their
profession more deeply engaged in social justice work. The investigators aim to
strengthen the role of social justice in engineering by, (a) mapping the
evolution of social justice in the culture of the profession, and then (b)
sharing the findings (of effective channels of advocacy) with engineering
student groups and professional member societies.

The objective of this research is to study political engagement around social
justice issues by a vanguard of engineers and to investigate how their dissent -
be it expressed as activism, advocacy, protest, or reform - shapes the culture
of their profession. The project engages theories of professions and social
movements along with organizational theory to investigate (a) the mechanisms
through which the engineering profession institutionalizes (or marginalizes)
political engagement around social justice issues; and (b) ways the discourse of
dissent are mobilized in bringing political consciousness around social justice
issues to the engineering profession. These questions will be addressed using a
holistic methodology for studying professional culture that comprises:
quantitative and qualitative analysis of vanguard and mainstream discourses
around social justice work, by analyzing informal and formal texts, in
traditional and social media; in-depth, ethnographic observations of
professional events where the socialization of engineers makes visible the role
of practices and discourses of dissent in professional culture formation; and
in-depth, semi-structured interviews with engineering dissenters - whether they
occupy roles of activist, reformer, vanguard, or other positions of political
protest. The results of this research and the dissemination of its findings will
make visible the myriad forms of engineering dissent with the aim of bringing
social justice into the mainstream of the profession.