* 1664313
* Development of MicroInterdigitated Electrode Arrays as Ion Sources for TIMS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2022
* USD 163,209.00

Thermal ionization mass spectrometry remains the technique of choice for high
precision determinations of the elemental isotopic abundances in such
disciplines as geochronology and nuclear forensics. However, the precision of
the isotopic measurements by this method depends on the number of ions measured
at the collector end of the instrument, which is itself dependent on the
efficiency of the techniques used in the mass spectrometer to generate ions from
elements extracted from natural and manufactured material. The preferred
ionization method for high ionization potential metals such as lead and silver
is the Si-gel technique, which consist of doping a suspension of silica with the
metal of interest and then drying and heating this mixture to temperatures over
1,300C on a metal ribbon in the source of the mass spectrometer. At these
temperatures, the silica mixture emits a steady stream of metal ions which is
analyzed in the instrument. This ionization method is inefficient, typically
producing only about 1% ionization. The goal of this project is to improve the
efficiency of this class of ion source. The approach being used builds on the
fact that the Si-gel technique is actually a liquid glass ion emitter which
releases ions generated in the liquid during high temperature evaporation in the
mass spectrometer. As a result, the fraction of metals ions generated in the
liquid glass likely can be increased using electrolysis techniques, in which the
liquid glass serves as electrolyte when placed in contact with two metal
electrodes of opposite electrical polarity (an 'electrochemical cell'). The
electrochemical cell consists of a micro-interdigitated electrode array (IDA)
produced by sputtering tungsten onto an undoped Si or sapphire wafer. The device
is being developed through a series of prototype IDA assemblies that will
consist of IDA, itself, and a high melting temperature ceramic holder that will
also hold IDA in place for required electrical connections and will allow the
placement of a metal ribbon from below that will serve as a heater to bring the
IDA to operating temperatures (1,200C to 1,300C). The various prototype
configurations are designed to optimize heating and electrical continuity within
the IDA and to maximize the ion currents created within the liquid glass. A main
goal will be to improve the ionization efficiency of lead by at least a factor
of five in order to improve the precision uranium-lead age determinations for
picogram size lead samples. A secondary goal is to develop and commercialize a
new class of ion source for use in private sector thermal ionization mass
spectrometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thermal ionization mass spectrometer
remains the gold standard for high precision isotopic ratio determinations and
is the key to current efforts to improve the precision of U-Pb age
determinations. The precision of isotope ratio determinations is controlled by
the number of ions counted and a major limitation in TIMS is that current
methods of producing thermalized ions by emission from the surface of a
resistively heated metal ribbon have low ionization efficiencies (~1%, rarely
~10%). This proposal involves the development of a new class of ion sources that
builds on the 'Si-gel' technique, a molten silicate liquid ion source which was
first implemented in TIMS in the late 1950s. More recent work has suggested that
most metal atoms doped into a molten glass ion emitter for isotopic analyses are
present and released during evaporation as neutral atoms, not ions, and so are
never delivered to the analyzer portion of the instrument. The goal of this
project is to increase the proportion of metal ions in these melts by treating
the melt as an electrolyte in an electrochemical cell. The major effort in the
proposed work will be the design, fabrication and testing of an electrochemical
cell in which a micro-interdigitated electrode array (micro-IDA) serves as the
working and counter electrodes and as the substrate upon which the metal doped
silicate is deposited, melted and manipulated electrically to induce ionization
of the metal dopant. In this method, the ionization of the metal dopant is
induced by tuning the relative potential of the two electrodes to the value
required to remove an electron from the neutral metal. The metal ions are then
released to the source of the mass spectrometer during evaporation of the molten
silicate. The small micro-IDA electrode arrays are ideal for this purpose
because they can be wholly placed in the focal plane of the mass spectrometer,
their submillimeter size electrodes and electrode spacing should remain wetted
by electrolyte even as the electrolyte evaporates and releases metal ions into
the mass spectrometer, and because micro-IDA are readily fabricated to user
specifications with conventional semiconductor fabrication techniques. The
project will involve establishing the combinations of micro-IDA design,
substrate and holder/heater that produce effective melting of silicate on micro-
IDA surface and produce a 2-10 fold increase in Pb ionization efficiency as
determined by measurements of ion beam intensity and duration in the TIMS
currently operating at the University of Colorado Boulder. The latter instrument
is already fitted with the custom potentiostat required for powering the micro-
IDA.