* 1664858
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Quantifying Morphologic Phenotypes in Prostate Cancer - Developing Topological Descriptors for Machine Learning Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* John Sheppard, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,706.00

The long-term goal of this project is to develop quantitative methodology for
detecting geometric and topological features in point clouds extracted from
(histology) images. Of particular relevance, this project considers the setting
of prostate cancer classification, which is based on a pathologist grading of
histology slides using the Gleason grading system. These pathology slides are a
source of biomedical big data that are increasingly available as archived
material. Developing these quantitative methods will be a significant advance
towards a (semi-)automated quantification of prostate cancer aggressiveness.
This award supports an interdisciplinary team of investigators in computational
mathematics, computer science, biomedical engineering, and pathology to develop
mathematical and computational tools based on topological descriptors and
machine learning in order to distinguish between different morphological types
of prostate cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop quantitative
topological descriptors (e.g., persistence diagrams and summaries) that describe
natural histologic phenotypes in prostate cancer, in order to provide
explanatory information to assist in providing improved diagnostics/prognostics
and insight into the best course of treatment for the patient. This will be
accomplished through developing graphical models via unsupervised machine
learning that increase our understanding of prostate cancer subtypes. The long-
term goal is to develop imaging biomarkers that better identify indolent from
aggressive prostate cancer compared to existing, subjective, and variable human
observer analyses (i.e., the Gleason score). This project takes steps towards a
novel quantitative methodology for prostate cancer classification, as well as
towards developing topological methods for statistically distinguishing
different types of glandular architectures.