* 1664971
* Quantifying the role of quantum coherence in organic photovoltaic cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Eric Bittner of the University of Houston is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop and apply theoretical approaches to study photovoltaic
devices. Photovoltaic diodes based on blends of semiconductor polymers and
fullerene derivatives now produce power conversion efficiencies exceeding 10%
under standard solar illumination. Bittner and his coworkers explore the role of
quantum effects in organic polymer-based photovoltaic systems that are of
current interest for solar conversion technologies. The proposed work combines
accurate quantum chemical methods and a novel search algorithm based loosely
upon those used by internet search engines such as Google and Netflix. These
methods are used to discover the optimal nuclear motions that facilitate
specific quantum transitions in photoexcited molecules. This work will help to
reach the goal of a carbon-free economy and reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions. Bittner is also developing a theory of entangled photons
spectroscopy, a new field with tremendous potential for developing quantum
encryption devices. Such devices will be key technological components in future
cybersecurity applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coherence between quantum
mechanical states is an intrinsic and defining component of the transition
between two electronic configurations in a molecular system. By quantifying the
role of coherence and providing a precise definition of the electron transfer
reaction coordinate in a multi-dimensional system, the theoretical methods and
analysis produced by this work will give materials scientists and synthetic
chemists another means of control of both the rates and pathways for electron
and energy transfer events, both of which are triggers for a whole host of
important chemical and biological processes. A crucial component of this work
will be the development of novel spectroscopic techniques involving entangled
photons and quantum optics as probes of chemical dynamics. The Bittner research
group is developing a sound theoretical framework connecting photon coincidence
counts to molecular-level processes with specific emphasis towards probing
collective many-body light-matter excitations. This component of the project
will have ramifications in the development of quantum communication and
encryption devices?a crucial component in the implementation of the next
generation of cybersecurity technologies.