* 1664990
* Assembly and spectroscopic interrogation of large atomic and molecular clusters in helium droplets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2021
* USD 578,972.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrey Vilesov of The University of
Southern California, interrogates chemical reactions at temperatures close to
absolute zero (-460 Â°F). At such low temperatures, the internal motions of
molecules are greatly slowed, making them easier to study. In order to study
chemical reactions at such low temperatures, the atoms or molecules must be
placed in an environment that keeps them cold, but also allows them to interact
with each other. Since most common liquids freeze at such low temperatures, the
atoms and molecules dissolved in them are prevented from colliding and
interacting with each other. The PI overcomes these challenges by using helium
droplets, which are still liquid at absolute zero, as test tubes in his studies.
In his previous studies, Professor Vilesov made an additional interesting
observation, namely that tiny vortices (similar to whirlpools) present in the
helium droplets help form wire-shaped particles just a few atoms across. The
properties and stability of such particles made of different materials are
systematically studied with state of the art laser and cryogenic techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the mechanisms of aggregation of
atoms and molecules at an ultra low temperature of 0.4 K. Free superfluid helium
droplets up to 1 micrometer in diameter are doped with atoms or molecules, which
then form clusters inside the droplet. The structure, stability and energy
levels of the clusters are interrogated by laser spectroscopy, transmission
electron microscopy and x-ray scattering techniques. Quantum vortices present in
the superfluid droplets attract the imbedded particles serving as a template for
low temperature aggregation. The properties of the resulting nanometer-thin,
track-shaped clusters are in the focus of this project. In addition, this
proposal includes the development of an experimental technique for the
exploration of low temperature ion-molecule reactions using infrared
spectroscopy and monitoring of the solvation effects in small carbocations and
protonated water clusters. The broader impacts of this work include potential
societal benefits from exploring unconventional paths for making useful
nanomaterials. This project provides opportunities for training of undergraduate
and graduate students in STEM field by developing of the cutting edge physical
experiments and preparation of the ensuing publications.