* 1664968
* CAREER: Multi-Resolution Model and Context Aware Information Networking for Cooperative Vehicle Efficiency and Safety Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/08/2016,04/30/2021
* Yaser Fallah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 360,375.00

Every year around 30,000 fatalities and 2.2 million injuries happen on US roads.
The problem is compounded with huge economic losses due to traffic congestions.
Advances in Cooperative Vehicle Efficiency and Safety (CVES) systems promise to
significantly reduce the human and economic cost of transportation. However,
large scale deployment of such systems is impeded by significant technical and
scientific gaps, especially when it comes to achieving real-time and high
accuracy situational awareness for cooperating vehicles. This CAREER project
aims at closing these gaps through developing fundamental information networking
methodologies for coordinated control of automated systems. These methodologies
will be based on the innovative concept of modeled knowledge propagation. In
addition, the educational component of this project integrates interdisciplinary
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) subjects on the design of automated networked
systems into graduate and undergraduate training modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For robust operation, CVES systems require each vehicle to
have reliable real-time awareness of the state of other coordinated vehicles.
This project addresses the critical need for robust control-oriented situational
awareness by developing a multi-resolution information networking methodology
that is model- and context-aware. The approach is to develop the novel concepts
of model communication and its derived multi-resolution networking. Context-
aware model-communication relies on transmission and synchronization of models
(e.g., stochastic hybrid system structures and parameters) instead of raw
measurements. This allows for high fidelity synchronization of dynamical models
of CVES over networks. Multi-resolution networking concept is enabled through
scalable representations of models. Multi resolution models allow in-network
adaptation of model fidelity to available network resources. The result is
robustness of CVES to network service variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful deployment of CVES, even partially, will provide significant societal
benefits through reduced traffic accidents and improved efficiency. This project
will enable large scale CVES deployment by addressing its scalability challenge.
In addition, methodologies developed in this project will be crucial to emerging
autonomous vehicles, which are also expected to coordinate their actions over
communication networks. The fundamental research outcomes on knowledge
propagation through network synchronization of dynamical models will be broadly
applicable in other CPS domains such as smart grid. The educational component of
this project will target training of CPS researchers and engineers on subjects
in intelligent transportation and energy systems.