* 1664464
* Conference: CoLang 2018: Institute for Collaborative Language Research -- Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Eric Potsdam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2019
* USD 171,006.00

The global crisis in language loss and endangerment represents a tremendous loss
in scientific information as well as linguistic and cultural heritage.
Addressing this problem requires skilled and well-informed collaboration between
indigenous communities and academic experts, and the expertise necessary to
achieve such collaboration requires specialized training in linguistics and a
variety of other fields. The Institute for Collaborative Language Research
(CoLang) is designed to respond to these needs. CoLang is a unique summer
institute that provides critical training for researchers and collaborators in
language documentation techniques and practices. The Institute advances the
scientific study of language, enables the preservation of rapidly disappearing
knowledge, and trains the next generation of language researchers. The promotion
of linguistic knowledge that CoLang represents is essential in our globalized
world and as the United States increasingly becomes linguistically diverse. In
effect, activities of Institute alumni and participants foster strong
international relationships and capacity building, serving a role akin to soft
diplomacy and in support of the national interest.Â CoLang 2018 will be held at
The University of Florida in June and July 2018. Broader impacts include
training of academic linguists, undergraduate and graduate students, and
indigenous community members, including those underrepresented in the language
sciences. Additionally, workshop materials will be disseminated to attendees as
well as a wider public audience through a new endangered language archive, The
University of Florida Language Archive (TUFLA).

CoLang 2018 will consist of two parts, lasting five weeks total. First, two
weeks of intensive workshops focus on the practice and principles of documentary
linguistics and fieldwork, ranging from new technology to interdisciplinary
methods to best practices in ethical community collaborations. Second, the
Institute offers an optional three weeks of intensive field methods courses
focused on working with speakers of different endangered languages. These
practica weeks require participants to use the technology and documentation
skills acquired during the preceding workshops. The entire five-week Institute
thus offers state of the art instruction, combined with guided practical
experience, allowing participants to acquire methods, technical skills and
collaborative approaches. CoLang has a developed a significant track record of
national and international success. Previous participants have used their CoLang
training to venture into successful fieldwork and community documentation
projects across the world. Importantly, one of the themes for CoLang 2018 is
archiving, key to the development and adoption of interoperable standards and
data sharing. CoLang 2018 activities in this area will continue to support
models of robust and reliable research in the social and behavioral sciences,
including through the data management of practicum documentation and its onsite
archiving at TUFLA by CoLang participants.