* 1664801
* Modeling the Molecular Forces Driving the Structure, Folding, and Misfolding of Nucleic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Chi Mak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

Chi H. Mak of the University of Southern California is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to study the molecular driving forces that determine the
structures of nucleic acids. The nucleic acids DNA and RNA are central to the
life cycle of the cell. The double helix is ubiquitous in the human genome, but
while genetic data is safeguarded in double-stranded form, DNA also assumes
diverse, transient, single-stranded structures during replication,
transcription, recombination, and repair processes. In the cell, DNA and RNA are
immersed in a surrounding water solvent environment, together with ambient
charged species such as Mg+2. This project focuses on developing and applying an
accurate and efficient model to understand and quantify the role of this
environment in determining the forces that drive the folding and misfolding of
DNA and RNA. The model is used to design a new computational algorithm that can
directly simulate folding and unfolding processes with atomic-level accuracy and
significantly improved numerical efficiency. This enables full-scale structural
dynamical simulations to study misfolding of DNAs, RNAs and their hybrids during
transitions between double-stranded and single-stranded forms, processes
critical to understanding their function and regulation in the cell. The
education and outreach component of the project is aimed at restoring some of
the natural excitement of discovery-based science into the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum. A scalable virtual platform for digital data-sharing and
student collaboration is being developed to augment and enhance the student in-
person laboratory experience. A mobile app designed as part of the project and
running on iOS and Android devices and standard web browsers will provide an
interface to the cloud-based collaborative environment. The platform will be
utilized in outreach efforts to middle school and high school students in the
local Southern California region, and will make available experimental designs
that employ low-cost, readily-available, non-hazardous materials for scalable
virtual collaboration and interactions among students and their
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to formulate rigorous
theories and efficient computational strategies to understand the fundamental
driving forces that dictate how nucleic acids fold, and the aberrant functions
that result when they misfold. Based on an analytical formula for the
conformational free energy of the sugar-phosphate backbone developed by
Professor Mak, the folding algorithm developed in the project uses analytical
and semi-analytical models to describe solvent- and counterion-mediated forces
dictating the structures of nucleic acids, yielding a computationally efficient
and highly ergodic numerical platform for folding DNAs and RNAs from scratch.
These studies focus on understanding and quantifying three specific types of
solvent- and counterion-induced interactions: base stacking forces, back pairing
interactions and complementary recognition mechanisms derived from them, and
ion-induced specific and nonspecific intra-chain attractions. Both analytical
theories and numerical simulations are being used to unravel and quantify these
forces. With these interaction models integrated into a new Monte Carlo folding
algorithm, the project focuses on studying two specific problems related to
ssDNA and RNA physiology: (1) noncanonical secondary structures on mRNAs
transcribed from overexpanded trinucleotide (CNG) or hexanucleotide (GGGGCC)
repeats in the genome, and (2) the overaccumulation of R-loops as a function of
sequence and loop length of the displaced single-stranded DNA as well as
stability of the RNA/DNA hybrid and supercoiling in the upstream or downstream
double-stranded DNA bounding these R-loops. Educational and outreach activities
include the development of a web-accessible, scalable virtual environment to
enable sharing of experimental designs and data, and facilitate collaborative
interactions among students and instructors, to encourage and develop the
excitement of inquiry-based science within chemistry laboratory courses and
curricula.