* 1664577
* Development of HPLC-free system for solid phase RNA synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Maksim Royzen, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports this project
by Professor Maksim Royzen. Professor Royzen is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York at Albany. Professor
Royzen is developing improved processes for the synthesis of RNA. Synthetic RNA
occupies a very special place in modern research. Custom synthesis of 20-30
nucleotide-long RNA strands has become routine, propelling many fields of
biochemical and pharmaceutical research. Research in the twenty-first century,
however, creates a strong need for a robust solid phase synthesis of longer RNA
strands ranging from 50-150 nucleotides (-nt) in length. Despite highly
impressive efforts to take the field to the next level, synthesis of long RNA
strands is still very challenging, even by the commercial leaders in the field.
The biggest obstacle lies in purification of the target RNA strand from the
impurities created in every cycle of the solid-phase synthesis. This proposal
develops an approach towards chromatography-free synthesis and purification of
RNA that is applicable to any strand regardless of its size. To demonstrate the
versatility of the method, syntheses of incrementally longer RNA strands are
being pursued, including a 58-nt long strand and 112-nt long non-coding RNA. The
project has been designed to provide educational and research activities for
graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach activities include the
participation of local high school teachers in the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard solid phase RNA synthesis
consists of four steps. It begins with activation of the solid phase-immobilized
first subunit, typically achieved by cleavage of a protecting group, followed by
coupling of the second subunit. Failure strands, generated due to incomplete
coupling, are capped to prevent further propagation. After oxidation of the
phosphite triester, the dimer strand is carried over to the next cycle. The most
challenging aspect of this approach is purification of the final product from
the failure sequences that occur to some extent during every coupling step. In a
typical synthesis of 20-nt long RNA, failure sequences may constitute as much as
50-60% of the total oligonucleotide content. The standard purification of RNA is
achieved through reverse phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC),
which is time and labor intensive and increasingly problematic with longer
strands. The strategy, involving bio-orthogonal inverse electron demand Diels-
Alder chemistry, is a transformative improvement over the existing approach. The
final coupling step is carried out using a unique subunit functionalized with a
releasable trans-cyclooctene (TCO) group. Because all failure sequences from
previous cycles are capped, only the desired strand incorporates the releasable
TCO. Upon completion of the final cycle, the synthetic oligonucleotide is
cleaved from the original solid support and purified using bio-orthogonal
"click-to-release" chemistry involving immobilized tetrazine. The bio-orthogonal
purification procedure is fully compatible with larger RNA strands. The
educational plan includes outreach to underrepresented minorities, who are
introduced to solid phase RNA synthesis, as well as organic synthesis.