* 1664184
* SusChEM: Visible Light-Driven Reduction of Carbon Dioxide using Heavy Metal-Free Colloidal Quantum Dots as Sensitizers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Emily Weiss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 408,615.00

The use of sunlight to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) to various small molecules
that can be used as fuels is a sustainable way to exploit abundant solar energy
for use both during day and night. The chemical reactions involved in this
conversion are complicated and multi-step, and typically involve the transfer of
electrons from one molecule to another. A "photocatalyst" is a species that
lowers the energy barriers for, and thereby facilitates, such complex reactions
by using light energy to drive chemical reactions. With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Emily Weiss of
Northwestern University is conducting fundamental studies to identify and
optimize photocatalyts for CO2 conversion in catalyst designs that comprise
molecules adsorbed to the surfaces of semiconductor nanoparticles made of non-
toxic, earth abundant materials. Her studies involve both chemical analysis of
these hybrid inorganic-organic complexes and laser spectroscopy to monitor their
behaviors on ultrafast timescales after excitation with light energy. Dr. Weiss
is actively involved in the mentoring of undergraduate researchers on this
project, in the development of a new curriculum for General Chemistry at
Northwestern University to increase retention of women and minority students
under-represented in STEM fields, and in programs like the Gateway Science
Workshop, which offers structured study sessions for students in STEM courses,
particularly those students with weaker high school preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Emily Weiss of Northwestern University is
identifying and optimizing the most important thermodynamic and kinetic
parameters in the performance of ternary heavy metal-free colloidal CuInX2 (X =
S, Se) quantum dots (QDs) as soluble, multi-site, colloidal sensitizers for
photocatalysis of the reduction of CO2 in solution. This work illuminates the
mechanisms by which specific and unique properties of a colloidal QD sensitizer
enhance the performance of a molecular catalyst with known specificity for CO2
reduction, by addressing several fundamental challenges associated with this
task, namely: (i) synthesis and surface functionalization of a QD sensitizer
with enough reducing power to donate multiple electrons to the co-catalyst; (ii)
control of the local concentration of hydrogen ions; (iii) fast hole extraction
from the sensitizer to inhibit recombination and photo-oxidative degradation;
and (iv) maximal electronic coupling between the sensitizer and the co-catalyst
to provide pathways for fast electron delivery. One and two dimensional nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, electron microscopy, electrochemical
measurements and steady-state and time resolved optical measurements allow for
quantitative characterization of the binding affinity for the QD-catalyst pair,
the proton (H+) concentration on the QD surface, the degree of adsorption of the
catalytic substrates and intermediates, the rate constants for elementary
electron and hole transfer steps, and the efficacy of hole scavenging. These
techniques complement the gas and liquid chromatography, NMR, and infrared
spectroscopy characterization of product distributions and reaction rates. In
addition to the societal impact of finding new pathways to produce carbon- and
hydrogen-based fuels from sunlight and CO2 using a non-toxic, earth-abundant
colloidal catalyst, this work has broad impact in that undergraduates will be
involved both in the proposed research and in ongoing curriculum reform of
General Chemistry by Dr. Weiss, in order to increase retention of women and
under-represented minority students in STEM fields at Northwestern University.