* 1664981
* Enantioselective, Metal-Catalyzed Alkynylations of Oxocarbenium and Iminium Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Mary Watson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 02/28/2022
* USD 443,200.00

Organic molecules containing oxygen and nitrogen atoms are prevalent in
pharmaceuticals, natural products, polymers, and other materials. Many of these
molecules are chiral, which means that they exist as non-superimposable mirror
images. These mirror image structures often behave differently in biological
systems. For example, chiral pharmaceuticals typically show different efficacy
depending on which mirror-image structure is administered. Given their
importance in biological and biomedical applications, it is therefore crucial to
prepare these molecules as a single chiral structure, also known as an
enantiomer. However, methods to prepare the desired enantiomer of many molecules
are limited, and this curbs the discovery of potential medicines and biological
probes. In this project, Dr. Mary Watson is developing a strategy using
catalysts for the synthesis of oxygen- and nitrogen-containing cyclic compounds
that will allow the efficient synthesis of molecules that are currently
difficult to prepare as single enantiomers. The catalysts are themselves single
enantiomers, and she is also studying the fundamental interactions between the
catalyst and the organic substrates to enable broad understanding of the
mechanism of these reactions, and especially how the chirality of the catalyst
is ultimately conveyed to that of the chiral product. Dr. Watson is actively
engaged in outreach activities that build upon her research to provide
opportunities for students of all levels to engage in science. Her research
program provides excellent training for undergraduate students through
significant research opportunities. In addition, through outreach at the
University-associated daycare, Dr. Watson is inspiring a diverse group of young
children (pre-school through third grade) with excitement about science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Synthesis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Mary Watson of the University of Delaware
is developing enantioselective catalytic methods for the synthesis of oxygen and
nitrogen heterocycles with tri- and tetrasubstituted alpha-stereocenters. She is
investigating the use of chiral copper catalysts to deliver terminal alkynes to
cyclic oxocarbenium and iminium ion intermediates. Her focus is to enable
efficient synthesis of highly enantioenriched oxygen and nitrogen heterocycle
scaffolds that are difficult to prepare via conventional methods. She will also
undertake rigorous mechanistic experiments to understand the structure of the
active catalyst and determine a rationale for the high enantioselectivity
observed in these reactions. Dr. Watson is actively engaged in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) outreach programs focused on
increasing diversity through student research experiences and demonstration
programs at the University-associated daycare, in support of the broader impacts
of this project.