* 1664544
* Research Data Centers: Dallas-Fort Worth
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kurt Beron, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award establishes the Dallas-Fort Worth Federal Statistical Research Data
Center. This Center joins the national network of over two dozen Federal
Statistical Research Data Centers (FSRDCs). These Centers make important data
gathered by federal statistical agencies available to leading researchers
throughout the United States. The Dallas-Fort Worth FSRDC will be available to
members of the sponsoring research consortium: the University of Texas at
Dallas, the University of Texas at Arlington, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, the University of Texas Southwest Medical Center, Southern Methodist
University, Texas Tech University, the University of North Texas, Texas
Christian University, and the Dallas-Fort Worth Hospital Council Foundation.
Research projects at this FSRDC include work in engineering, economics, urban
planning, sociology, health, and demography. The Center will encourage greater
use of federal statistical data among faculty, researchers, and graduate
students in this region. In addition, the Center will make valuable new data on
health outcomes collected by Dallas hospitals available to researchers through
the FSRDC network nationwide. The research made possible by this FSRDC will
improve the economic competitiveness of the US and regional economies by helping
policymakers at all levels understand how government decisions affect market
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each FSRDC is a secure facility that provides
leading researchers with authorized access to restricted-use data from federal
statistical agencies. As a result, qualified researchers can conduct projects
that are important for both science and policy while protecting respondent
confidentiality. The research conducted at this FSRDC will improve statistical
efforts by the federal government (including Census and other statistical
agencies that make data available through FSRDCs). The projects will utilize
datasets supported by the Bureau of the Census, the National Center for Health
Statistics, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the Bureau of
Justice Statistics, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Department of Housing
and Urban Development, and the Department of Agriculture.