* 1664866
* SusChEM: Theoretical Studies of Inorganic, Organometallic, and Bioinorganic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Michael Hall, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael B. Hall at Texas A&M
University, College Station, investigates important problems in catalytic
chemistry by using modern computational techniques. The project studies the
naturally occurring hydrogenase enzymes and related model complexes, as these
systems hold promise for low-cost replacements for expensive platinum electrodes
that are now used for the development of hydrogen as an energy resource.
Additional studies are on the activation and formation of chemical bonds by
reactions with inexpensive metal catalysts rather than precious metals,
developments that are important for the chemical industry. In addition to the
education of students and postdoctoral associates at Texas A&M University, a
number of experimental collaborators bring the educational aspects to a broader
audience. The Laboratory for Molecular Simulation, directed by Professor Hall,
provides researchers across campus with access to the latest atomistic modeling
software and hardware. The Laboratory also supports the free world-wide
distribution of the Fenske-Hall method. This method, with its simple graphical
user interface and ability to run large transition metal calculations on a
laptop, allows it to be easily used by a wide audience and to be incorporated
into teaching courses.

Full-gradient geometry optimizations with non-local density-functional theory
(DFT) and ab initio energy calculations, primarily coupled cluster, complete
active space and multireference configuration interaction, are being used to
solve problems of current interest in inorganic, organometallic, and
bioinorganic chemistry. Specific systems include: (1) non-innocent thiolate
ligands in alkene and hydrogen activation, where the metal-sulfur pi bonding is
sufficiently weak, such that the substantial multireference character cannot be
handled by DFT; (2) cobalt catalyzed borylation reactions (in collaboration with
Paul Chirik), where development of abundant first-transition-row metals as
catalysts are needed, but where the mechanism appears to be different from those
for second-transition-row metals; (3) unexpected non-innocent behavior in nickel
phosphine complexes (in collaboration with Morris Bullock), where the ligands
that are well known to assist in providing protons for proton reduction become
active in other transformations; (4) regioselective functionalization of
unactivated sp3 carbon-hydrogen bonds; (5) fluoroalkane metathesis (in
collaboration with Tom Baker), where the formation and stability of the
metallocycle competes with its further transformation to the final metathesis
products; (6) Nickel iron hydrogenase studies to include more of the protein
backbone, where there are still several competing mechanisms in the literature,
but where there is insufficient calibration of the functionals; (7) modeling new
nickel iron hydrogenases and their mutants (in collaboration with David
Barondeau), where changes in the residues near the bridging carbonyl site change
the reactivity; and (8) hydrogenase synthetic models (in collaboration with
Marcetta Darensbourg), where exploration of new ligands opens up unexpected new
mechanisms.