* 1664247
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:   A High resolution Paleontological, Ichnological, and Chemostratigraphic Study of Late Devonian Mass Extinctions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Diana Boyer, Winthrop University
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,687.00

RUI, Collaborative Research: A High resolution Paleontological, Ichnological,
and Chemostratigraphic Study of Late Devonian Mass
Extinctions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;by&lt;br/&gt;Diana Boyer, EAR-1348981, SUNY
Oswego&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Love, EAR-1348988, Univ. California,
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The rock record preserves a
detailed history of past events in life history, and understanding these events,
particularly episodes of unusual biotic turnover, is of paramount importance,
particularly in this time of our current diversity crises. There have been many
large scale extinction events throughout geologic history, and despite extensive
study, the Late Devonian mass extinction events in the Frasnian-Famennian still
remain enigmatic in terms of a causal mechanism. Although numerous kill
mechanisms have been proposed, marine anoxia is widely thought to be a major
contributing factor, in part because of the pervasiveness of organic-rich black
shale. This study will test for extensive anoxic and/or pervasive euxinic
(sulfidic water column) conditions associated with several biotic turnover
events preserved in a Laurentian basin. PIs will use an integrated
paleontological, inorganic geochemical, and lipid biomarker approach performed
at high spatial resolution to reconstruct secular changes in ancient microbial
and metazoan source organism inputs, and marine redox structure in these ancient
epeiric seaways. They will test for a correlation between the magnitude and
timing of extinction events and patterns of oxygen and euxinic stress which
prevailed.&lt;br/&gt;The utility of combining paleontological and geochemical
proxies to recognize bottom water oxygen levels on a fine-scale in black shale
facies has been realized (Boyer et al., 2011), but not yet applied to understand
the dynamics of major events in the history of life. The new light we are
shedding on Late Devonian biospheric and environmental evolution in North
America will inform and direct future work in biogeochemistry,
paleontology/paleobiology, evolutionary biology, and ocean-atmosphere evolution.
Central to this research is a unique bridging of organic and inorganic
geochemical methods with paleontology within a broad field-based template to
yield high-resolution bio- and chemostratigraphic records that span the Late
Devonian mass extinction events and their aftermath. At the heart of this
research proposal is the training and education of a group of talented graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 school students in the geosciences at UCR and SUNY
Oswego, many from underrepresented ethnic groups, through a combination of
direct involvement in the research project or through a variety of outreach
ventures.