* 1664682
* Understanding the Mechanism of Mn-Promoted H2O Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Julie Kovacs, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 449,841.00

Clean energy alternatives inspired by Nature's photosynthetic oxidation of water
require an understanding of the important reaction steps. Photosynthetic water
(H2O) oxidation produces oxygen (O2) as one of the reaction products. A key step
in this process is the formation of the oxygen-oxygen bond present in O2. For
example, fuel cells based on artificial photosynthesis are limited by their slow
rates of H2O oxidation. This provides a compelling motivation to understand how
Nature's catalyst works. Professor Kovacs' group is synthesizing molecules that
contain both manganese and calcium, elements know to be important components in
the natural photosynthetic formation of oxygen from water. This research is (a)
testing proposed mechanisms for photosynthetic O-O bond formation, and (b)
providing evidence as to why calcium is essential. Professor Kovacs is a member
of a mentoring group for female faculty organized by the University of
Washington NSF-funded ADVANCE program, and serves as a mentor to female faculty,
post docs, and graduate students at Washington and other academic institutions.
Her graduate students are judging science fairs (Bainbridge Elementary Science
Fair, Washington State Science and Engineering Fair), presenting demonstrations
at the Shoreline STEM Festival, and volunteering at the Pacific Science Center.
These activities are engaging children (ages 3-12) in science-related
activities.

Fundamental scientific research is needed in order to develop methods for
efficiently capturing sunlight, and converting its energy into storable fuels.
Nature accomplishes this via photosynthetic H2O oxidation, which converts solar
energy into chemical bond energy in the form of electrons and protons, and
simultaneously produces the O2 necessary to sustain life on our planet. Sluggish
H2O oxidation catalysts limit the performance of existing fuel cells. Nature had
billions of years to optimize its catalyst, which incorporates both Mn and Ca,
and this provides compelling motivation to understand how Nature's catalyst
works. The mechanism of the key O-O bond-forming step to form a peroxo
intermediate is not well-understood. Professor Kovacs' research group is
synthesizing site-differentiated heterobimetallic MnCa complexes designed to
promote O-O bond formation. These complexes incorporate a Ca-OH moiety in close
proximity to Mn, in order to rapidly trap MnV oxo intermediates, generated via
sequential oxidative charging. Calculations show that the Ca-Mn separations in
the synthetic targets require minimal rearrangement for O-O bond formation to
occur. In order to verify that the designed molecules are capable of supporting
the peroxo intermediate expected to form following O-O bond formation,
independent routes to peroxos are being explored, using a reagent (H2O2)
containing an intact, preformed, O-O bond. Reactions are being monitored in situ
at low T, using electronic absorption spectroscopy and EPR, and oxidants are
added in a step-wise fashion, thereby providing more control over the O-O bond-
forming step. Professor Kovacs is a member of a Mentoring group for female
faculty organized by the UW NSF-funded ADVANCE program, and serves as a mentor
to female faculty, post docs, and graduate students at the UW, and at other
academic institutions. Her graduate students judge local Science Fairs
(Bainbridge Elementary Science Fair, Washington State Science and Engineering
Fair in Bremerton, WA), present demonstrations at the Shoreline STEM Festival,
and volunteer at the Pacific Science Center, engaging children (ages 3-12) in
science-related activities.