* 1664325
* Advances in Coupled-Cluster Theory with Molecular Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Stanton, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

John Stanton of the University of Florida is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Stanton and his research group work in the field of theoretical
chemical physics, which aims to apply concepts from physics to the study of
atoms and molecules. They work in two research areas: quantum chemistry and
molecular dynamics. In quantum chemistry, the Stanton group develops and applies
computational tools from the class of methods for treating electrons that is
known as coupled-cluster theory to enable highly accurate calculations of the
properties of molecules that are of interest to experimentalists. In molecular
dynamics, they develop approaches to semiclassical transition state theory,
enabling the prediction and understanding of the rates at which chemical
reactions take place. Potential applications of the quantum chemistry research
include very detailed calculations to improve the fidelity of chemical models to
study chemical processes in the atmosphere and industry. By combining the work
in quantum chemistry with the reaction rate theory developments, they can
perform accurate studies of chemical reactions involving radicals and
biradicals. This latter area of research has significant import in many areas,
since the oxygen molecule so vital to life and which constitutes 20% of the
atmosphere is a biradical. The quantum chemistry methods that are developed in
this research are all implemented in the CFOUR quantum chemistry package, which
is freely available to the research community. Stanton is working to develop an
honors program at his university for highly-motivated and highly-accomplished
students enrolled in the study of the natural
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves
explorations in the coupled-cluster treatment of electronic correlation,
specifically involving high-accuracy methods including effects of quadruple
excitations and the multireference effects that are characteristic of the
ubiquitous (and important) class of problems that comprise "biradical" systems.
In addition, work will be done to explore the accuracy and limits of
semiclassical transition state theory, involving: benchmarking against exact
quantum results for multidimensional model systems, designing extensions of the
method, and exploring the formal connections between the pseudo-states treated
by this method and Siegert eigenstates. In addition, work will be done on
developing methods for the treatment of vibronic coupling in molecules that
include angular momentum effects, culminating in the design and implementation
of a spin-rovibronic treatment.