* 1664374
* Designer Silver Catalysts for Tunable C=C and C-H Bond Amination
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jennifer Schomaker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Designer Silver Catalysts for Tunable C-H and C=C Bond Amination

One of the major challenges facing chemists in the 21st century is identifying
cheap and sustainable ways to transform substances obtained from petroleum and
biorenewable sources into useful building blocks for the synthesis of critically
needed pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, polymers, and fuels. The carbon-hydrogen
single bond (C-H) and carbon-carbon double bond (C=C) are two of the most common
chemical bonds in organic compounds and represent convenient locations to
introduce new functionality into those compounds. However, it is difficult to
achieve a desired reaction at only one specific C-H or C=C bond of the many that
are present in a single molecule. In this project, Dr. Schomaker is developing
new silver catalysts that transform these bonds to important and useful carbon-
nitrogen bonds with high yields, less waste, and with the ability to selectively
make many different useful products from a single starting compound. Studies to
understand the unique features of silver that enable such high, predictable
levels of control over this reactivity are key to designing improved and durable
catalysts that efficiently transform precious hydrocarbon feedstocks into
valuable materials, even using water as reaction solvent. Dr. Schomaker is
active in outreach programs related to her research interests in catalysis to
educate and engage the general public, especially young women, in fields related
to science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Her activities
include developing hands-on experimental modules centered on topics related to
silver catalysis for "Expanding Your Horizons", a STEM-centered program for
girls in 6-8th grades, as well as entertaining and educational demonstrations on
silver chemistry for "Science is Fun" public presentations.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Jennifer Schomaker of the University of Wisconsin is developing low-cost,
modular catalysts for the tunable functionalization of C-H bonds to valuable C-N
bonds. Such methods are crucial for streamlined syntheses of pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, chiral ligands and amine building blocks, but represent a long-
standing challenge in the field of catalysis. To address this issue, Dr.
Schomaker is pursuing a fundamental understanding of the unique features of
silver complexes that enable them to achieve catalyst-controlled transformations
of C-H bonds to C-N bonds through metal-catalyzed nitrene transfer processes. A
combination of variable temperature (VT) NMR, diffusion spectroscopy,
mechanistic and computational studies (density functional theory and higher-
level ab initio methods such as CASSCF) are being employed to assess how the
features of N-donor ligands influence the electronic structure of the metal
nitrene, the dynamic/fluxional behavior of reactive intermediates in solution
and promotion of non-covalent interactions between substrate/catalyst to
influence the site of the C-H functionalization event. Ultimately, this work is
establishing universal design principles for the synthesis of catalysts that
facilitate non-directed C-H functionalizations capable of overriding innate
reactivity preferences that are extendable to other metals and other C-H
oxidation reactions, particularly in an asymmetric context. Dr. Schomaker is
also active in a number of STEM outreach programs to engage and educate students
in her community about the importance of catalysis in solving challenges that
currently face our society. She is particularly interested in increasing the
representation of women in STEM disciplines to support the broader impacts of
this work.