* 1664283
* Modular Synthesis of N-Glycans and Homogeneous Glycoproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Chi-Huey Wong, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2020
* USD 540,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project
led by Professor Chi-Huey Wong at The Scripps Research Institute. His group
focuses on the development of a new combination of chemical and enzymatic
methods for the synthesis of complex oligosaccharides to be attached to proteins
to form homogeneous glycoproteins such as antibodies. Most of the proteins in
humans and other higher organisms have various sugars attached to form a
heterogeneous population of glycoproteins. As a result, it has been difficult to
understand the roles sugars play in glycoproteins. This project establishes
effective methods for the synthesis of complex oligosaccharides and their use in
the assembly of homogeneous glycoproteins containing well defined
oligosaccharide structures. Access to these homogeneous glycoproteins allows us
to understand how the oligosaccharide affects the functions of proteins and how
to make better glycoproteins as medicines or as reagents. This multidisciplinary
project presents a rich environment for the training of young scientists.

Understanding the effect of glycosylation on protein folding, structure and
function is vitally important in biology and medicine and requires access to a
large number of complex N- glycans. These oligosaccharides could be assembled
using the modular method described in the project, which breaks down the task of
N-glycans synthesis into the chemoenzymatic preparation of branched modules and
the chemical synthesis of the core unit. The synthesis of branched modules
(Specific Aim 1) begins with seven synthetic intermediates, which can be
diversified using enzymatic transformations to generate a number of modules.
Chemical synthesis of the core oligosaccharide is being optimized to provide
N-glycans tailored to a specific application, therefore increasing the utility
of this method (Specific Aim 2). Using the synthetic N-glycan samples, new
glycoforms of a representative monoclonal antibody are being prepared for the
study of their activities (Specific Aim 3). All modules, enzymes, and reagents
developed in this study are made available to the community to facilitate our
understanding of protein glycosylation and to advance the research in
glycoscience.