* 1664965
* A look at atmospheric chemistry through the back door: PEI spectroscopy of anionic precursors to transient species
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Caroline Jarrold, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2021
* USD 540,590.00

Many of the principal drivers of atmospheric chemistry are short-lived reactive
small molecules known as "radicals," the characterization of which is
challenging because it is difficult to prepare them in a laboratory in
sufficient quantities to study them. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Caroline Chick Jarrold uses a unique approach to preparing radicals by
(1) stabilizing them with a negative charge, then (2) gleaning detailed
information about the neutral radicals by using lasers to selectively detach the
electrons in a way that the energy of the electrons precisely reflects the
properties of the radicals. The specific molecules of interest are involved in
production of ozone in the part of the atmosphere with negative impact on human
health. Outreach is being done, in part, through her institution's STEM Summer
Scholars Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines low-temperature
preparation of radical species and their anionic precursors with anion
photoelectron imaging (PEI) spectroscopy. This combination of tools is being
applied to OH-isoprene adducts, and species formed by ozonolysis of isoprene,
which may include Criegee intermediates (carbonyl oxides believed to be formed
during ozonolysis), along with non-covalent complexes the intermediates form
with H2O and O2. The oxidation of isoprene (2-methyl-1,3-butadiene) by OH and O3
leads to the formation of a wide range of reactive open-shell molecules, the
kinetics of which has been a very active area of research. The spectroscopic
data from the proposed studies complements kinetics studies with more detailed
electronic and molecular structural information. Additionally, the effects of
water, which influences isomerization and reaction barrier heights, and O2,
which can both photosensitize and react with the transients, are being probed.
Spectroscopic analysis is supported collaboratively by quantum wavepacket ab
initio molecular dynamics studies. The broader impacts of this project include
an increase in current understanding of the complex, interconnected web of
atmospheric processes, in addition to highly technical training for a
postdoctoral research associate, graduate students, and undergraduates in the
context of an area of global importance.