* 1664290
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Seismic Response to the 2016 M5.8 Pawnee Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Heather Savage, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 20,512.00

Induced earthquakes, or seismicity caused by human activity such as wastewater
injection or secondary oil recovery, have been increasing in the midwestern
United States since 2009. The state of Oklahoma has become known as "the new
earthquake capital", with earthquake rates of M&gt;3 exceeding those of
California in the last few years. The 3 September 2016 Mw5.8 Pawnee, Oklahoma
earthquake occurred within the region of induced seismicity, near wastewater
disposal wells, and was the largest earthquake ever recorded within the state.
The earthquake occurred five years after the second largest earthquake, the
similarly sized Mw5.7 November 2011 Prague earthquake. Near Pawnee, local
residents reported strong ground-shaking, damage to houses, cracks on the
ground, and concerns about safety. Students from Cornell University and Colombia
University, in collaboration with local universities including the University of
Oklahoma, Oklahoma State University, and University of Tulsa, actively
participated in the rapid deployment of 25 seismic stations around the
epicentral region. Students of the institutions involved have been actively
involved in learning about sensors, network designs, and earthquake physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main fault the ruptured during the Pawnee event was an
unmapped fault intersecting mapped Labette Fault, which has hosted a significant
number of aftershocks include the largest aftershock (M3.9). The aftershock
sequence and related seismic activity in the region that has been recorded since
the rapid (within 2 days) deployment of seismic instrumentation will help study
aftershocks and the likely triggered seismicity on the regional fault systems.
In the coming weeks, we will deploy an additional 20 short-period stations that
will record data for 12 months. This combined network will provide information
on fault structure, aftershock decay, duration, and interaction with injection
rate variations. The data will help to understand the characteristics of faults
that host large damaging earthquakes, and will help to assess earthquake hazards
in Oklahoma and the midcontinent. The broader impact of this rapid deployment
will help understand the regional tectonic framework in northern Oklahoma and
may elucidate the relationship between this recent seismic activity with the
fluid injection activities in the region.