* 1664601
* Electric and magnetic deflection of fully field-oriented molecules within superfluid nanodroplets:  A probe of simple and complex cold polar molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Vitaly Kresin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 529,438.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Vitaly Kresin's group
from the University of Southern California is using a jet of extremely cold
nanoscale droplets of superfluid helium as a tool to probe the electric magnetic
properties of individual molecules. A "superfluid" is a fluid that can flow
without the internal friction or viscosity of liquids. The cold temperature (a
fraction of a degree above absolute zero, which is -273.15 degrees Celsius) and
viscosity free condition of superfluid helium makes it possible to use electric
or magnetic fields outside the droplet to control the orientation of molecules
inside the helium droplet. This in turn makes it possible to measure fundamental
properties of these molecules (for example the electric and magnetic "poles" of
the molecules). It also makes it possible to understand how molecules aggregate
into clusters. The research group is considering the study of a variety of
important molecules and their agglomerates, including biological species and
"molecular magnets." The broader scientific impacts of the project stem from the
fact that electric and magnetic characteristics of biological, molecular-magnet
systems are relevant to fields ranging from protein synthesis to quantum
computing. Graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers are
mentored in a highly interdisciplinary area of research and are involved in
outreach programs and in science fairs. Undergraduate students gain experience
in giving scientific presentations, as they present their work at USC's annual
Undergraduate Symposium for Scholarly and Creative Work. Professor Kresin is
also involved in the national Society of Physics Students' "Adopt-a-Physicist"
program which connects high school classes with professional scientists for
conversations and questions about careers, science, school, work, and life
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helium nanodroplets are produced by the supersonic
expansion of cold helium gas. These droplets pick up guest molecules by passing
through pick-up cells and then traverse a strong inhomogeneous electric or
magnetic field which both orients the polar impurity and exerts an intense
deflecting force. This force is measured by mapping out the beam profile - in
this way yielding an experimental readout of the magnitude of the dipole moment
of a single ultracold molecule or molecular complex. This technique is applied
to amino acids and small peptides, to hydrated acid complexes, to molecular
magnets, and to molecular assemblies whose reaction pathways can be custom pre-
aligned by the external field. The study and control of cold polar molecule
interactions, assemblies, and reactions is attracting considerable
interdisciplinary interest in view of their relevance to quantum computing,
novel condensate phases, molecular interferometry, and investigations of
fundamental symmetries.