* 1664446
* Nanomanufacturing of High-temperature Superconductor Circuits Using Focused Ion Beams
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Shane Cybart, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2021
* USD 343,469.00

The research objective is to investigate high-throughput, large-area
nanomanufacturing of high-temperature ceramic oxide superconductor electronics.
At liquid nitrogen temperature, ceramic oxide materials superconduct, i.e., they
conduct electricity without offering resistance. These superconductors are
anisotropic and the conductivity varies in different crystallographic
directions, which complicates the manufacturing of Josephson junctions, the
building-blocks of these circuits. Recent advances in focused ion beam
technology has opened up a new resistless direct-write nanomanufacturing method
for high-temperature superconductor electronics that has the potential to
improve performance and reduce cost. This research involves several disciplines
in science and engineering including nanofabrication, superconductor
electronics, and cryogenics. The project will develop knowledge and skills in
film growth, nanofabrication, mathematical modeling, advanced low noise electron
transport measurement techniques as well as critical thinking to prepare
students for careers in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics. The
Institute's Faculty Mentor Program will be utilized to create opportunities for
women and underrepresented minority students. The superconductor electronics
industry will be impacted in areas from high performance cryogenic computing to
high temperature semiconductor amplifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges
to fabricating high transition temperature (high-Tc) ceramic oxide
superconductor circuits are several. Its anisotropic crystal structure
complicates the manufacture of Josephson junctions. The figure of merit for
Josephson junctions scales exponentially with the circuit critical dimension.
High performance devices require feature sizes in the sub-10 nanometer regime.
Variation of even 1 nm can result in large fluctuations in the figure of merit.
Despite these challenges many high-Tc junction manufacturing techniques have
emerged over the last three decades but none is able to generate large numbers
of Josephson junctions with high-yield and predictable properties. This award
utilizes a finely focused 0.5 nm helium ion beam to directly modify the
superconducting material for the precise fabrication of nanowires for Josephson
junctions. The key to this method is that the material is very sensitive to the
oxygen ordering in the crystal lattice which can be altered by light ion
irradiation. Restricting this altered region to the nanoscale allows for the
creation of in-plane tunneling barriers directly in the material with no resists
or etching. The method is compatible with commercially available high-TC
superconductor films on relatively inexpensive large area sapphire wafers. There
are a number of variables in the parameter space for this process, such as beam
current, dose, film thickness, and spatial Josephson junction dimensions. The
goal is to study the impact of these parameters throughput, yield, and figure of
merit uniformity.