* 1664994
* Photoinitiated Dynamics of Transient Species: Hydrogen-Bonded Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2022
* USD 437,499.00

In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms -
A (CSDM-A) and Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Programs
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Hanna Reisler of the University of
Southern California uses lasers to initiate chemical reactions and then observe
how the molecules dissociate (fall apart), dissipate the energy they absorbed
from the laser light, or behave as acids under light exposure. The Reisler group
is particularly interested in hydrogen-bonded complexes of molecules and
nanoparticles in water containing a few molecules of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and
organic molecules such as benzene or phenol. Hydrogen bonds are formed from the
attraction of partially negatively-charged atoms such as oxygen on one molecule
and the partially positive charge of a hydrogen atom on a neighboring molecule.
Hydrogen-bonded networks influence chemical and biological function and are
implicated in the identity of icy bodies in the solar system. Hydrogen bonding
is not yet well understood because of difficulties in defining the experimental
conditions. Professor Reisler overcomes these challenges by selecting water
aggregates that contain a specific number of solute molecules, then uses laser
techniques that have high detection sensitivity for the molecules and reactions
of interest. The broader impacts of the project include potential societal
benefits arising from better understanding the effects of hydrogen bonding on
the reactivity of molecules in the atmosphere and other water-rich environments,
like the human body. Students and postdoctoral researchers build advanced
instrumentation, preparing them high technology careers. Professor Reisler, a
leader in mentoring of women in science fields, continues her activities in
encouraging students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
research focuses on three topics: (1) energy flow pathways in the
predissociation of dimers of water with aromatic molecules;(2) measurements of
hydrogen-bond dissociation energies in cyclic trimers and tetramers with
specific HCl and water subunits; and (3) interactions of nanoscale water samples
with protons. By recording images of specific rovibrational levels of one
fragment of the dissociated cluster, the rovibrational energy distributions in
the cofragments are determined, demonstrating how geometry and hydrogen-bonding
type influence energy disposal. This provides stringent tests of theories and
proposed mechanisms. In order to study the emergence of acidity in condensed
phase aggregates, nanofabricated arrays of gold nanoparticles are covered with
solid water and rapid heating is achieved by visible irradiation that excites
the plasmon resonance of the gold nanoparticles. A 0.5 mm diameter laser pulse
excites over a million nanoparticles. The effect of a single laser pulse on
solid water doped with HCl is studied using isotope exchange to probe acidity.