* 1664426
* Nonlinear dimensionality reduction and enhanced sampling in molecular simulation using auto-associative neural networks
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2018
* USD 380,105.00

Andrew Ferguson of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Chemistry Division to establish new theoretical approaches and
computational tools to accelerate molecular simulations of protein folding. This
project is cofunded by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the
Division of Materials Research. Proteins are molecular workhorses that perform
the essential functions of life. Proteins have evolved to adopt shapes that
enable them to do these tasks. Determining the shape and motions of a protein
can help reveal how it works and inform how to design new proteins to help treat
disease, produce biofuels, or make new materials. Computer simulations of
proteins are very useful in that they can identify the precise locations and
motions of all the constituent atoms. For all but the smallest proteins,
however, it is too computationally intensive to accurately predict their
structure and motions even with powerful supercomputers. Ways to accelerate
these simulations have been developed, but to work well they need good estimates
of the structural rearrangements that the protein will make. This is a problem,
since this is usually the question the simulations are trying to answer. In this
work, Professor Ferguson is developing a new approach to accelerate protein
folding simulations using a type of machine learning known as artificial neural
networks so-called because they are based on the structure of neurons in the
brain. Neural networks allow computers to both determine these important
structural pathways and use them to make simulations run faster. This new
approach is being used to help understand large proteins involved in cancer and
HIV infection. It is also being incorporated into popular simulation software
available for free public download. Professor Ferguson is providing research
opportunities for undergraduates to work with him on this project and he is
developing hands-on workshops in computational materials science as part of the
Girls Learning About Materials (GLAM) summer camp at the University of Illinois.

The aim of this work is to establish a nonlinear machine learning approach to
discover collective variables for protein folding and to use these variables to
perform enhanced sampling in molecular dynamics simulations. The success of
enhanced sampling techniques in accelerating conformational sampling is
predicated on the availability of good collective variables (CVs) correlated
with important molecular motions. Existing nonlinear dimensionality reduction
techniques (e.g., diffusion maps, Isomap, land ocally linear embedding) can ably
discover good CVs, but do not furnish the explicit coordinate mapping so that
biased sampling must be conducted inefficiently and indirectly in proxy
variables. This work establishes a new enhanced sampling approach based on auto-
associative artificial neural networks ("autoencoders") to discover CVs that are
explicit differentiable functions of the atomic coordinates and to permit
calculation of analytical biasing forces. This approach is termed MESA
(Molecular Enhanced Sampling with Autoencoders). MESA is validated on the short
peptides alanine dipeptide and tryptophan-cage, and deployed to discover
metastable states and structural transitions in a kinase overexpressed in many
cancers and an envelope protein presented on the surface of HIV. MESA is made
broadly available to the molecular simulation community by collaborating with
the developers of OpenMM and PLUMED to contribute the approach to future
releases of these software packages. Positive research experiences have great
benefits for undergraduate success and retention and this work supports 10-week
summer research opportunities during each year of the award. Professor Ferguson
is also developing new and exciting content for the highly successful Girls
Learning About Materials (GLAM) summer camp at the University of Illinois to
illustrate and promote computational materials science among female high school
students and elevate female enrollment in STEM degree programs.