* 1664664
* SusChEM: Single Molecule Studies of Aldol Condensation on Heterogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Daniel Higgins, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 474,234.00

Converting renewable biomass resources to fuels provides a way to meet society's
growing energy demands sustainably without reliance on fossil fuels. However,
the compounds most easily extracted from biomass are quite different from
conventional hydrocarbons obtained from processing petroleum or shale. One major
difference is that most biomass-derived compounds are smaller than hydrocarbon
fuels, necessitating catalytic reactions to build larger molecules from the
original compounds. In these reactions, the catalyst is a solid film comprising
chemicals that aid the efficiency of the reaction, but are not themselves
consumed in the reaction. Drs. Hohn and Higgins are studying one such reaction,
aldol condensation, to understand what catalytic properties are best suited to
this task. To accomplish this, they follow a light-emitting reaction occurring
on a catalyst film that they create with a gradient of catalytic properties
along the film surface. Observing which parts of the film emit the brightest
light provides information on the types of catalytic sites that are most active
and allows the team to design improved catalysts. Research results are being
disseminated in several ways, including through presentations at scientific
conferences and peer reviewed publications. Dr. Hohn is also incorporating
research results into outreach activities for K-12 students, while Dr. Higgins
is introducing research results into a textbook on microscopy and into a
graduate-level chemistry class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Hohn and Higgins of
Kansas State University are developing a fundamental understanding of the
catalytic properties responsible for activity in aldol condensation. They are
applying single molecule methods to simultaneously measure acid/base properties
and aldol condensation activity on thin films incorporating gradients in
acid/base site densities. With these measurements, they are correlating
catalytic activity in aldol condensation with the strengths and densities of the
acid/base sites. The team applies surface characterization methods, including
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman mapping studies, to augment the
single molecule characterization studies. In addition, Drs. Hohn and Higgins
correlate catalytic activity in aldol condensation with acid/base site proximity
by preparing films with acid and base sites mixed at the molecular level and
films where acid and base sites are separated by macroscopic distances. Along
with regular publication of the results in the peer reviewed literature and
presentation at conferences, Dr. Hohn is incorporates aspects of the research
into activities for outreach programs at Kansas State University to enhance the
recruitment of students from under-represented groups into science and
engineering, while Dr. Higgins is introducing selected results into a graduate-
level course and a textbook on chemical microscopy.