* 1664137
* SI2-SSI: FAMII: High Performance and Scalable Fabric Analysis, Monitoring and Introspection Infrastructure for HPC and Big Data
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2020
* USD 800,000.00

As the computing, networking, heterogeneous hardware, and
storage&lt;br/&gt;technologies continue to evolve in High-End Computing (HEC)
platforms,&lt;br/&gt;it becomes increasingly essential and challenging to
understand the&lt;br/&gt;interactions between time-critical High-Performance
Computing (HPC)&lt;br/&gt;and Big Data applications, the software
infrastructures upon which&lt;br/&gt;they rely for achieving high-performing
portable solutions, the&lt;br/&gt;underlying communication fabric these high-
performance middlewares&lt;br/&gt;depend on and the schedulers that manage HPC
clusters. Such&lt;br/&gt;understanding will enable all involved parties
(application&lt;br/&gt;developers/users, system administrators, and middleware
developers) to&lt;br/&gt;maximize the efficiency and performance of the
individual components&lt;br/&gt;that comprise a modern HPC system and solve
different grand challenge&lt;br/&gt;problems. There is a clear need and
unfortunate lack of a high-performance and&lt;br/&gt;scalable tool that is
capable of analyzing and correlating the&lt;br/&gt;communication on the fabric
with the behavior of HPC/Big Data&lt;br/&gt;applications, underlying middleware
and the job scheduler on existing&lt;br/&gt;large HPC systems. The proposed
synergistic and collaborative effort,&lt;br/&gt;undertaken by a team of computer
and computational scientists from OSU&lt;br/&gt;and OSC, aims to create an
integrated software infrastructure &lt;br/&gt;for high-performance and scalable
Fabric Analysis, Monitoring and&lt;br/&gt;Introspection for HPC and Big Data.
This tool will achieve the&lt;br/&gt;following objectives: 1) be portable, easy
to use and easy to&lt;br/&gt;understand, 2) have high performance and scalable
rendering and&lt;br/&gt;storage techniques and, 3) be applicable to the
different&lt;br/&gt;communication fabrics and programming models that are likely
to be&lt;br/&gt;used on existing large HPC systems and emerging exascale
systems. The&lt;br/&gt;transformative impact of the proposed research and
development effort&lt;br/&gt;is to design a comprehensive analysis and
performance monitoring tool&lt;br/&gt;for applications of current and next
generation multi&lt;br/&gt;petascale/exascale systems to harness the maximum
performance and&lt;br/&gt;scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research and the associated infrastructure will have a&lt;br/&gt;significant
impact on enabling optimizations of HPC and Big Data&lt;br/&gt;applications that
have previously been difficult to provide. These&lt;br/&gt;potential outcomes
will be demonstrated by using the proposed&lt;br/&gt;framework to validate a
variety of HPC and Big Data benchmarks and&lt;br/&gt;applications under multiple
scenarios. The integrated middleware and&lt;br/&gt;tools will be made publicly
available to the community through public&lt;br/&gt;repositories and
publications in the top forums, enabling other MPI&lt;br/&gt;and Big Data stacks
to adopt the designs. Research results will also&lt;br/&gt;be disseminated to
the collaborating organizations of the&lt;br/&gt;investigators to impact their
HPC software products and&lt;br/&gt;applications. The proposed research
directions and their solutions&lt;br/&gt;will be used in the curriculum of the
PIs to train undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students, including under-
represented minorities and female&lt;br/&gt;students. The technical challenges
addressed by the proposal include: 1)&lt;br/&gt;Scalable visualization of large
and complex HEC networks so as to&lt;br/&gt;provide a near instant rendering to
end users, 2) A generalized data&lt;br/&gt;gathering scheme which is easily
portable to multiple communication&lt;br/&gt;fabrics, novel compute
architectures and high-performance middleware,&lt;br/&gt;3) Enhanced data
storage performance through optimized database&lt;br/&gt;schemas and the use of
memory-backed key value stores/databases, 4)&lt;br/&gt;Support in MPI, PGAS, and
Big Data libraries to enable the proposed&lt;br/&gt;monitoring, analysis, and
introspection framework, and 5) Enabling&lt;br/&gt;deeper introspection of
particular regions of application. The&lt;br/&gt;research will also be driven by
a set of HPC and Big Data&lt;br/&gt;applications. The transformative impact of
the proposed research and&lt;br/&gt;development effort is to design a
comprehensive analysis and&lt;br/&gt;performance monitoring tool for
applications of current and next&lt;br/&gt;generation multi petascale/exascale
systems to harness the maximum&lt;br/&gt;performance and scalability.