* 1664434
* Design and Self-Assembly of Giant Metallo-Supramolecules Based on Density of Coordination Sites (DOCS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/16/2016,05/31/2019
* Xiaopeng Li, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 05/31/2019
* USD 295,415.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Xiaopeng Li of the University of South
Florida and his coworkers will design and synthesize ligands with well-defined
geometry and multiple coordination sites and characterize the 2D and 3D
supramolecular structures resuling therefrom. A wide variety of biological
molecules (such as DNAs and proteins) have very complex structures and
3-dimensional (3D) architectures that are important for their biological
functions. Inspired by nature, Prof. Li conducts research to develop self-
assembly strategies to creating complex chemical structures with unique
properties. Of particular interest is the preparation of metallo-gels with self-
healing properties that may be useful in batteries. This project is expected to
provide an excellent platform for interdisciplinary research training of
postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and undergraduate students,
especially underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted
metallosupramolecular structures are envisioned to result from the coordination
of metal ions (e.g., Zn(II), Fe(II) and Pd(II)) by the designed multitopic
ligands. The research team will prepare metallo-gels and explore their potential
applications as self-healing materials and binder materials of batteries. The
level of complexity is often attained by self-assembly of structurally simple
subunits (or building blocks) which have specific functionalities and geometries
to direct their assembly into sophisticated structures of precisely controlled
size, shape and properties.The Li research group aims to gain insights into the
fundamental chemistry principles that control supramolecular self-assemblies and
to prepare novel materials with unique properties.