* 1664842
* Theories of Metals with Correlated Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Subir Sachdev, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
investigate unusual metallic states that arise in quantum materials and the
interesting states of matter composed of electrons that emerge from these
'strange metals.' In familiar metals like copper or silver, electrical
conduction occurs via the motion of a liquid of electrons through the crystal of
atoms, with the quantum motion of each electron largely independent of the other
electrons. However, in many modern quantum materials, and especially in the
cuprate compounds which display high temperature superconductivity, the motion
of an electron is correlated with that of other electrons. This correlation is
of a subtle non-local quantum variety, often referred to as quantum
entanglement, in which observation of one electron can determine the state of
other well-separated electrons. In this project, the PI will focus on studying
and classifying states of electrons with complex varieties of long-range quantum
entanglement. Understanding such metallic states is required to predict the
critical temperature for high temperature superconductivity, as
superconductivity emerges from such a `strange' metal upon lowering the
temperature. Superconductors exhibit the ability to conduct electricity without
resistance when the temperature is lowered through the superconducting
transition temperature. With transition temperatures near the temperature where
liquid oxygen boils, high temperature superconductors still exhibit
superconductivity at much higher temperatures than traditional superconductors
but still very much below room temperature. More fundamentally, theoretical
research in combination with experimental observations, is expected to lead to a
deeper understanding of the structure of quantum matter. The research supported
by this award will be coupled with public lectures, articles in popular science
journals, lectures at schools for advanced students. The research will be
conducted by a group of students and postdoctoral fellows drawn from
institutions around the world.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
investigate the interplay of topological order, quantum criticality, and broken
symmetry in interesting metallic materials. Lattice models will be developed
that are amenable to analytical study and quantum Monte Carlo simulations. The
PI aims to describe the transition between metallic states with and without
quantum entanglement, and the role of topological order. The theory of the
interplay of topological order, quantum criticality, and broken symmetry is
fairly well-developed in insulators; the PI proposes a program to extend such
theories to metals. Reliable analytic and numerical tools will lead to a
description of the phase diagrams of such metals, and of quantum phase
transitions involving changes in Fermi surface size linked to the development of
topological order. The effect of disorder on correlated metallic states will be
examined, building upon the solvable Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model of a strange metal
that had been originally proposed by the PI. Disorder plays a crucial role in
the electrical and thermal conductivities of metals, and these conductivities
will be computed in correlated states. New analytic tools will be developed to
analyze the dynamics of metals without quasiparticle excitations. Collaborations
with a number of experimental groups will allow comparison of theories to
observations in the cuprate and pnictide superconductors and closely related
materials, graphene, and other modern materials.