* 1664278
* Diastereodivergent Catalysis with Modularly Designed Organocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* John Zhao, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 533,678.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor John Zhao. Professor Zhao is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). He is developing a
new method for the selective synthesis of multiple stereoisomers of organic
molecules. Stereoisomers, which differ only subtly in their structures, may have
totally different biological and/or pharmacological properties. The goal of this
research project is to exploit the unique properties of modularly designed
organocatalysts (MDOs) to achieve the easy synthesis of multiple diastereomers
of complex organic molecules from the same starting materials, which is
presently a very challenging task in chemistry. The research greatly facilitates
the exploration of new chemical space and drug discovery. This project offers
research opportunities for students, including students from underrepresented
minorities, who are preparing for careers in the chemical sciences. UTSA is one
of the most diverse institutions of higher education in the United States.
Professor Zhao's group provides a high level of education and training for
students through a variety of outreach programs that are already in place at
UTSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic asymmetric syntheses of multiple
diastereomers of various important polysubstituted carbocyclic and heterocyclic
compounds are under investigation. The researchers use the same starting
materials and different modularly designed organocatalysts to selectively
generate different stereoisomers of the targets. Specifically, Professor Zhao is
pursuing the development of novel MDO catalysts that are self-assembled from
readily available precatalysts and the utilization of the MDOs in the catalytic
tandem reactions for the diastereodivergent synthesis of polysubstituted
carbocyclic and heterocyclic compounds. The method is being investigated for the
diastereodivergent syntheses of bioactive natural products of medicinal
relevance. The research provides new catalysts that not only achieve the
divergent synthesis of different stereoisomers of important molecules, but also
improves the stereoselectivity in the synthesis. Stereoselective synthesis is a
current challenge in asymmetric catalysis. The research results are being
incorporated into an organic laboratory aimed at undergraduates to help
stimulate their interest and attract these students to the chemical sciences.