* 1664455
* Linguistic and Ethnographic Investigations of Place Names and Narratives in Two Alaska Dene Languages: Toklat (Lower Tanana) and Middle Tanana
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2021
* James Kari, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2021
* USD 191,702.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. These languages are present in everyday life for most
Americans in the names for places, plants, animals and more. This project will
focus on place names for two Central Alaska Native languages and their dialects.
Both languages are what is known as 'sleeping' languages, when there are no
remaining fluent first language speakers. Focusing on extensive collections of
audio recordings and language and ethnographic notes, this project will
prioritize these materials for transcription and editing. Importantly, the
project will also include a focus on place names, not just the names themselves,
but also cultural vocabulary and narratives where places are discussed and
integrating Geographic Information System (GIS) data in a multilingual format.
The interrelated methods employed for dictionary files, texts, cultural
vocabulary, and geographic annotation will create a durable archival record.
Broader impacts include the accessibility of place names (of importance for
communities, geographers, and governmental agencies, among others), outreach to
public schools, and materials available to Alaska Native communities for
language and cultural revitalization. The products and digital files for the
project will be available through the Alaska Native Language Center and the
Alaska Native Language Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
serve as the capstone of a productive career for the PI, who has spent nearly
five decades documenting the Dene languages, especially those of Alaska,
including the focus of this work, the Toklat dialect of the Lower Tanana
language (the lower Kantishna River &amp; the Toklat River) and the Middle
Tanana language (Tanana River between Moose Creek and Goodpaster River). The
Dene (formerly Athabaskan) language family is of great significance to
linguistics, with members including Navajo, Apache, and numerous Alaska
languages. Both Toklat and Middle Tanana have extensive collections of
narratives and ethnographic notes recorded between 1964 and 2000, including from
well-known storytellers Bessie Barnabus and Eva Moffit, from Salcha and Hester
Evan and Celia Peterson, from Toklat &amp; Nenana. Incorporating women's
language will further enrich the documentation and historical record. The
project will also give special attention to geographic names and place
annotations for the middle and lower Tanana Valley Dene language groups. Two
dictionary files for Middle Tanana and Lower Tanana that were begun in the 1990s
will be expanded to include shared Dene cultural vocabulary items, the common
verb themes, and all grammatical morphemes. Place name records for the two
languages will be combined in stages with place name inventories for adjacent
Dene languages (Ahtna, Tanacross and Koyukon). These expanded materials will
clarify the classification of the Dene languages of the lower Tanana Valley and
the study of Alaska prehistory. The beta version of this multilingual Dene
geodatabase with a digital webmap will foster editorial consistency and mapping
accuracy. Eventually (and beyond the scope of this project), this extensible
multilingual Alaska Dene place names geodatabase can facilitate the integration
of Dene geographic information with scientific databases (in archaeology,
ecology, or climatology), or language learning, or for public education, applied
toponymy (official naming) and land management by both tribal and government
entities.