* 1664431
* Investigations in the Semantics of Kiowa, a Native American language of Oklahoma
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Andrew McKenzie, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 149,941.00

The most important use of language is communication between people, where the
transmission of information is essential. This transmission relies on speakers
and listeners knowing what the words and parts of words mean, and how those
parts combine to make meaningful sentences that fit in a conversation. That
knowledge is called the semantics of a language. Researchers explore semantics
to probe the nature of knowledge, culture, and cognition within individual
cultures and throughout the human species as a whole. Understanding the subtle
meaning of linguistic elements is also important for language learning. This
study will document the semantics of the Kiowa language, a severely endangered
language spoken by members of the Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma. Many Native American
tribes, including the Kiowa have established programs to preserve and revitalize
tribal languages through teaching and language-nest programs. The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. Broader impacts of this project include support for Kiowa
revitalization, as some documentation will have dual use as teaching materials.
Also, this project will bring together teachers of Kiowa and will include Native
graduate researchers, broadening participation in linguistic science both by
community members and academics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by a
linguist who is also a tribal member, this project will conduct an in-depth
investigation into Kiowa semantics. Semantics forms a crucial component of
language, but linguists have not thoroughly documented any language's semantics
with depth and precision, because the theoretical framework to do so was only
recently developed. This project will apply this framework of language
documentation, in order to uncover the semantics of phenomena crucial to the
Kiowa language. The investigators will elicit language judgments from native
speakers of the language, which can tease apart subtle aspects of meaning that
are often impossible for speakers to define with words. The project will also
record and examine new texts that document naturalistic language use, especially
in cultural domains under-represented by currently available Kiowa texts. Kiowa
grammar includes multiple areas of interest to formal semantics, such as
evidentiality, modality, incorporation, quantification, and degree, all of which
are also important areas for learners to acquire. This project will result in a
reference grammar and teaching materials that will greatly aid these programs by
covering the areas in semantics that remain poorly understood by teachers and
researchers. This reference grammar will also serve as a manual for researchers
of other Native American languages, especially those who are not trained in this
research framework. This study will offer new insight for researchers on dozens
of phenomena that occur in many languages besides Kiowa. In doing so, it will
re-emphasize the longstanding contribution of Native American languages to
linguistics, a scientific understanding of what is possible in human language,
and thus a deeper understanding of what is possible in the human mind.