* 1664275
* Collaborative Research: RIPS Type 1: Human Geography Motifs to Evaluate Infrastructure Resilience
* ENG,EFMA
* 06/30/2016,08/31/2017
* Paul Torrens, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 113,762.00

This project will examine how shifting motifs in the everyday rhythms and tempo
of people form, interdependently, with mobile transport and communications
infrastructure. The resilience between dynamics of human and engineered systems
is often challenged by small wrinkles in the motifs of human geography that may
shift the timing and geography of populations and infrastructure off-normal. For
example, delayed starts to the workday because of winter weather can bump peak
commuting off-rhythm, delay the logistics of citywide delivery systems, or
produce bursts in communications activity. While these may form as small local
shifts from normal in particular places and times, they can transfer, diffuse,
and adapt with unforeseen consequences and serious impacts on broader phenomena
as diverse as commuting, the labor market, logistics, and urban management.
Understanding how these dynamics arise, form, and spread through increasingly
connected systems, as well as measuring and modeling them is critical if we are
to plan for them, mitigate them, and manage them. Building this understanding
requires an interdisciplinary approach that bridges engineering, informatics and
computing, and the socio-behavioral sciences: a multipronged challenge that is
indicative of the problems that a next-generation of students and engineers will
face in designing, constructing, maintaining, and managing urban systems that
are increasingly intertwined with, dependent upon, and adapting to the shifting
and ever-evolving patterns of our activities. Similarly, getting the right data,
metrics, and models to diverse groups of urban managers, engineers, and the
public-at-large in ways that can usefully inform their understanding of
interdependency will be critical in fashioning systems that can better weather
such challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A starting point in investigating these
connections is to explore conventional sources of data on human geography, but
to also develop extensible systems that can use newly-forming data from
location-aware technologies that produce rapid snapshots of whole populations in
the messy context and complexity of everyday urban life. Novel analyses on these
data can produce dynamically-evolving atlases and censuses of interdependency,
from which motifs of behavior can be extracted and resolved, as land-use,
activity, mobility, and sociality. These motifs can inform computer models
designed to explore what-if dynamics between people, place, process, and
infrastructure, that better frame and describe interdependency in activity,
movement, access, and information. To assist in translating this research into
the public domain, the project will formalize several outputs: a set of reusable
data and model outputs accessible via a community Web portal, a pilot
demonstration for winter weather scenarios in Washington DC that will fully
explore scenarios of interdependency between human geography and mobile
transport and communications infrastructure, and a set of code libraries for use
in allied model systems. Through application to substantive issues of relevance
in geography, informatics, and engineering, these outputs will enable other
communities to apply and adapt these methods to their cities, data, and
infrastructure.