* 1664961
* Organometallic Chemistry of High Valent Nickel
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Melanie Sanford, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,998.00

Organometallic Chemistry of High Valent Nickel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition
metal catalysts are used to manufacture many important products, including life-
saving pharmaceuticals, crop-protecting agrochemicals, and electronic materials.
The cost and sustainability of these products are directly impacted by the
development of new catalysts that are less expensive, that generate less waste,
and that operate under milder conditions. A particularly important goal for the
field is to replace catalysts that are based on rare and expensive precious
metals (e.g. palladium) and towards those derived from inexpensive and more
readily available metals (e.g., nickel). Often, however, the more desirable
inexpensive metals have very different (and often problematic) properties, that
make them difficult to use for these important applications. In this project Dr.
Sanford and her research group are conducting detailed studies of nickel
catalysts. The overall goal of this work is to determine how to control the
properties of nickel catalysts to enable them to perform as well or better than
their palladium analogues. Dr. Sanford is also actively involved in outreach
activities that seek to increase the participation of women in science and
engineering. For example, she is working with programs that engage middle-school
aged girls in scientific activities and that train diverse graduate students for
careers in science/technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Sanford of the
University of Michigan is studying the fundamental organometallic chemistry of
high valent nickel intermediates [i.e., nickel(III) and nickel(IV) complexes].
Despite their potential relevance to a wide variety of important Ni-catalyzed
cross-coupling and C-H functionalization reactions, the synthesis and reactivity
of organometallic nickel(III) and nickel(IV) compounds has not been
systematically explored. The current work is focused on establishing the
feasibility and mechanisms of a variety of transformations at nickel(III) and
nickel(IV) centers using both model systems and catalytic intermediates. The
reactivity and selectivity profiles that are being established herein are
expected to have a transformative impact on the design and optimization of new
high valent Ni-catalyzed transformations. Dr. Sanford is also actively engaged
in outreach programs aimed at broadening participation of women in science at
the K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and faculty levels. Furthermore, her project
is training a diverse group of scientists in the interdisciplinary areas of
inorganic and organic synthesis, inorganic reaction mechanisms,
electrochemistry, and catalysis. A well-trained and diverse scientific workforce
is essential for continued advances in innovation and technology in the 21st
century.