* 1664555
* Understanding Combustion and Surface Kinetics Using the Sum Over Histories Representation
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Rex Skodje, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Rex Skodje, of the University of Colorado, Boulder is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop a novel
approach to chemical kinetics. Many important systems in nature and technology
are described by large networks of interconnected chemical reactions. For
example, hydrocarbon combustion in engines can involve thousands of individual
chemical reactions as the fuel molecules break up and oxidize in route to their
final destination as carbon dioxide and water. Similarly, large chemical
networks arise in the study of the chemistry of the atmosphere, the biochemistry
of living systems, the performance of catalytic reactors, and many other places.
The present project studies these complex systems using a new methodology termed
the Sum Over Histories Representation (or SOHR). In the SOHR method, the
chemistry of complex systems is quantitatively described using the reaction
pathways followed by individual molecules rather than by the conventional rate
equation approach that has been employed for over a century. There are several
objectives of this work. First, the mathematical methodology is refined and made
efficient to facilitate the implementation to extremely large chemical systems.
Second, the SOHR method is used to analyze the chemistry of combustion for
important fuels such as propane and heptane. Third, the SOHR method is used to
model catalytic reactions of important organic molecules on the surfaces
industrially relevant materials such as nickel and platinum. The successful
outcome of the proposed research program is important both from a fundamental
scientific standpoint as well as in practical application. The SOHR method is
designed to allow complicated chemical systems to be reduced to their simplest
most transparent forms by identifying the dominant chemical pathways in the
mechanism. This will guide the design and optimization of practical reactors and
provide new insight into naturally occurring networks. The innovative approach
is being implemented in user-friendly software that is made available to the
larger research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SOHR method replaces
conventional kinetic modeling that involves use of a "local" differential rate
equations theory formed from the rates of formation and destruction of each
species in a mechanism. The SOHR method instead uses "global" chemical pathways.
A chemical pathway follows a chemical moiety, such as a "tagged atom", as it
hops from species to species due to reaction during the course of the
simulation. It is found that if a sufficient number of these chemical pathways
are enumerated, the full chemistry of the model can be quantitatively described.
The SOHR method derives in name from the path integral representation of quantum
mechanics proposed by Feynman. Unlike the continuous dynamical pathways of
quantum mechanics, the chemical pathways exist in a discrete species space.
However, like the quantum analog, the SOHR method can yield a convergent
quantitative solution by summing enough paths. The proposed research has two
main objectives. First, the methodology of the SOHR method is further developed
into a generally applicable simulation tool. This involve the introduction of an
iterative solution method to obtain the pathway probabilities. Also, graph
searching algorithms is being developed to locate the most important chemical
routes to a product. The second objective is to interpret chemical mechanism
found in combustion chemistry and surface catalysis using SOHR. The chemical
pathways found by the SOHR algorithm have direct physical meaning as the global
mechanism for product formation. Therefore, issues such as product selectivity,
trace species formation, and emergence of catalytic cycles can be explored in
realistic models. The methodology will be applied to large mechanisms such as
propane combustion and methanol-steam reforming reactions on Cu-nanoparticle
catalysts.