* 1664218
* Theoretical Investigations of Dynamic Aspects of Protein-DNA Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 458,475.00

Anatoly Kolomeisky of William Marsh Rice University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry Division to theoretically investigate interactions between two major
classes of biological molecules: DNA and proteins. This project is co-funded by
the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division. DNA encodes the genetic plans for all living organisms. Proteins read
this information and implement it in the cell. Proper timing is a key aspect of
protein-DNA interactions due to the dynamic nature of living cells. If the
proper interactions do not occur at the right time, the entire biological system
can fail catastrophically. Understanding protein-DNA interactions can lead to
new insights for drug discovery and contribute to technological breakthroughs
such as bio-inspired or biomimetic materials. Professor Kolomeisky is combining
theoretical modeling, simulation, and bioinformatics to understand the molecular
foundations of the temporal dependence and efficiency of protein-DNA
interactions. Specific questions include: how proteins identify the correct DNA
binding sites in performing their functions; the effects of DNA loop formation
on multi-site proteins that can bind at different DNA sites; mechanisms of DNA
editing using the newly-discovered CRISPR associated protein technology; and
understanding the tradeoff between strong binding and fast recognition in
determining how proteins bind to DNA. Close collaborations with experimental and
theoretical groups will enable testing of the new models, and promote a deeper
understanding of these complex natural processes. Professor Kolomeisky is
providing opportunities for high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to participate in this research and gain valuable
training and experience for their future careers. Outreach activities include a
high-school scientific projects competition, co-organization of an undergraduate
chemistry research symposium, public lectures delivered at venues such as the
Rice Science Café, and continued collaboration with the Rice robotics systems
lab to create online games based on the results of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a theoretical
program to analyze the temporal dependence of protein-DNA interactions. These
fundamental interactions are analyzed using a variety of theoretical tools
including discrete-state stochastic models, first-passage analysis,
bioinformatics methods and extensive Monte Carlo computer simulations. The
advantage of this multiscale approach is that it takes into account in a
consistent manner the major physical and chemical properties of DNA and proteins
interacting in the complex cellular environment. In collaboration with
experimental research groups, theoretical predictions are tested using various
techniques, including single-molecule spectroscopy, chemical kinetics, and
bioinformatic analysis. An outreach program developed by Professor Kolomeisky
provides the opportunity for local high-school students and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minority groups to participate in scientific
research in an academic setting. The project also highlights the benefits of
science for society by directly presenting scientific findings to the local
community in the informal setting of café discussions, as well as communicating
with science writers in local newspapers and participating in scientific
Internet blog discussions. The broader impacts of this project include a
multidisciplinary training program for young researchers of different levels
that will prepare them better for future technological and industrial
challenges.