* 1664807
* Removable Sets and Questions in Geometric Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Malik Younsi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 09/30/2017
* USD 126,854.00

Conformal maps are planar changes of coordinates that locally preserve angles.
The study of the properties of such maps led to the development of the subject
known as geometric function theory. A cornerstone of this discipline is the
remarkable fact that every planar region without holes can be conformally
transformed into the round disk in an essentially unique fashion. Such
coordinate changes have proven over the years to be of great value in a wide
variety of applications in physics and engineering. In many of these
applications, one has to deal with coordinate changes that are conformal in a
given planar region except possibly some "exceptional set" of points inside the
region. The question whether the exceptional set is negligible and small enough
to be ignored leads to the notion of conformal removability, central to this
research project and closely related to fundamental questions in complex
dynamics and in random surfaces. The project will also consider several other
questions in geometric function theory, such as conformal welding (a
correspondence between curves in the plane and functions on the circle, recently
observed to have important applications in the field of numerical vision),
shapes of Julia sets (fractal sets arising from the iteration of polynomials),
and the subadditivity of analytic capacity. Each of these investigations has a
numerical aspect, and successful completion of the research project will enhance
computational structure and build interdisciplinary connections with applied
sciences such as finance and pattern recognition.

The first part of the research project deals with the study of the geometric
properties of conformally removable sets. More precisely, the investigator will
further study various settings where removability appears naturally, including
the rigidity of circle domains. This first component of the research project
also includes problems related to conformal welding and fingerprints of
lemniscates. The second part is devoted to the study of the possible shapes of
Julia sets. More specifically, the investigator plans to explore various
questions revolving around the constructive approximation of planar sets by
polynomial Julia sets in the Hausdorff distance, such as sharp rates of
approximation, dynamical properties of the approximating polynomials, and an
efficient numerical implementation of the approximation scheme. Finally, the
last part of the research project concerns the subadditivity problem for
analytic capacity. The investigator will further explore a conjecture that, if
true, would imply analytic capacity is indeed subadditive. This involves an
improvement of a numerical method for the computation of the analytic capacity
of finite unions of disks.