* 1664462
* Documentation and Analysis of Discourse in Cheyenne, a Native American language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Richard Littlebear, Chief Dull Knife Memorial College
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 429,068.00

The indigenous languages of America are a vital national resource. The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. However, many of these languages are under-documented and existing
documentation can be scattered and difficult to access, hampering language
learning efforts and research. This project will address that challenge and will
create a digital corpus of analyzed transcriptions and translations of Cheyenne,
an endangered Algonquian language for which no publicly available online corpus
or database currently exists. The corpus will result in an online, searchable
database, hosted at a tribal college. This will make the database available for
a wide audience to make new queries, to find resources for language and cultural
revitalization by the community, as well as to test the reproducibility and
robustness of prior findings on the language. In addition to supporting an
indigenous language with the development of a crucial language and cultural
resource, this project will increase engagement in the language sciences. The
project brings together linguists, students and staff from a tribal college,
fluent speakers of Cheyenne, and other members of the Cheyenne community,
broadening capacity in the social sciences by training in language documentation
and technology as well as linguistic analysis. The project is co-funded by the
NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program
(TCUP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make a large corpus of
Cheyenne language texts widely accessible and bring home Cheyenne stories that
are not currently available to the Cheyenne people. Existing documentation of
Cheyenne includes texts dating back at least to the 1940s, but there is
currently no single repository for this documentation. This project proposes to
collect together existing Cheyenne texts from published materials and archives
into an online, searchable, audio-enhanced database, hosted at Chief Dull Knife
College (CDKC), the tribal college of the Northern Cheyenne Nation. The project
will also increase the coverage of existing documentation by investigating
subtle semantic and pragmatic features of Cheyenne discourse, including
sentential connectives, discourse particles, and obviation, which have never
been studied in detail before. These important features of Cheyenne discourse
are rapidly being lost and studying them from a semantic and pragmatic
perspective has the potential to reveal previously undocumented phenomena. This
investigation will also advance linguistic science, contributing to our cross-
linguistic understanding of these phenomena and bringing data from an
understudied language to bear on theories primarily developed for English. All
texts will be standardized and linguistically analyzed linked with any existing
audio files. Texts will be displayed in a variety of formats for different
purposes, including research, language learning, and language material
development. Such a database will be useful to Cheyenne language teachers and
learners as well as linguists, and it will put in place a structure for the
collection and dissemination of future texts and language materials. This
project is a collaboration between Chief Dull Knife College and Cornell
University.