* 1664335
* A reference grammar and tonal documentation of Seenku, an endangered Mande language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Laura McPherson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 231,134.00

Over half of the world's estimated 7,000 languages are tonal, and most are
spoken by small populations, threatened by globalization and changing
socioeconomic landscapes. This project will advance scientific understanding of
tone and tonal languages more generally. This project will answer some of the
many questions remaining about tone by focusing on a language displaying
exceptional tonal complexity. The investigation of a language with four tones, a
relatively uncommon cross-linguistic pattern, will better inform linguists about
the upper bounds on the number of distinct tones and the types of grammatical
information represented solely through tone. The project will provide new
insights into many questions remaining about tone and phonological reduction,
and on the behavior of a complex tonal system in morphology and syntax. The
results will be disseminated via a reference grammar that includes and fully
documents tone in its grammatical context, as well as by archived, annotated
language data. Broader impacts include fostering international scientific
cooperation and training undergraduate students in methods of language
documentation and analysis. This contributes to the national interest by
enabling soft diplomacy through scientific and technological training of
international partners and by producing language scientists for the twenty-first
century with expertise in cutting-edge techniques. This award is co-funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on documenting the grammatical structure of Seenku, an
endangered Mande language of Burkina Faso. Even in the African context, Seenku
is exceptional for its tonal complexity, both in the number of contrasting pitch
levels and the range of uses of tone in the grammar. Special attention is paid
to documenting and analyzing the tone system using a variety of innovative
methods. First, the research team will develop a novel computational tool ATLAS
(Automated Tone Level Annotation System) to automate the tonal annotation of
documentary materials. Tone can be notoriously difficult and time-consuming to
transcribe, and the development of this tool will help other researchers and
linguistic communities working on tonal languages. Second, tone will be studied
through a culturally unique tradition in which Seenku words are encoded on the
xylophone through their tone and rhythm. Mechanisms like this produce tones
without the segmental and other features, which interact with surface tone
realizations. This mechanism provides a rare window into speakers' subconscious
knowledge of their language, addressing questions of cognitive representations
of tone. The main products of this project include a comprehensive reference
grammar, a trilingual Seenku-English-French dictionary, and an archive of audio
and video recordings of various speech genres, with time-aligned transcriptions
and translations. These products are of use to linguists, anthropologists,
ethnomusicologists, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).