* 1664645
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Complex Fluids: Adaptivity, Fluid-Structure Interaction, and Applications in Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Many biological systems involve flexible structures immersed in viscoelastic
fluids (e.g., sperm in the reproductive tract, bacteria in the gut and lung,
ciliary transport of mucus in the lung). In some cases, such as cilia-driven
transport in the lung, these structures operate in a multi-fluid environment.
Despite decades of work explicit challenges remain with developing suitable
computational tools for the modeling of the complex fluid-structure
interactions. The goal of this project is to develop and analyze accurate
computational methods for these simulations, and to establish high-performance
open-source implementations of these tools to be used by other researchers. The
new computational tools together with experimental measurements will be used to
generate new insight into the mechanical behavior of mucus. Mucus provides a
protective barrier for every human organ, and many diseases and disorders are
associated with mucus pathology (e.g., in the lung (COPD, cystic fibrosis,
asthma), stomach (ulcers), reproductive tract (infertility)). Moreover, tools
developed as part of these projects have applications beyond mucus: to the food
industry, for personal care products, as well as pharmaceutical applications,
including drugs and drug delivery systems. The project will also provide broad
interdisciplinary training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in
the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives
of this project are 1) to develop and analyze efficient higher-order accurate
numerical methods for fluid-structure interaction and fluid-fluid interaction
problems involving complex fluids, 2) to validate these methods by comparison to
experimental data of project collaborators, and 3) to develop mathematical
models of industrial and biological systems, including microbead rheology,
ciliar synchronization and transport, and phase separation of suspensions.
Previous research on numerical methods for viscoelastic fluids has been driven
by engineering applications, while biological applications pose new challenges:
large deformations of active soft structures and complex rheology. Despite past
efforts to understand the dynamics of active structures in complex fluids, a
significant bottleneck persists: the lack of accurate, efficient, adaptive
numerical methods and software for viscoelasstic fluid-structure interaction and
fluid-fluid interfaces. The research team aims to build, validate, and apply
this technology, guided by applications and experimental data from biology and
engineering.