* 1664379
* Deciphering Delocalized Bonding in Excited States, Solvated Species and Novel 0-, 1-, 2-, and 3-Dimensional Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Alexander Boldyrev, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 353,109.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Boldyrev explores new frontiers
for multicenter bonding. In high school and college chemistry classes, chemical
bonds are typically presented as pairs of electrons shared between two atoms (a
single pair produces a single bond, two pairs create a double bond, etc.).
However, there are many cases where chemical bonds are formed through electrons
being shared by multiple atoms (hence the name "multicenter"). Professor
Boldyrev and his group have developed a theoretical model that takes into
account both two- and multi-center chemical bonding. He and his group are now
applying this model to explain the geometry and behavior of complex systems such
as cluster molecules containing dozens of atoms, molecules dissolved in liquids,
and molecules which have been excited by light. Chemical bonding is at the heart
of chemical understanding, and is the basis for explaining why molecules and
solids adopt a certain geometric structure, and why molecules or solids react
with other molecules in a particular manner. Professor Boldyrev's computational
approach is called Adaptive Natural Density Partitioning, or "AdNDP." AdNDP is
currently used by 50 research groups around the world, and the Boldyrev group is
continuing to make this program and its updates available to other scientists.
The graduate students involved in this project are not only helping to advance
the field of chemistry, but are also obtaining important skills in computer
programming and software development, all of which are valuable assets in the
technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring
new chemistry frontiers for the application of the AdNDP method and its solid-
state adaptation (SSAdNDP). The topics being studied include chemical bonding in
excited states of molecules and clusters, the interaction of solvated electrons
and multiply charged anions with solvent molecules. The project seeks to
understand the chemical bonding in novel three-dimensional (3D) chemical systems
that have been synthesized under extremely high pressure. Such high-pressure
compounds violate many conventional stoichiometries and chemical bonding. In
such systems, chemical bonding cannot be rationalized on the basis of a Lewis
model alone. This project continues to benefit from collaborations with
experimentalists (Professors Kit Bowen at Johns Hopkins, Lai-Sheng Wang at Brown
University, Michael Heaven at Emory University, and Zhong-Ming Sun at the
Chinese Academy of Sciences) who are providing experimental data on newly made
clusters (0D species), as well as new 1D-, 2D- and 3D-materials. The broader
impacts of this work include potential societal benefits of the AdNDP and
SSAdNDP methods for the rational design of new materials, and for application in
chemical education. These methods and the software developed under the support
of Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) Program of the NSF
Chemistry Division are being developed for use in classes such as general
chemistry, computational chemistry, quantum chemistry, advanced inorganic
chemistry, nanotechnology, and materials chemistry.