* 1664683
* Microlocal Analysis of Linear and Nonlinear Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Andras Vasy, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 204,000.00

This project develops and applies tools from the field of mathematics known as
microlocal analysis. Roughly speaking, microlocal analysis devises methods to
keep track of the position and frequency (or momentum) of waves (or, more
generally, functions) simultaneously. The project's applications are to wave
propagation and other related phenomena, as well as to inverse problems for
determining a function from integrals along curves (the X-ray transform) and
related problems for determining the structure of a material from boundary
measurements. Although the project itself concerns their mathematical theory,
the problems under investigation are closely connected to the physical world.
Wave propagation is ubiquitous in nature, with electromagnetic waves, such as
light, being one of the most prevalent examples. The theory of general
relativity is another important physical example via (the recently detected)
gravitational waves. Scattering theory for quantum particles (such as protons
and electrons) is another subject governed by microlocal analysis, aspects of
which enter into the description of both quantum waves at large distances and
semiclassical phenomena (those in which Planck's constant can be regarded as
small, often the case in chemistry). The inverse problems under study are also
of broad significance. One application of the theory under development here is
the determination of an unknown variable sound speed in an object via the
measurement of travel times of waves, which for instance is relevant to imaging
to interior of Earth using the travel times of earthquake
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parts of this project describe the long-time or far-
field behavior of waves on curved space-times. Physically these arise in
scattering theory and general relativity, including electromagnetic waves on a
curved background. The microlocal approach to analysis on these spaces has made
breakthroughs possible in work on linear and nonlinear problems on
asymptotically (real) hyperbolic spaces as well as on Kerr-de Sitter space. The
projects here aim to improve the understanding of Lorentzian scattering spaces,
which include asymptotically Minkowski spaces (asymptotically flat spaces, which
our universe approximates, at least locally, even if there is a small positive
cosmological constant). Other projects concern the behavior of waves at edges --
specifically, the diffraction of the Rayleigh (surface) waves of elasticity. Yet
another main area is inverse problems, building on recently-developed tools for
spatially localized inversion of the geodesic X-ray transform, including the
solution of fixed conformal class boundary rigidity: under suitable assumptions,
one can determine a variable sound speed inside an object from the travel times
of waves between points on the surface. The parts of the project in this area
aim to extend the foregoing result to tensors, which describe anisotropic sound
speeds in an appropriate sense; namely, the project will investigate boundary
rigidity, for example, recovering a Riemannian metric from its boundary distance
function.