* 1664332
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Chemistry and Dynamic Implications of Heterogeneous Fe and Si in the Deep Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Allen McNamara, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Curtis Williams
* 04/30/2022
* USD 375,194.00

The composition of Earth's rocky mantle is fundamentally linked to dynamic
processes responsible for the composition and motion of tectonic plates on
Earth's surface. Although the mantle is stirred by convection, it is not well-
mixed: images of the mantle obtained from seismology reveal enigmatic regions of
unknown composition and age. Progress towards identifying these regions and
their role in the history of the Earth has been based on determining the range
of compositions and physical properties consistent with remote geophysical
observations. Physical properties of mantle minerals can be measured in
experiments that mimic the high pressures and temperatures of the deep Earth.
Effects of contrast in temperature, density, and viscosity on shapes and
dynamics of mantle structures can be tested by simulations of convecting rock.
The team combines complementary expertise in experimental mineralogy and
computational geodynamics and will train students in both fields, resulting in
not only new constraints on the compositions and origins of mantle
heterogeneities, but also well-rounded, multidisciplinary young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attempts at explaining large low shear velocity
provinces (LLSVPs) and ultralow velocity zones (ULVZs) identified by seismology
at the base of the mantle involve various combinations of contrasting
temperature and composition relative to the surrounding mantle. Possible
mechanisms for generating compositional differences have dramatically different
implications for the age of these regions, including subduction of modern basalt
and segregation of iron-rich mantle during the formation of the planet. Towards
understanding these provinces, the project will systematically investigate the
effects of variable amounts of iron and silicon on observable properties of the
lower mantle phase assemblage such as density and viscosity. A series of well-
characterized samples with variable amounts of ferrous iron, ferric iron, and
silicon will be compressed to lower mantle conditions to synthesize assemblages
of bridgmanite, ferropericlase, and at the highest pressures, post-perovskite.
Effects of iron and silicon content on mantle density will be obtained from
equations of state. Effects of variable silicate fraction on strength and
viscosity of the mantle will be evaluated from observed shear strain. Resulting
constraints from experiments on density and viscosity will be incorporated in
geodynamic simulations of effects of compositional differences between
background mantle and heterogeneous provinces on resulting morphology of
thermochemical piles. The results will be shared widely at conferences and on
the web and will be of interest to a broad community of solid Earth geochemists
and geophysicists.