* 1664337
* Collaborative Research:   Media Influences on Entrepreneurship and Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* David Robinson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 166,217.00

Business leaders and policy makers stress the importance of stimulating
entrepreneurial activity for the continued vitality of the US economy, but many
policies to promote entrepreneurship have had mixed effectiveness. One reason is
the lack of exposure to the processes of innovation and starting a new firm.
This research uses the idea that television is often credited for breaking new
cultural ground, ushering in acceptance of minority groups, and shifting
opinions on important social issues of the day, to assess if televised business
plan competitions can shift opinions about the willingness and desirability of
starting a business. The results have the potential to suggest a low cost means
of introducing large numbers of individuals to the central challenges facing
startups, and strategies to overcome them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
combine data from a wide range of sources, such as Nielsen ratings, in-take data
from the Small Business Administration, patent application data from the US
Patent and Trade Office, and data on business creation, to explore whether
exposure to a televised business plan competition affects rates of activity
associated with new business formation across the United States. By exploring
within-market variation in the show's popularity over time as measured by
Nielsen ratings, as well as exogenous shocks to programming that arise when
local sporting events or weather conditions disrupt the television-viewing
patterns of the target demographic, which in turn impacts the size of the
audience for given episodes, the study will assess how increasing familiarity
with the ups and downs of starting a business affect individuals? willingness to
actually start businesses.