* 1664684
* OP: Model Theory of Single Nanoparticle Photothermal Absorption Spectroscopy via Optical Microresonators
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Masiello, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 426,000.00

David J. Masiello of the University of Washington is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop theoretical and experimental approaches to understand and
interpret a new class of single particle photothermal absorption spectroscopy
experiments. Photothermal spectroscopy offers a unique platform to measure
absorption spectra of single molecules at room temperature and has many
potential applications in biology, materials science and other fields. Masiello
and his diverse team of undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
associates are working to understand how individual nanoscale objects such as
single molecules, quantum dots, and plasmonic nanoparticles process light. The
light may be absorbed into the particle or it may be scattered. While it is
difficult to measure, absorption contains important information about the nano-
particle that is not present in the scattering. Masiello's theoretical advances,
applied to these new state-of-the-art absorption experiments, allow the
experimentalists to distinguish absorption from scattering at the single
particle level. They also determine the conditions that are required for other
fascinating phenomena such as long-range, nonradiative energy transfer and room-
temperature quantum entanglement between distant nanoscale objects in the high
quality microresonator cavities that are used in the experiments. Masiello and a
colleague have developed and teach a graduate level course on scientific writing
aimed at developing and enhancing the scientific communication skills for a
diverse group of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus
of this work is to: 1) develop simple yet rigorous analytical models of the
individual and collective electronic excitations in molecules, quantum dots, and
metallic nanostructures as well as their interaction with the high-quality
optical whispering-gallery modes of their supporting toroidal microresonator
cavity; 2) use these models together with full-wave numerical simulations of
Maxwell's equations to understand the complex line shapes present in
photothermal absorption spectra; and 3) investigate the ability of optical
microresonators to assist in the interaction and coherent energy transfer
between distant nanoscale objects hybridized or even entangled in ultra-long-
range Rydberg-like plasmons.