* 1664945
* EAGER:TDM Solar Cells: Research on CdSe-Si tandem junction cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,932.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;The
conversion of solar energy into electricity using photovoltaic (PV) technology
is an important technology with significant potential for reducing global
warming. Currently, the costs of the PV solar energy system are dominated by
systems related costs, such as structural costs, field wiring and the costs of
chemical encapsulant materials and glass. In order to significantly reduce the
total costs of solar PV technology, the conversion efficiency needs to be
increased from the current ~15-20% to &gt;30%, because most of the systems costs
reduce proportionately with an increase inefficiency. The only way to achieve
such higher efficiencies is to use a tandem junction solar cell, comprising two
materials, one with a high bandgap and one with a lower bandgap. In this
project, we will investigate the fundamental properties of an inorganic
material, CdSe, then make solar cells in this material, and then make proof-of-
concept tandem junction solar cells by combining cells made in this material
with cells made in Si. The project will involve the research training of
graduate and undergraduate students, including women scientists. The advantage
to society is a significant lowering of the cost of solar energy conversion
technology, thereby accelerating the deployment of solar energy into the
nation's grid. The project is a joint project between Iowa State University and
Syracuse University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;CdSe is an interesting new material with a bandgap (~1.72 eV)
which is in the range needed to make tandem cells with Si. But not much is known
about the electronic properties of this material, nor have any high efficiency
cells been made in this material. A fundamental objective of this project is to
study electronic properties of thin films of this material and then make proof-
of-concept solar cells in the material. Among the properties to be studied will
be doping concentration, mobility of electrons and holes, deep defect densities
and recombination phenomena, minority carrier diffusion lengths, electron
affinities and energies of band edges. Structural, electronic and optical
measurement techniques will be used to measure the relevant properties. CdSe
films will be deposited using multi-source evaporation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to studying these fundamental electronic properties, we will make
proof-of-concept devices using appropriate heterojunctions. In addition, we will
make proof-of-concept tandem cells using tunnel junctions between CdSe and Si.
The objective is to demonstrate that one can indeed make tandem junction cells
using this new material system. Appropriate heavily doped contact layers will be
used on both CdSe and c-Si cells to make efficient tunnel junctions to connect
the two cells. The goal is to obtain an open-circuit voltage of ~1.5V in a
tandem cell, and also a high fill factor, thereby demonstrating that the tandem
junction concept works. The intellectual merit of the project lies in
systematically investigating the potential of a stable, inorganic material
system for making high efficiency solar cells.