* 1664657
* Biogeochemistry of Iron, Iodine and Boron in Marine Plant-like Linages: Synchrotron Radiation Methods for Visualizing Chemical State, Localization and Potential Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Carl Carrano, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2022
* USD 159,800.00

With this award the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division of NSF are supporting Carl J. Carrano and Frithjof C. Kupper's study of
how important trace elements (iron, boron and iodine) are taken up and stored in
seaweeds, and how these elements interact with each other so as to affect the
plant biology. Seaweeds represent an important resource with a wide range of
uses in the food, cosmetic, and fertilizer industries. They are also attracting
increasing attention as a source for biofuels that do not compete with
terrestrial plants for food production. The project utilizes advanced high
resolution synchrotron radiation methods to define the precise locations and
chemical states of iron, iodine and boron in two important seaweeds and uses
this information to assist in determining the biological importance of
interactions between them. This work also provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students in a wide range of important techniques. In addition,
since San Diego State University has a high minority population (10th largest
grantor of minority bachelor's degrees in the USA), this research project is
thus expected to favorably impact minority training in the sciences. Outreach
activities are also in progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While in the cytoplasm
many metalloproteins are present as a complicated mixture not easily amenable to
simple analysis without prior potentially destructive, and certainly disruptive,
isolation and purification. Many other metalloproteins are stored, sequestered
or localized in discrete locations within the cell/organelles and are also
difficult to isolate and study. As the resolution and flux density of
synchrotron radiation (SR) increases, it may be possible to pinpoint such
systems and analyze and characterize them directly in situ without need for
isolation or purification. Thus, one goal of this research is to see what the
limits are for SR methods for visualizing the chemical state, localization and
potential interactions of trace elements as applied to biological samples given
the increasing capabilities of 3rd generation synchrotrons where significant
progress (both in terms of brilliance and resolution) has been evident. The
project is using utilizing advanced high resolution (micron to submicron) SR
methods, i.e. microprobe, 3D tomography, IR/Raman, XANES and EXAFS to define the
precise locations and chemical states of iron, iodine and boron in two model
marine macroalgae (Ectocarpus siliculosis, Macrocystis pyrifera). The
investigators use this information to assist in determining the biological
importance of interactions between the elements. Seaweeds represent an important
resource with a wide range of uses in the food, cosmetic, and fertilizer
industries. They are also attracting increasing attention as a source for
biofuels that do not compete with terrestrial plants for food production.