* 1664376
* Catalytic, Enantioselective Dihalogenation of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2020
* USD 490,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Scott E. Denmark at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign is conducting research to develop a new paradigm for the catalytic,
enantioselective dichlorination of alkenes. Addition to unsaturated compounds is
among the oldest and most reliable of stereospecific transformations. However,
the problem of controlling the absolute configuration of the products has proved
challenging. The growing number of complex natural products bearing halogen
atoms at stereogenic centers has underscored this critical deficiency in
synthetic methodology. This proposal addresses the selectivity challenges
inherent in the design of enantioselective dihalogenation processes, and
formulates mechanism-based solutions to alkene dihalogenations, including those
that circumvent the classical haliranium (or alkene-dihalogen pi-complex)
intermediates. Professor Denmark has devised a new approach that inverts the
classical "anti" addition to the double bonds by the use of a specially designed
catalyst based on selenium. The resulting "syn addition" to double bonds enables
the rational development of an enantioselective variant. There are several
benefits to society: first in providing a highly skilled workforce to aid in the
economic health of our chemistry-based industries. Second, the significance of
chemical catalysis cannot be overestimated as it accounts for over 20% of the
USA GDP. Given the emphasis on single enantiomer substances in many reaches of
the chemical enterprise, new general and selective processes that provide such
materials are of great current interest.

The primary objective of this proposal is to construct the mechanistic/physical
organic foundation for the development of generally applicable and highly
selective alkene dihalogenations reactions using two different modes of
catalysis. These two modes constitute the two Specific Aims of this project,
namely: (1) redox active main group catalysis and (2) asymmetric phase transfer
catalysis. Within each Specific Aim, we are: (1) learning the
structure/reactivity correlations and the rules for achieving high catalytic
activity (turnover frequencies and turnover numbers) for the target reactions,
(2) carrying out detailed mechanistic investigations of the newly invented
catalytic reactions, and (3) designing chiral catalysts that impart high
stereoselectivity and high chemical conversion for the introduction of new
vicinal stereocenters and (4) demonstrating generality in a variety of substrate
classes that represent useful and commonly encountered structural motifs. This
award supports an excellent training environment for young scientists in the
Denmark group.