* 1664632
* SusChEM: Bimetallic Catalysis for C-C and C-X Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Neal Mankad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 461,650.00

Replacing precious metal catalysts with those using inexpensive and abundant
metals is a major challenge faced by the chemistry community as precious metal
resources dwindle and the focus on the environmental impact of chemical
manufacturing increases. Successfully utilizing non-precious metal catalysts
improves the sustainability, economics, and environmental impact of many
technologies that are crucial to society. However, accomplishing this requires
the development of new non-precious catalysts that function as well as, or
better than, established precious metal catalysts. In this project, Dr. Mankad
is developing a new strategy for catalyzing reactions of importance to the
synthesis of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The concept uses two non-
precious metals to achieve chemical reactions typically conducted with a single
precious metal. In addition to achieving the targeted chemical reactions,
development of these innovative catalysts stands to impact many other areas of
chemistry that rely on catalysis. Dr. Mankad is leading a diverse team of
researchers and is promoting their engagement in outreach and leadership
activities in their university and community. These activities, which include
conducting chemistry demonstrations for urban middle school students in Chicago,
promoting laboratory safety in research and teaching settings, and disseminating
research results to a wide range of audiences, are promoting both interest in
STEM disciplines and engagement in the issues of sustainability and
environmental responsibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Mankad of the
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is developing bimetallic strategies for
C-C and C-X coupling reactions that utilize two base metals cooperatively to
achieve transformations typically conducted using single-site noble metal
catalysts. The targeted transformations include carbonylative C-C coupling
reactions (typically catalyzed by Pd) that allow for the modular synthesis of
ketone products from simple starting materials, dehydrogenative C-H borylation
reactions (typically catalyzed by Ir) that allow for direct synthesis of
arylboronic esters that are valuable synthetic building blocks, and alkyne semi-
hydrogenation reactions (typically catalyzed by Pd, Ru, Rh, Ir) that exhibit
unusual stereoselectivity dictated by the bimetallic reaction mechanism. The
cooperation of two or more metals during catalysis is an under-developed design
strategy, and so this project stands to have a broad impact on many other areas
of chemistry that depend on catalysis. Dr. Mankad leads a diverse team of
researchers and promotes their participation in outreach and leadership
activities at UIC and in the surrounding Chicago community, including outreach
to local middle school students, promotion of laboratory safety, and engagement
in issues of sustainability and environmental responsibility, that further
support the broader impacts of the project.