* 1664920
* Investigating Functional Peptides for Asymmetric Hypervalent Iodine Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Daniel Whitehead, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 443,193.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Daniel Whitehead at Clemson University. His group is developing new
catalysts that are capable of promoting selective chemical oxidation reactions.
Oxidation reactions are essential synthetic tools because they increase the
overall functionality of a molecule. Yet in spite of this importance, oxidation
reactions that recognize different mirror images of molecules remain elusive.
This is a problem because natural systems recognize specific mirror images of a
molecule. Hence, the majority of new molecules forwarded as pharmaceuticals must
be comprised of only one mirror image. Reactions that cannot operate in this
context have limited utility. In this project, Professor Whitehead and his
students are conducting oxidation reactions with activated iodine species. To do
so in a manner that recognized the mirror images of a molecule, the activated
iodine species are being urrounded by a peptide ligand that controls the three-
dimensional environment around the reagent. Peptide ligands can be readily made
with tremendous control of shape and functionality. Hence, their use provides an
outstanding opportunity for discovery. In the effort being pursued, this
synthetic work is combined with spectroscopy, X-Ray crystallography, and
mechanistic studies in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that
control selectivity in oxidation reactions. The project is contributing to the
growing number of new methods for the synthesis of organic molecules with
practical relevance to both the pharmaceutical and fine chemical industry. This
project is well suited for the education of both undergraduate and graduate-
level scientists. Professor Whitehead's group is well positioned to provide the
highest level of education and training for students underrepresented in science
by recruiting these individuals to participate in laboratory research related to
the project. Outreach activities involving K-6 Montessori students and grade-
school aged homeschoolers are also being pursued as part of the funded project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enantioselective catalytic transformations mediated by
hypervalent iodine reagents are relatively rare, despite several key advances in
the last 10 years. These organocatalysts offer access to a wide variety of
oxidative transformations of organic substrates while avoiding the use of
expensive and toxic heavy-metal based catalysts. This project is building upon
significant preliminary data in order to develop a new class of peptide-based
chiral hypervalent iodine catalysts in order to address two key goals: 1) to
understand the structural drivers governing the observed enantioselectivity of
initial "hit" peptide catalysts for the asymmetric alpha-oxytosylation of
ketones and oxidative lactonization of keto-acids; and 2) to investigate novel
iodo-arene containing amino acids in peptide scaffolds, optimize newly
discovered catalysts, and expand the substrate/transformation scope of this new
class of catalysts. The work is training both graduate and undergraduate
students in synthetic organic chemistry, spectroscopy, crystallography, and
organic reaction mechanisms. Outreach efforts focus on facilitating science
experiments with area Montessori and home-school students.