* 1664225
* Workshop: Midscale Instrumentation to Accelerate Progress in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Collin Broholm, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 11/30/2017
* USD 103,994.00

The Division of Materials Research, the Division of Physics, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences provide support for the Workshop on Midscale Instrumentation for
Quantum Materials which will be held on December 5-7 2016 in Arlington Va
(http://sites.krieger.jhu.edu/miqm/). The workshop addresses two of the 10 Big
ideas of the Director of the National Science Foundation: Quantum Leap and
Midscale Instrumentation. The focus is on midscale instrumentation for quantum
materials that would support the next quantum revolution, Quantum Leap. The
workshop will discuss and describe midscale instrumentation that would advance
our understanding and applications of a broad array of quantum materials. These
include topological semimetals and insulators, high temperature superconductors,
quantum spin liquids, multiferroic materials, nano-structured quantum materials
devices, as well as ultra-cold atomic gases realizing novel quantum correlated
states of matter. The workshop will focus on midscale instrumentation in the $5M
to $60M range that could have transformative impacts on the science and
applications of quantum materials. Examples of instrumentation include beam
line, sample environment, and detector systems that extend capabilities of
existing user facilities, advanced stand-alone instrumentation employing new
sources and/or methods to probe quantum materials, new tools for synthesis in
bulk or nanostructured forms, quantum simulators based on ultra-cold atoms, and
advanced computational platforms, software, and data sharing systems for quantum
materials. The outcome of the workshop result in a concise report describing
opportunities to stimulate scientific and technological progress in quantum
materials through new midscale instrumentation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in the
solid state research and development work that gave us the transistor, advances
in quantum materials and their applications require a multidisciplinary approach
that links the basic science of hard condensed-matter physics to chemistry,
materials science, and engineering. The Workshop on Midscale Instrumentation for
Quantum Materials has correspondingly broad representation from all areas of
science and engineering of advanced electronic materials. The resulting workshop
report would provide an overview of midscale instrumentation to accelerate a
field of research where fundamental scientific progress has great potential for
transformative technological impacts. These would result in the next
technological revolutions that is captured in the Quantum Leap idea.