* 1664300
* 2017 Gordon Research Conference on Catchment Science: Interactions of Hydrology, Biology &amp; Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Kevin McGuire, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 11/30/2017
* USD 49,760.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Catchment Science was conceived on the
idea of improving the understanding of interaction among hydrology, biology and
geochemistry in catchments (also known as watersheds), which are hydrologic
drainage areas that act as systems and encompass interconnected physical,
chemical, and biological processes that determine the composition, regime, and
value of water. No other hydrologic science meeting is focused on this goal. The
Catchment Science GRC, has taken place biennially since 1991 and continues to
represent a unique opportunity for scientists from academic institutions and
government agencies from around the world in this field. The GRC on Catchment
Science and the associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS, for early career
scientists and students) includes members from broad ranging disciplines but
maintains a focus on interactions among hydrology, biology and geochemistry in
catchment science. The conference will identify new research opportunities and
define new research questions in catchment science from an integrative,
multidisciplinary standpoint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unraveling catchment
functions from an integrated physical, chemical, and biological perspective,
requires interdisciplinary research and information exchange among hydrologists,
ecologists, engineers, soil scientists, and biogeochemists. Scientists from
these disciplines need to have a common framework and language to be in a
position to solve and understand today's water resource and ecosystem grand
challenges. The specific conference theme in 2017, "Crossing Boundaries and
Seeking Synthesis in the Catchment Sciences," is to enable catchment scientists
from different disciplines and who work on different aspects of catchments to
share and learn from one another in order to identify opportunities for research
and advancement of the science as a whole. The focus on "boundaries" (physical,
institutional, disciplinary and conceptual) highlights the need to cross those
various boundaries related to catchment science because many critical processes
and solutions to problems occur at the boundaries which represent the
intersection of the various contributing systems. Importantly, this conference,
with its associated GRS, provides opportunities for the exchange of ideas among
early career investigators and an occasion to build relationships with peers
that will form the next generation of scientists who will be better positioned
to work across boundaries in catchment science.