* 1664692
* Random matrices and related models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jinho Baik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 206,987.00

In a one-lane traffic situation, one slow car may delay a whole platoon of cars
behind. This situation is an example of randomly interacting systems in which
particles (cars) have random amounts of time to move, and one particle's
movement influences other particles in some distance. The spread of fire, the
cavity of melting ice, and growth of bacterial colonies also have similar
features. In this project, the principal investigator studies some of the
underlying fundamental mathematical properties for a class of simplified models
representing such random interactions. In particular, the principal investigator
studies how the randomness of the particles movement impact the global
characteristics of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
will study the fluctuations of several random systems. They include spin glass,
random matrices, and interacting particle systems. The overarching goal is to
explore the scope and limitation of the universal distribution functions that
arise from random matrix theory and related models and also uncover new
universal distributions. Specifically, the principal investigator studies 2-spin
spherical Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model of spin glass, totally asymmetric simple
exclusion process on a ring, and the Airy process. the principal investigator
uses the exactly solvable nature of these models extensively to obtain precise
asymptotic results. Riemann-Hilbert problems and coordinate Bethe ansatz method
are some of the tools used.