* 1664203
* PREEVENTS Track 2: 3D Nonlinear Simulation of Large Earthquakes on the Southern San Andreas Fault
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Kim Olsen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,815.00

The latest official earthquake rupture forecast for California (UCERF3) predicts
a probability of 22% within the next 30 years for a magnitude 7.7 or larger
earthquake in southern California, with the San Andreas fault as a likely
causative fault. The population (exceeding 13 million) and infrastructure in
greater Los Angeles are highly vulnerable to such an event. The benefits of
previous ground motion predictions for large earthquake scenarios on the
southern San Andreas fault are limited by deficiencies in the underlying
simulation techniques as well as bandwidth. This project will use recent
advances in available supercomputing resources and sophistication of numerical
modeling codes to bring the simulations to a level that can be used for
engineering design. The resulting ground motion models will allow improved
seismic hazard analysis with realistic model features deemed to be important at
the higher frequencies. The project will provide a first step toward
significantly improved seismic hazard estimation, initially for a large event on
the San Andreas fault in southern California. However, the results can be used
in other areas where large earthquakes are possible in the future (e.g.,
northern California, western Washington, Wasatch Front, New Madrid Seismic
Zone). The research is expected to enable refined predictions of peak ground
motions for extreme events in the future, including the near-fault area where
observations are sparse. If properly used, these results could affect current
hazard maps and engineering design, and mitigate the loss of life and property
in future large earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale computational
efforts for large earthquake scenarios on the southern San Andreas fault have
shown significant variability of the resulting long-period (longer than 0.5 s)
ground motion levels due to 3D basin effects. However, the long-period ground
motions predicted from these studies have limited use for practical purposes,
due to simplifications in the underlying ground motion modeling as well as
computationally-imposed constraints on the frequency content. This project will
bring the simulations to a sophistication useable for engineering design and
seismic hazard analysis. The maximum frequency of previous ground motion models
for large southern San Andreas fault events will be increased to 5 Hz with
realistic near-surface velocities and include new model features deemed to be
important at the higher frequencies, such as small-scale source and media
heterogeneity, frequency-dependent viscoelastic attenuation, and site effects.
The current engineering practice of site-specific hazard assessment still relies
on 1D nonlinear (or equivalent linear) simulations to predict the response of
soils. The project will develop models and computational strategies that
integrate nonlinear soil response into 3D simulations, validate them using
borehole array data, and apply the models predictively to large San Andreas
fault scenarios. In addition, the research will investigate how surface waves
contribute to amplification, and how this amplification is affected by
nonlinearity and near-surface anelastic attenuation. The highly scalable GPU-
based finite-difference code AWP and available supercomputing resources provide
the foundation for the challenging computational aspects of the research. The
project will complete on-going work on a discontinuous mesh capability to allow
for lower near-surface velocities and higher frequencies in the simulations,
accurate source insertion in a nonlinear medium, and refinement of 3D nonlinear
rheology.