* 1664549
* RUI: Synthesis of Heterohelicenes Using Acetylene-Activated SNAr Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Katz, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 227,796.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports this project
by Professor Jeffrey Katz, a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at
Colby College. He is investigating chemical methods that allow for the synthesis
of chemical compounds called helicenes. Helicenes are unusual molecules that
possess a rigid helical (screw-like) shape. The primary goal of the funded
research is the development of technology that allows access to previously
unknown helicenes containing nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and selenium atoms on
terminal positions of the molecules. Compounds of this type have potential
applications as chemical sensors, organic electronics, and new polymeric
materials. Students working on this project are obtaining experience in organic
chemical synthesis and materials chemistry. Professor Katz is highly active in
the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority students into
chemistry and other scientific fields. He serves as co-Director of the Colby
Achievement Program in the Sciences (CAPS), a summer bridge program at Colby
College for entering first-year students from underrepresented backgrounds that
fosters a climate of success and leadership within the minority student science
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helicenes and their heteroaromatic variants are
a promising compound class for use as chiral ligands, supramolecular building
blocks, polymerization monomers, liquid crystals, optoelectronic materials, and
components of molecular machines. A wide variety of [n]heterohelicenes are being
accessed using acetylene-activated SNAr/anionic cyclization chemistry as the key
diversifying transformation, a reaction cascade recently developed in the Katz
laboratory. The cascade approach is efficient, highly modular, and allows for
structural diversification at the final stages of the synthetic sequence.
Further, the investigations target the production of non-racemic heterohelicenes
through the use of chiral nucleophiles in the SNAr step of the cascade sequence,
as well as adaptation of the method to produce heteroarene-terminated
phenacenes. Undergraduate students working with Professor Katz travel to
scientific conferences to present their research. Professor Katz leverages his
attendance at these meetings by organizing and moderating Undergraduate Context
Sessions, which support the educational environment for all attending
undergraduate students. Such Sessions are included in the general programs of
several major conferences in organic chemistry and have helped undergraduate
students to become an increasingly recognized focus of the program structures.