* 1664331
* 2017 Physics and Chemistry of Microfluidics Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Dino Di Carlo, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

CBET - 1664331&lt;br/&gt;PI: Di Carlo, Dino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide partial support for young US researchers to attend the ninth Gordon
Research Conference on the physics and chemistry of microfluidics, which will be
held June 3 - 9, 2017 in Lucca, Italy. Microfluidics refers to fluid handling
and chemical processing on micro- and nanoscale dimensions, which, in many
cases, provide significant advantages to large scale processing. Microfluidics
can be used to automate complex processes, to perform chemical reactions and
separations in arrays of channels, to speed up bioanalytical processes, to
process ultra-small sample volumes, to maintain precise control of synthetic
processes to produce higher quality products, and to avoid formation of harmful
or environmentally hazardous byproducts. This conference will provide
opportunities for US faculty members and graduate students to present their
research results to an international audience, to forge new collaborations, and
to meet research leaders in the field of microfluidics. The conference will
include a Gordon Research Seminar, which will provide additional opportunities
for graduate students to discuss their work and interact with keynote speakers.
The conference will address fundamentals of microfluidic systems with
applicability to diverse applications including water and energy sustainability,
point-of-care diagnostics, microfluidics of 3D printing&amp;#8232;and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Session topics at the Gordon Research
Conference will range from fundamental fluid interface research to more applied
topics such as cell separations and analysis. Session topics will include
droplet microfluidics, water and energy, point-of-care diagnostics,
microfluidics of 3D printing, rare cell capture and analysis, sequencing in
confined volumes, wearable and in vivo devices, cell mechanics, and fields,
forces, and flows. Researchers from a variety of academic disciplines including
biomedical engineering, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical
engineering, biology, chemistry, physics and materials science are expected to
participate. A special emphasis will be placed on supporting participants from
underrepresented groups as well as promoting attendance from researchers at
predominantly teaching colleges and universities.