* 1664975
* Borane Modification of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2020
* USD 462,852.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Frieder Jaekle. Professor Jaekle is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry at the Newark Campus of Rutgers University. He is developing new
conjugated materials called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) that contain
boron-containing units. The presence of the boron enhances the potential for the
PAHs to serve as materials in optical and electronic devices. To this end, PAHs
have proven to be effective platforms for building organic electronics, imaging,
sensors, molecular switches, etc. In these settings, their performance is
improved when the materials are "doped" with either electron-rich donor or
electron-poor acceptor atoms that enhance conductivity. While the doping of PAHs
with nitrogen and sulfur (both donors) has been studied extensively, research
into systems with other heteroatoms remains less developed. Boron is very
interesting as its electron-poor (acceptor) character can result in new,
desirable properties for opto-electric devices. Professor Jaekle and his
students are well-positioned to make and study the boron doped PAHs in order to
fully develop their potential. The project also contributes to the training of a
diverse group of students in an interdisciplinary research environment at the
interface of organic, inorganic and materials chemistry. Another goal is to
bring together researchers from different backgrounds in pursuit of new
conjugated hybrid materials through organization of symposia, international
collaborations, and broad dissemination of new knowledge in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the research are to: (1)
develop regioselective methods for the targeted functionalization of PAHs at
their periphery via Lewis base-directed electrophilic C-H borylation; (2)
develop new approaches to incorporate multiple tricoordinate boron centers into
the framework of PAHs; (3) investigate the effect of boron
doping/functionalization on the electronic structure, photophysical properties,
and chemical reactivity. New synthetic tools are developed that provide access
to unique functional pi-conjugated systems with tailored properties. Strategic
placement of boranes at well-defined positions in the periphery or framework of
PAHs is expected to dramatically alter their electronic structure. The
preparation of the new pi-conjugated hybrids is anticipated to lead to new
materials with desirable optical, electronic, stimuli-responsive and sensory
properties. The research is complemented by efforts to involve students from
underrepresented groups, to engage in international and interdisciplinary
collaborations, and to provide a forum for scientific exchange for researchers
in the field of organic-inorganic hybrid materials.