* 1664644
* QuBBD: From Personalized Predictions to Better Control of Chronic Health Conditions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Christos Cassandras, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 899,999.00

The United States spends twice as much annually on health care than the next-
highest spender but significantly under-performs in quality of care metrics,
such as life expectancy and infant mortality. Hospital care accounts for about a
third of U.S. health care spending. It has been estimated that nearly $30
billion in hospital care costs each year are potentially preventable, with about
half of that amount due to hospitalizations related to the two major chronic
diseases: heart diseases and diabetes. Electronic Health Records, and the
emerging digital data from home-based devices, smart phones, and wearables,
offer a great opportunity to develop a systematic approach towards better
management of chronic conditions in an outpatient setting and the prevention of
hospitalizations required to treat acute episodes resulting from poor control of
a patient's condition. This project will utilize digital health data to develop
predictive models that anticipate future undesirable events, such as
hospitalizations, re-admissions, and transitioning to an acute stage of a
disease. These predictions will be used to trigger personalized interventions,
ranging from increased monitoring and doctor visits to optimized treatment
policies adapted to each patient. The project supports a collaboration between
mathematical scientists and a physician at a major safety-net hospital, which
treats a significant percentage of low-income and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on two broad tasks: (1)
predictive analytics, and (2) personalized interventions. Task 1 develops
methods for predictions in two time scales, long and medium. These predictions
target hospitalizations and rely upon new supervised machine learning approaches
that combine classification with clustering as a way of enhancing performance
and offering interpretable results. In addition, anomaly detection methods are
proposed for shorter-term predictions. Task 2 focuses on interventions seeking
to prevent events predicted under Task 1. Interventions include increased
monitoring and optimizing treatment policies using Markov Decision Processes and
perturbation analysis methods. Methodological advances will include methods for
joint clustering and classification, anomaly detection, learning and improving
policies for Markov Decision Processes, and perturbation analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.