* 1664198
* SI2-SSI: Lightweight Infrastructure for Land Atmosphere Coupling (LILAC): A Tool for Easy Integration of the Community Land Model into Multiple Modeling Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* L. Darrell Whitley, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,600,000.00

Everyone on Earth lives on the ground, so interactions between the atmosphere
and the land surface are a critically important part of the climate system and
understanding these interactions is important for weather prediction,
agriculture, and urban water management. Earth System Models (ESMs) are complex
software systems representing complex natural systems. They are critical tools
for diagnosing, understanding, and predicting interactions and change in the
atmosphere, oceans, and land ecosystems. This project will develop a new
software system for coupling the land and atmosphere components of Earth System
models, specifically for the most widely-used climate model in the world: the
Community Earth System Model (CESM). The new system will be capable of
simulating climates near the ground including exchanges of heat, water ,and
carbon between vegetated land and the air as well as streamflow and soil
moisture. As an officially-supported component of CESM, it will be used by
thousands of scientists and students around the world. Unlike its predecessor,
the new system will be able to simulate small areas at high resolution for
important applications and testing. The project will also support a computer
science graduate student as well as academics and scientists who will help
develop and test the software. The PIs will engage a global community of
software developers and users through a series of workshops and webinars as well
as through professional societies and publications. The PIs recognize the
chronic under-representation of women and ethnic minorities in both Computer
Science and Atmospheric Science. To address this, they will host a computer
science summer camp for middle school students from underrepresented groups
(URGs), and close collaboration with existing climate courses for K-12 teachers,
science outreach in K-12 schools, and a highly successful REU-Site operated by
the PI. This project will dramatically improve the usability of the most widely-
used climate model in existence. Hundreds of developers and thousands of users
around the world will benefit from the far greater flexibility and use cases for
this model. The Community Land Model will be coupled to a much greater range of
atmospheric codes for weather prediction, air quality applications, and climate
projections that enhance the quality of life for people everywhere. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Community Earth System Model CESM) is a
uniquely open ESM with a distributed community of hundreds of developers and
thousands of users around the world. Compared to other ESMs, CESM is the "Linux
of climate models." The land component of CESM, the Community Land Model (CLM),
has its own vibrant and diverse user and development community, which has
supported the construction of a particularly comprehensive terrestrial system
model. It includes a rich array of processes that enable examination of the
physical, biological, and chemical processes by which natural terrestrial
ecosystems and human-managed land affect and are affected by climate and
weather. CESM can only be run globally, but there is widespread interest in
coupling CLM to alternative high-resolution atmosphere models to study the
challenging scientific problems that exist at the interface between small and
large spatial scales. A barrier to this research, however, is that CLM cannot
readily be coupled to alternative atmosphere models. The CLM coupling interface
only supports communication with the CESM coupling infrastructure (CPL7), which
imposes strict requirements on how an atmospheric component can communicate with
CLM. One key requirement is for the atmosphere model to complete a full time
step before coupling can occur. This requirement necessitates significant
refactoring of many atmospheric models in order for them to couple to CLM via
CPL7. In addition, the tools to build and configure CLM are currently difficult
to use outside of the CESM context. For all of these reasons, CLM has never been
coupled to alternative atmospheric models in a sustainable fashion. Colorado
State University (CSU), in partnership with the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), proposes to develop a Lightweight Infrastructure for Land-
Atmosphere Coupling (LILAC) that will significantly simplify the coupling of CLM
to alternative atmospheric models. The LILAC coupler and the associated proposed
streamlining and simplification of the CLM tool chain will be developed and
tested with a prototype high-resolution atmosphere model, the CSU SAM Cloud
Resolving Model, and will be extended for use with any arbitrary Target
Atmosphere Model. The development of LILAC and associated tools will enable
numerous groups to couple CLM to their atmospheric models, and to quickly update
to new state-of-the-art CLM model versions as they become available. This will
open up new avenues of land-atmosphere research that can exploit the combined
biogeophysical and biogeochemical capabilities of CLM with the strengths of
high-resolution atmosphere models. It will enable research into land-atmosphere
interactions across a variety of scales, ranging from turbulence-resolving
simulations of tower and aircraft data to cloud-resolving simulations to study
how small-scale land features such as hillslopes, valleys, lakes, rivers, urban
areas and farms conspire to alter surface climate and atmospheric boundary layer
characteristics to continental-scale simulations of the impact of land cover and
land use change on weather and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science and Engineering and the
Office of Polar Programs and Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Science in the
Directorate for Geosciences.