* 1664902
* RUI:   SusChem:   Redox Active Aluminum Nitroxide Complexes for the anti-Markovnikov Hydrofunctionalization of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Christopher Graves, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

This award by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry Division supports
work by Professor Christopher Graves at Swarthmore College to synthesize
molecular aluminum compounds that have catalytic potential. Catalysts are
substances that cause a chemical reaction to occur and are required in many
important laboratory and industrial processes. Since catalysts are often based
on rare, expensive metals, the discovery of replacements that contain common,
inexpensive metals is important. In this respect, aluminum is among the most
abundant and least expensive of the elements. Consequently, it is an attractive
candidate for use in catalysis. However, effective catalysts often must be able
to easily gain and/or lose electrons and aluminum normally cannot do this. In
this project, the problem is circumvented by attaching aluminum to groups that
are capable of gaining and/or losing electrons. This results in aluminum based
systems that can be developed as catalysts for the conversion of olefins
(components in petroleum and natural gas) into high value chemicals. In
addition, this project provides research opportunities for undergraduate
students, which prepares them to enter the workforce or continue their
development in graduate or professional schools. On top of this, the students
participate in the Philadelphia Science Festival, and outreach to local and
elementary schools with large populations of African American, Hispanic, and
economically disadvantaged students.

In this project aluminum is coordinated to a series of multi-dentate nitroxide-
based ligands and the structure and bonding of the resulting complexes is
studied. By incorporating multiple N-O moieties into a multi dentate framework
robust complexes that exist over a range of ligand oxidation states are
obtained. Through variations in ligand substituents the steric and electronic
properties of the complexes are modulated and their ability to activate small
molecules is evaluated. This knowledge is used to guide the development of
aluminum-nitroxide complexes as catalysts for the anti-Markovnikov
hydrofunctionalization of alkenes. An educational component centers on the
training of undergraduate students and outreach programs targets K-12 students.