* 1664928
* Synthesis, Characterization and Reactivity Studies of Cerium Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division Professor Eric Schelter and his research group at the University of
Pennsylvania is preparing compounds of the element cerium. Cerium is a member of
the rare earth elements, which possess distinctive properties. Compounds of rare
earths form double and triple bonds that are extremely reactive. The goal of
this project is to develop synthetic cerium chemistry that will be used to
understand the unique reactivity of cerium-ligand multiple bonds. The reactivity
of such species is expected to enable unique chemistry found with no other
metals, contributing to the discovery of new, potentially value-added chemicals
including dyes, pharmaceuticals and polymers. The discovery of new complexes
bearing cerium(+4)-ligand multiple bonds expands fundamental chemistry of the
rare earth elements. Societal benefits are accrued from new organic compounds
identified in reactivity studies. Results are communicated through outreach
programs for grade- and high school students including minority students.
Underrepresented groups including women and underrepresented minority
undergraduates and graduate students benefit from support of the project. This
project focuses on synthesis and reactivity studies of complexes bearing rare
earth metal-ligand multiple bonds, namely those of Ce(IV). The ability to attain
the tetravalent state for cerium is expected to enable isolation of reactive
oxo-, imido-, phosphinidine and other complexes and enable studies of their
reactivity. Analogous compounds of the related 5f congeners uranium and thorium
are also synthesized to understand the reactivity and bonding patterns through
comparison. Studies of the associated electronic structures are performed using
spectroscopy together with density functional theory. Reactivity patterns,
discerned through small molecule activation studies, are established the unique
nucleophilic/electrophilic characteristics.