* 1664091
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Collaborative Research: SHADE: Surface Heat Assessment for Developed Environments
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Kelly Klima, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2021
* USD 515,000.00

Extreme heat wave events, exacerbated by the urban heat island effect, can have
major impacts on the lives and health of city residents. Projected future
temperature increases for many urban areas of the United States will only
exacerbate these impacts. This project investigates how various geophysical
processes interact to produce this extreme heat, and how heat hazard and the
vulnerability and exposure of urban populations to this hazard contribute to the
consequences of these extreme events. It will develop and apply methods for the
assessment of the magnitude, frequency, and potential consequences of extreme
heat events in urban areas at a high resolution in space (throughout a city) and
time (throughout a day). Furthermore, these methods will be used to assess how
changes to the climate and to the urban fabric, for example via mitigation
actions such as adopting green roofs or urban trees, will alter the heat hazard
and risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop physical and
probabilistic models for urban temperature hazards, to accomplish the following
project goals: (i) improving the physical modeling of extreme urban heat to
better understand its physical precursors, (ii) improving the probabilistic
modeling of extreme urban heat to enable more efficient downscaling of its
increasing hazard in the future, (iii) understanding and modeling the spatially
and temporally varying vulnerability of the urban population to extreme heat,
and (iv) combining these improved hazard and vulnerability models to assess the
resulting risk and the effectiveness of mitigation strategies that aim to reduce
it. The combination of deterministic and probabilistic modeling approaches
proposed in this project will allow for more accurate predictions (including
appropriate quantification of uncertainties) of current and future high
temperature hazards due to the interaction of heat waves and the urban heat
island effect in cities. Specific components developed during this research,
such as probabilistic temperature models, risk quantification methods, and
assessments of the effectiveness of portfolios of risk mitigation strategies
will be of interest to other researchers in the scientific community and in
industry pursuing related work. The developed methods will be applied to the
integrated analysis of cities as Pittsburgh, PA, and Los Angeles, CA.