* 1664416
* Sitting Bull College's Lakota Language Capacity Building Initiative
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Tasha Hauff, Sitting Bull College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2022
* USD 233,306.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American Languages. Native American languages are valuable because, among other
things, they contain diverse grammatical features that language scientists have
only just begun understanding and analyzing. Yet, all Native American languages
are endangered, and many of these languages are no longer spoken or used by
fluent first language speakers. It is in the national interest to broaden
participation by training Native linguists who are familiar with the culture and
communities in which these languages reside; these linguists bring their diverse
knowledge and experience to the language sciences, and can more directly help
with grassroots language revitalization efforts in their home communities, at
least some of which is funded by other federal initiatives. Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs), such as Sitting Bull College (Standing Rock Indian
Reservation), are often spaces in which these grassroots language revitalization
efforts take place. Moreover, many community members are motivated to learn
their ancestral language, despite a dearth of indigenous linguists. This project
will leverage that motivation to facilitate a better linguistic and structural
understanding of a Native American language by TCU faculty and students. Broader
impacts include increasing representation of Native Americans in the social
sciences, capacity building in linguistics at a TCU, and improved training of
TCU participants in second language acquisition and assessment methodologies.
This project is co-funded by the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program
(TCUP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sitting Bull College's Lakota Language Capacity
Building Initiative hypothesizes that community members often may not know how
linguists can help their language revitalization efforts because they do not get
to see the processes involved in creating programs, materials, or other
resources that help revitalize language. Similarly, community members may not
know if they want to participate in language sciences, as language sciences are
not usually introduced to students in primary or secondary schools, and are also
not always taught or included in language-learner environments and other
language revitalization activities. The team will investigate how the
development of a deeper and more explicit connection of the language sciences to
Lakota language revitalization activities and language learning fosters interest
in the language sciences by TCU faculty and students. The Initiative will ramp
up existing Sitting Bull College language courses to speed-up Lakota language
acquisition among the college's students and staff and in the greater Standing
Rock community. Datives, conditional clauses, adverbial clauses of time and
other morphologically or syntactically complex structures are used in basic
daily conversations, so learners are confronted with them regularly. This
project will document these grammatical elements in the speech of both fluent
speakers and learners, creating a rich corpus of second language acquisition
data in addition to the documentation of fluent Lakota speakers. The strength of
the proposed initiative is that it helps students develop a better understanding
of the possibilities and limits of the language sciences by teaching the Lakota
language in a multitude of ways, such as through grammars, archival materials,
as well as through interaction with fluent speakers. By developing student
proficiency in and metalinguistic awareness of the Lakota language, this
initiative aims to create groups of passionate Lakota language learners who will
not only continue to learn and use Lakota in everyday life, but who will also
build Sitting Bull College's capacity as a center for Lakota language research
and acquisition.