* 1664047
* Rectifiability and Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Steven Hofmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 219,000.00

This project lies at the interface of geometric measure theory and partial
differential equations, and it will utilize techniques from harmonic analysis.
In geometric measure theory, one studies geometric properties of sets via the
behavior of some measure on them (the concept of "measure" generalizes the
notions of length, area, and volume). In this project, the sort of set under
consideration is typically the boundary (i.e., the enclosing perimeter) of some
region in space, and for this a specific measure -- namely, "harmonic measure"--
plays a central role. Harmonic measure and its generalizations may be used to
construct solutions in some region, with prescribed boundary values, to partial
differential equations of so-called "elliptic" type. Such equations govern
various steady-state phenomena in the real world, including electrostatics and
steady-state temperature distributions. For example, harmonic measure may be
used to determine the steady-state temperature distribution within some region,
given a known temperature distribution on the perimeter of the region.
Unsurprisingly, the geometry of the region and its boundary greatly affect one's
ability to carry out such a program in practice. A principal goal of this
project is to quantify, in a natural sense, the connection between geometry and
the behavior of harmonic measure and its
generalizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two main areas of focus.
First, the principal investigator plans to find an intrinsically geometric
characterization of quantitative absolute continuity of harmonic measure with
respect to surface measure, on the boundary of an open set in d-dimensional
Euclidean space. He expects that such a characterization should comprise two
parts: a quantitative rectifiablity property of the boundary, plus scale
invariant nontangential accessibility to ample portions of the boundary. Related
to this work, the principal investigator also plans to investigate the analogous
question concerning quantitative absolute continuity of elliptic-harmonic
measure associated to a more general second-order elliptic operator. Second, the
principal investigator will study the solvability of other boundary value
problems for elliptic equations, in several different settings. More precisely,
he intends to work toward an improved understanding of the Neumann problem in
domains more general than Lipschitz domains and for nonsymmetric divergence form
operators. As a first step, he plans to consider a certain family of
transmission problems, for which the Neumann problem is an endpoint case. He
also plans to treat boundary-value problems for certain higher-order divergence-
form elliptic operators.