* 1664832
* Collaborative Research: Ionic Liquids at Interfaces: from Bulk Structure to Tunable Films
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Claudio Margulis, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 353,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division (CSDM-A) supports a Collaborative Research effort by Professors Claudio
J. Margulis at the University of Iowa (P.I.) and Edward W. Castner, Jr.
(co-P.I.) at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, with synthetic
collaborations including Professor Sharon Lall-Ramnarine at Queensborough
Community College. The focus of this research is to develop a more complete
understanding of the molecular level structure of a special class of liquids
called ionic liquids. Ionic liquids are gaining interest for their potential
applications in various technologies for example, batteries and gas separation
systems. Professors Margulis and Castner are studying how the molecular
structure of ionic liquids affects such properties as their "thickness"
(viscosity) and electrical conductivity. Ionic liquids are an interesting class
of compounds that, like salts are composed of positively charged atoms or
molecules (cations) and negatively charged atoms or molecules (anions). Ionic
liquids are salts that are molten at or near room temperature. The research
involves both experimental techniques (e.g., x-ray spectroscopy and synthesis)
and computer modeling. The research project is expected to increase our
understanding of ionic liquid properties, so that they can be better applied to
a variety of problems in modern energy storage technologies, as well as other
novel applications. The students involved in this research project are gaining
experience in a highly interdisciplinary environment that challenges graduate
students in non-traditional ways. For example, students in the Margulis group
whose interests and expertise are primarily in theory and computation spend time
in the Castner laboratory, where they gain experience in actual experiments. At
the same time, the experimentalist graduate researchers from the Castner group
are doing simulation work under Prof. Margulis' guidance. Finally, the
Queensborough Community College collaboration is providing research experiences
for selected undergraduate students from a minority-serving Associates-level
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquids can exhibit structural order at
various length scales, from simple pair-wise interactions between two molecules
to hydrogen-bonded networks that may extend over several nanometers. Ionic
liquids have been shown to have an intermediate range of structural order
arising from the combination of the strong interactions between the positively
charged cations and the negatively charged anions, with hydrophobic groups on
these molecular ions. Some of the Margulis and Castner groups' recent work has
shown that ionic liquids can be designed such that this intermediate range order
is disrupted. Such structural disruptions are correlated to lower viscosities,
which provide opportunities for the development of superior electrolytes for
both enhanced battery and electrical double-layer technologies. In this project,
the Margulis and Castner teams are seeking to understand whether ionic liquids
with certain combinations of ions will further disrupt intermediate range order.
Computational molecular dynamics studies guide and explain experimental results,
including those from high-energy X-ray experiments at synchrotrons (such as the
Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory), from measurement of ion
diffusivities using nuclear magnetic resonance techniques, and density and
viscosity experiments. Another important aspect of the project is to obtain a
quantitative understanding of the arrangement of the ionic liquid anions and
cations in vacuum or specific solid interfaces. The Castner group is extending
the bulk liquid simulations to include vacuum interfaces, while angle-resolved
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements are providing the density profiles
of specific atoms at the interface. Both the Margulis and Castner groups
continue to participate in both computational studies of ionic liquids and
synchrotron-based X-ray experiments, providing excellent collaborative cross-
training research experiences for younger scientists. Inclusion of Professor
Lall-Ramnarine and her students provides a first research experience for
community college students.