* 1664173
* PREEVENTS Track 2: Understanding Extreme Fire Weather Hazards and Improving Resilience in Coastal Santa Barbara, California
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Richard Church, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,508,987.00

Wildfires at the wildland-urban interface pose significant hazards to people and
the environment and cost billions of dollars. Santa Barbara County in California
encapsulates one of the worst wildfire hazard scenarios affecting highly
populated areas along the west coast of the United States. A significant portion
of the Santa Barbara population resides in mountain areas near canyons and
passes in the wildland-urban interface, and are particularly vulnerable to fires
during extreme weather conditions. Residents use winding narrow roads to leave
these areas, which increases the time needed for mandatory evacuations. Frequent
gusty downslope winds accompanied by rapid warming and decreased relative
humidity are among the most significant fire weather conditions affecting
coastal Santa Barbara. Such conditions have enhanced the severity of 15 major
wildfires since 1955. This project will integrate atmospheric, fire spread and
transportation models to enhance the current understanding of extreme fire
weather regimes and wildfire behavior in the wildland-urban interface in Santa
Barbara County. The main goal of the project is to improve existing fire-weather
forecast methods, increase resilience, and reduce socioeconomic impacts of
wildfires. The project also will improve understanding of the effects of natural
hazards and extreme events on societal preparedness in the context of evacuation
planning. The results of the project can be applied to many other mountain areas
in Southern California where fires present a major hazard. The project will
provide key outreach materials for dissemination to government agencies that
could be available to the public. Moreover, the project supports the development
of new educational courses, and supports the training of graduate students and a
postdoctoral investigator&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop unique
approaches to make substantial intellectual advances in a natural hazard problem
of high impact to society. The research links fire-weather, fire behavior and
evacuation planning and focuses on the coastal area of Santa Barbara County with
a population of over 200,000 people. The project will develop a new framework
centered on the specific objectives of: 1) understanding synoptic-to-mesoscale
mechanisms of downslope windstorms and extreme fire-weather regimes (i.e., gusty
winds, low humidity, high temperature and high vegetation fuels), 2)
investigating probabilities of fire spread and fire-weather risk at the
wildland-urban interface, 3) developing enhanced evacuation strategies using
transportation and land use models and 4) carrying on a comprehensive program to
transfer research findings to Federal, State and Local Agencies and the
community of Santa Barbara. This research will create scenarios to examine
evacuation strategies using transportation modeling, significantly enhancing
understanding of extreme fire weather regimes on various spatial and temporal
scales and improving the present capability to model and forecast these
hazardous events.