* 1664280
* Extending the Theoretical Framework of Numeracy to Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Kevin Hadley, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2020
* USD 306,025.00

Engineering students typically are capable of the procedural aspects of applying
math to their discipline, but may lack conceptual insight into what the math
"says". A common example involves students' abilities to solve problems that
involve translating a given scenario into its corresponding mathematical
representation. In general, numeracy is the ability to translate math into
different representations or state what the math says. Many concepts in
engineering are difficult for students to understand or are built upon
misconceptions regarding how the world works. Mathematical misconceptions
compound this misunderstanding when the engineering concept relies upon high-
level math. Mathematical misconceptions have been studied, particularly for
early childhood, but never under the lens of numeracy for high-level math like
derivatives, which have direct application to engineering concepts. The ultimate
goal of the numeracy field is to prevent numeracy misconceptions (e.g.,
understanding what derivatives represent) from compounding engineering
misconceptions (e.g. the difference between heat and temperature). As such, this
work will formally define the most common numeracy misconceptions and provide a
means for educators to identify these misconceptions among their students. By
knowing what the root misconception is, steps can be taken so it no longer
hinders understanding other discipline-specific concepts.

A major limitation in the current field of numeracy is a lack of insight into
engineering and calculus-based numeracy. Specifically, engineering education
lacks a formal theoretical framework related to engineering numeracy. One
objective of this project is to conduct a comprehensive review of the literature
associated with mathematical misconceptions in engineering fields. What is
learned from summarizing the literature will guide a Delphi Study of experts.
The Delphi Study will obtain consensus from experts on what constitute the core
competencies of engineering numeracy. Prompts to the Delphi surveys will be
influenced by the literature search, and the Delphi Study will provide insight
on how to expand the literature search on engineering numeracy. The resulting
framework will allow researchers to make connections between related works
associated with numeracy in addition to laying the foundation for building
understanding of engineering numeracy misconceptions. Once the theoretical
framework and lexicon are formalized for engineering numeracy, a concept
inventory will be developed to measure and assess numeracy. This concept
inventory will identify strengths and weaknesses of an individual's numeracy
skills to guide strategies on how to improve those skills. The process of
developing this concept inventory will mimic the process used in developing
other concept inventories like the Thermal and Transport Concept Inventory.
Ultimately, creation of an engineering numeracy concept inventory will open up
new areas of research in engineering education.