* 1664242
* Understanding the Formation of Sociotechnical Thinking in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Barbara Moskal, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2021
* USD 362,673.00

The ability to integrate social and technical elements into a unified
sociotechnical way of thinking is an important skill for professional engineers
since engineering takes place in settings that involve people. Unfortunately,
the curricula that engineering students encounter at many engineering colleges
and universities do not provide sufficient education in the area of
sociotechnical thinking. In this project, the research team builds on prior
research to extend sociotechnical education into additional classrooms at two
universities to better understand how students learn to think sociotechnically.
The results from the two new courses, one each in electrical and mechanical
engineering, will be compared to those from the original research project to
better understand barriers and opportunities for such educational practices in
this broader context. The three primary project goals are: 1) to increase
understanding of the processes by which students develop their abilities to
engineer sociotechnically; 2) to advance understanding of how sociotechnical
thinking impacts engineering habits of mind, including specific engineering
values, attitudes, and skills; and 3) to increase understanding of the
transferability of sociotechnical integration methods between courses and
institutions. Key contributions include the creation of new understandings of
the process by which students learn to think sociotechnically and assessment of
the transferability of teaching elements and results from one course and
instructor to two others. An estimated 1000 students over three years will
benefit from new skills, and undergraduate research assistants will further
learn how to conduct engineering education research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research builds upon an earlier grant to examine the processes by which students
acquire sociotechnical thinking in mechanical and electrical engineering courses
and the impacts of sociotechnical integration on their engineering habits of
mind. Data will be collected and analyzed from pre- and post-assessments,
assignments, focus groups, and faculty reflection logs over the course of three
years. The intellectual merit of the research centers on the creation of new
understandings of processes by which students form sociotechnical engineering
attitudes and skills, using triangulation via a combination of quantitative and
qualitative methods to increase validity. The plan to assess transferability to
different classes and universities represents a significant new contribution
compared to prior research. In terms of broader impacts, by better understanding
how approximately 1000 students over three years form, struggle with, and
benefit from sociotechnical thinking, the research can identify the means by
which diverse students acquire sociotechnical engineering attributes that align
with professional practice. The research will also identify specific mechanisms
of transferability to guide sociotechnical learning across engineering
education. The diverse research team will learn from each other, improving
collective understanding of how students develop sociotechnical thinking. A
long-term impact is to inspire broader innovations in sociotechnical engineering
within engineering science core courses and thereby to disrupt the artificial
divide that prioritizes techno-centric thinking within engineering education.