* 1664618
* Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds (Singly and Multiply Charged) and Protonated Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Peter Armentrout, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2020
* USD 660,814.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Peter B. Armentrout of
the Department of Chemistry of the University of Utah and graduate student
researchers are studying the reactivity of electrically-charged species (ions)
with neutral molecules. The chemical systems being studied include transistion
metal ions such as zinc (Zn2+), cadmium (Cd2+) and tungsten (W+), and
biologically relevant molecules such as the amino acids asparagine, glycine and
glutamine. From these experiments, they obtain information about the changes in
energy between reactant and product molecules(thermochemistry) as well as
information about the speed with which these reactions take place (kinetics).
Such quantitative information is of use to a broad range of scientific
endeavors. Professor Armentrout has made an evolving data analysis program
(CRUNCH), freely available to groups worldwide. This program enhances
infrastructure for research. This project involves many students(undergraduate
and graduate) in all aspects of research. Students design and construct
instrumentation, interface data acquisition equipment, propose and conduct
experiments, run computational studies, analyze experimental and theoretical
results, and prepare manuscripts. Opportunities to conduct research at a user
facility in the Netherlands broaden the students' research and cultural
experience further. Outreach efforts by the Professor Armentrout include
participation in the STEM for U Week in which he visits several K-12 classes to
present scientific content and career possibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof.
Armentrout and his graduate students carry out a series of experiments,
exploring the reactivity of cations with neutral reaction partners, using their
guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometer (GIBMS) instruments. Studies include:
(1) electronic state-specific measurements of transition metal cation
reactivity, with an emphasis on quantitative evaluation of spin-orbit effects on
chemical reactivity; (2) measurements of solvation energies of multiply charged
metal ions, including explicit quantification of the potential energy surface
for charge separation channels, emphasizing environmentally and biologically
important examples; (3) binding studies of biologically-relevant molecules to
metal cations and protonated systems, with an emphasis on deamidation of
asparagine (believed to be a major molecular process in aging); (4)
spectroscopic studies of species formed in carbon-hydrogen bond activation
reactions by transition metal cations and of metallated biologically relevant
molecules; and (5) theoretical work to complement all of the experimental
studies in (1) - (4). The research is interdisciplinary, utilizing state-of-the-
art physical and analytical methods. Students receiving training in Professor
Armentrout's laboratory have gone on to positions in academia and industry.