* 1664985
* RUI: Unusual Oxidation and Domino Reactions via Palladium-catalyzed &amp;#945;-Heteroarylation of Ketones
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,11/30/2017
* Lili Ma, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 11/30/2017
* USD 242,979.00

Unusual Oxidation and Domino Reactions via Palladium-catalyzed alpha-
Heteroarylation of Ketones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The preparation of organic
chemicals using palladium catalysts continues to grow in importance in both
fundamental research and industry. Reactions catalyzed by palladium are
extremely useful and used in many different fields of chemistry such as basic
chemicals, dyes, organic light emitting diodes, crop protection chemicals, and
pharmaceutical agents. To further improve and expand these catalytic reactions,
it is imperative to develop a fundamental understanding of the underlying
chemistry in order to discover new chemical transformations, produce fewer
byproducts, and generate less waste. In this project, Dr. Lili Ma is
investigating two types of palladium-catalysis, oxidations and domino
(sequential reaction steps) reactions. Spectroscopic techniques are being used
to understand the fundamental steps of these reactions, and their applications
in green chemistry, ligand design, biochemistry, and medicinal chemistry are
also being explored. Dr. Ma is actively engaged in STEM research activities such
as an international summer research intern program and UR-STEM summer research
program for students without previous research experience. Dr. Ma is also highly
involved in STEM outreach activities such as the STEM day for grade school
students, STEM expo day, and the Saturday Program for Access to Rewarding
Knowledge (SPARK) to improve the education for grade school and high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Lili Ma of Northern Kentucky University is
developing palladium catalysts for unusual oxidation reactions and domino
reactions via direct รก-heteroarylation of ketones. The first reaction under
investigation is a Pd-catalyzed, microwave-assisted synthesis of 1,2-diketones.
The 1,2-diketone products are applied to the synthesis of versatile building
blocks which include heterocyclic rings, diamines and diimines. The second
reaction under investigation is a Pd-catalyzed microwave-assisted, one-pot
domino approach for the synthesis of heteroaryl isocoumarin derivatives. These
efficient organic reactions provide convenient access to building blocks which
are useful for applications ranging from materials chemistry to medicinal
chemistry. Studies of the catalytic cycle are being probed using 1H and 31P NMR
techniques to gain insights on the reaction mechanisms. Dr. Ma is an active
participant in the STEM research and outreach programs. In support of the
broader impacts of the project, her research activities in conjunction with the
department and university STEM programs provide opportunities to recruit and
retain female students, first-generation college students and African
American/Latino research students in the STEM disciplines.