* 1664954
* Metal-Free Functionalization of Electron Rich Aromatic Systems:  ortho-Quinone Methides, Aza-ortho-Xylylenes, and N,N-Dialkylaniline N-Oxides in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* William Chain, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2020
* USD 335,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor William Chain. Professor Chain is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at the University of Delaware. He is developing
new classes of reactions that that are facilitated by reversing the normal
polarity and hence reactivity of molecules. Reversing the polarity means that
molecules that normally behave as if they are negatively charged behave as if
they are positively charged. The change facilitates the formation of a wide
array of new carbon-carbon, carbon-oxygen, carbon-nitrogen, and carbon-sulfur
bonds that lie at the heart of chemical structures that serve many purposes in
industrial, chemical, and medical applications. Professor Chain's research group
provides the highest level of education and training for students at all ages.
It also offers opportunities for students typically underrepresented in science.
Professor Chain is actively engaged in outreach activities in local elementary,
middle, and high schools to promote science education and engagement of students
in science disciplines. These activities include summer research internships in
Professor Chain's laboratory for promising high school seniors. These
internships encourage student interest in university studies and careers in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An array of aromatic substitution reactions have
been described since the seminal work of Charles Friedel and James Crafts in the
mid to late 1800's. Despite this body of work, there are still limitations in
electron-rich settings; functionalization of electron-rich aromatic systems can
be controlled by virtue of a temporary inversion of reactivity. Generating and
engaging highly reactive intermediates in a controlled and predictable manner by
an umpolung strategy is a critical tool set in organic synthesis. Synthetic
strategies in this regard are the manipulation of latent aromatic compounds
and/or the temporary engagement of heteroatom-bound electron pairs and
harnessing these energetic structures to form congested carbon-carbon and
carbon-heteroatom bonds. This award explores two reactivity manifolds available
to phenols and anilines. In the first reactivity manifold, silyl-protected
phenols and anilines are converted to ortho-quinone methides (QOMs) and aza-
ortho-xylylenes (AOXs). These protected species are mixed with silyl enol ethers
or silyl ketene acetals to release both the electrophilic and nucleophilic
participants in conjugate addition reactions by treatment with easily dispensed
and handled fluoride sources. In the second reactivity manifold, anilines are
oxidized to the corresponding N-oxides, which facilitates an array of bond
formations that take advantage of the excision of the weak N-O bond. By virtue
of these mild reaction conditions, the scope and capability of umpolung
reactions with electron rich aromatic rings is expanded. The educational plan
includes outreach to local elementary, middle, and high schools with integration
of high school students into the research program in as research interns.