* 1664912
* Organic Chemistry in Harsh Reaction Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 565,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert J. McMahon of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison investigates the behavior of
organic compounds under harsh conditions of temperature, pressure, or radiation.
These conditions, which are similar to the conditions found in flames
(combustion) or in space, cause the degradation of organic compounds and
generate a complex mixture of highly reactive products. This research provides a
foundation for understanding two very different problems - one involving
combustion and another involving the chemistry of space. Combustion of organic
fuels is central to our nation's energy supply and national economy. A
fundamental understanding of combustion offers the possibility of enhancing the
energy efficiency of fuel combustion and minimizing pollutants (soot) that arise
from incomplete combustion. In interstellar space, it is known that hundreds of
different organic compounds exist throughout the galaxy in environments that are
harsh because they are so hot (near stars) or because they are so cold (far from
stars). The project supports the education of graduate and undergraduate
students. Training in mechanistic organic chemistry provides a valuable
foundation for subsequent careers in industry or academia. Professor Robert J.
McMahon has been a major contributor in developing the Department's Plan for
Broadening Participation and participated in the National Diversity Equity
Workshop series. Professor Robert J. McMahon is also a champion of STEM
education on the UW-Madison campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses issues in mechanistic organic chemistry that are relevant to our
understanding of harsh reaction environments. The current proposal develops
these issues along three major lines: 1) quantum mechanical tunneling in organic
chemistry, 2) spectroscopy and photochemistry of carbon-chain molecules, and 3)
generation, detection, and characterization of key chemical targets by
rotational spectroscopy. The scientific impact of the proposed research reaches
beyond chemistry and cuts across diverse areas of contemporary science. Studies
of spin delocalization and spin polarization underpin the development of new
organic materials with novel electrical and magnetic properties. Studies of
reactive organic species contribute to a fundamental understanding of
combustion. The Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA), an NSF-funded
astronomical interferometer of radio telescopes in northern Chile, is generating
a deluge of new radio-astronomical data, much of which can be interpreted only
by comparison with laboratory spectra of the type that will be obtained through
the proposed studies.