* 1664732
* Chemical bonding via anion photoelectron imaging spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Andrei Sanov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2022
* USD 413,249.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
-A(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrei Sanov at the
University of Arizona is using sophisticated laser techniques combined with a
technique called photoelectron imaging to study chemical bond­ing. This research
targets isolated molecules, as well as molecules undergoing chemical change or
interacting with neighboring species. The broad objective is to uncover the
prin­ci­ples and mechanisms by which all chemical matter binds together in
progressively larger systems: from atoms to mol­e­cu­les, from molecules to
molecular clusters and macromolecules, from mono­mers to poly­mers, and beyond.
The nature of chemical bonding is defined by electrons and it is their behavior
that controls the outcomes of chemical reactions. By capturing images of
electrons ejected from molecular anions (molecules with an extra electron)
interacting with laser light, Professor Sanov and his research group identify
the funda­mental interactions involved in the formation and dissociation of
chemical bonds. This research defines a pedagogical framework for introducing
students to quantum concepts. The program provides continuing training for
undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them for advanced careers in
academia, government labs, and industry. Quantum concepts have relevance to
careers in computing, sensing, and cybersecurity. Prof. Sanov is continuing to
develop photoelectron imaging (which he also refers to as "quantum photography")
as a teaching tool for quantum concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses primarily on transient species, such as radical and diradical reactive
intermediates, as well as complex reactive pathways involv­ing seve­ral
electronic states and/or spin-forbidden transitions. Examples of the specific
systems studied include transient diradicals and the radical species of organic
heterocyclics with important roles in atmospheric chemistry and combustion
processes. In the experiments, the radical and diradical species are accessed by
photodetaching electrons from the corresponding molecular anions. The freed
electrons carry information about both the initial state of the anion and the
final state of the resultant neutral molecule. This information is recorded
spectroscopically, by imaging the photodetached electron distributions,
generated in interactions of the mass-selected target anions with visible or
ultraviolet laser pulses. Additional structural and dynamical insights are
obtained from the quantum-state distribu­tions of the nascent products observed
in photodissociation reactions and in interactions of anions with solvent
molecules. The results are interpreted with the help of electronic-structure
calculations, enabling a comparison of observed quantum states with theoretical
models. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits
resulting from increased knowledge of the structures and thermochemistry of
reactive intermediates and an improved understanding of the general mechanisms
of chemical bonding and reactivity. The project provides opportunities for the
training of students in the design, construction, and operation of advanced
instrumentation and complex theoretical analyses.