* 1664674
* RUI: Time-independent excited state methods for computational screening of photoactive materials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Tim Kowalczyk, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 298,328.00

Tim Kowalczyk of Western Washington University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop simulations that rapidly predict the visible-light
absorption, energy conversion, and emission capabilities of organic materials.
In these materials, the redirection of light energy into a flow of electrons
forms the basis of emerging technologies including flexible solar cells, low-
toxicity flow batteries, and noninvasive light-based therapies for the treatment
of certain cancers. The research supported by this award fills a critical gap in
existing methodology to enable fast computational screening of organic materials
according to their photoactivity. Kowalczyk mentors a predominantly
undergraduate team of student researchers in the development and application of
these simulations to understand the behavior of light-absorbing materials both
in isolation and in complex molecular environments. These rapid screening
simulations are paired with high-accuracy modeling to uncover the details of how
specialized organic dyes use the energy in light to produce the reactive oxygen
species that destroy diseased tissue in photodynamic cancer therapy. Kowalczyk
is linking demonstrations of simulations developed in this award to a program of
undergraduate student-led energy literacy outreach in conjunction with WWU's
Institute for Energy Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kowalczyk and coworkers are
pursuing rapid simulation strategies for photoactive materials screening through
the development, benchmarking assessment, and application of time-independent
excited state methods within the density-functional tight-binding (DFTB)
formalism. This research seeks to transform the nascent time-independent DFTB
(TI-DFTB) approach into a practical, computationally efficient strategy for
photoactive materials screening as well as for multi-scale excited-state
simulations in condensed phases. The TI-DFTB molecular dynamics simulations
developed in this award enable efficient conformational sampling on excited-
state potential energy surfaces with a self-consistent, quantum mechanical
treatment of the molecular environment. Simple chemical descriptors are
extracted from TI-DFTB excited-state simulations to characterize the
photosensitization of singlet oxygen by a range of organic chromophores. This
award supports the training and mentoring of a diverse group of undergraduate
and masters-level research students at a primarily undergraduate institution.