* 1664652
* Development of Green Catalytic Coupling Reactions via Unreactive Bond Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Chae Yi, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

To avoid environmental pollution from some chemical processes, extensive
research effort is focused on the development of energy-efficient, "green"
catalytic methods to manufacture beneficial chemicals from petroleum and
biomass. Transition metal catalyzed coupling of molecules with carbon-hydrogen
(C-H) bonds to form new carbon-carbon (C-C) bonds are one such method. These
reactions impact a broad spectrum of applications ranging from petrochemicals to
pharmaceutical agents. Dr. Yi's research group is investigating the scope and
mechanism of these reactions. Dr. Yi's group is applying these reactions to the
syntheses of complex organic molecules, and extending the research to the
syntheses of carbon-nitrogen (C-N) and carbon-oxygen (C-O) bonds. The research
results impact economic and environmental issues important to commodity
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and crop protection chemicals. The Yi group is
actively recruiting and training undergraduate and graduate students from
colleges and universities in the Midwest region. In a collaborative effort with
the NSF-STEM program, the Yi group is hosting undergraduate interns from a local
college (Milwaukee Area Technical College) during the summer. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Yi is investigating the scope and mechanism of
new catalytic sp3 C-H coupling methods of saturated hydrocarbons and their
applications for the synthesis of complex organic molecules. The central theme
of this project is the development of green catalytic coupling methods of C-H
bonds that give desired products without forming toxic and wasteful byproducts.
The project is also developing novel catalytic coupling methods via C-C and C-X
(X = N, O) bond activation for biomass-relevant substrates. Catalytic C-C and
C-X bond activation methods are of fundamental importance with enormous
synthetic and economic potential in realizing cost-effective and environmentally
benign syntheses of petroleum and biomass feedstocks. The proposed project is
aiming to develop expedient syntheses of both bio-based materials and
pharmaceutical agents, which can bear significant economic and environmental
benefits to society in terms of designing next generation of energy-efficient
and environmentally sustainable catalytic processes. Professor Yi's research is
also providing education and training in organometallic chemistry and
homogeneous catalysis for graduate and postgraduate workers in his group. In a
collaborative effort through a NSF-STEM program, the PI's group is hosting
undergraduate interns from a local college (Milwaukee Area Technical College)
during the summer.