* 1664266
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Engineering Pathways and Their Impact on Community and Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Rachel Kajfez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2021
* USD 208,605.00

The first year of an engineering program is a critical time period for
undergraduate students who are evaluating whether or not they should continue in
engineering. As a result, numerous first-year programs, courses, and experiences
exist, with new ones created each year. While first-year engineering education
is heavily dependent on the history, design, and political structure of the host
institution, it remains important to use research results to inform the creation
and alteration of the first-year engineering courses, programs, and experiences.
Recent research investigations have generated knowledge of the differences in
course structure and content if first-year engineering courses. However, faculty
and administrators designing first-year engineering education commonly ask
questions that are not addressed by current literature, such as "Is it better
for students to have a common first-year experience or one that is discipline
specific?" or "Should transfer students have a different course than freshmen?"
While it is likely that neither is better or worse, there are differences that
must be investigated so faculty and administrators can make informed decisions
regarding changes to first-year engineering education to enhance the student
experience for all. This study intends to clarify how first-year engineering
structure (e.g., common engineering, discipline specific), content (e.g.,
design, problem solving, academic success), and timing (e.g., one or two
semesters) help or hinder students pursuing a variety of engineering
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a three-phase exploratory qualitative
case study employing individual interviews and focus groups, this study attempts
to answer the research question: how do students who are pursuing engineering
degrees through pathways that vary with respect to first-year engineering
structure, content, and timing describe their experience participating in
engineering communities of practice and their emerging engineering identities?
Through the community of practice framework, this research determines what
communities of practice are formed during first-year engineering and their
relation to engineering identity in diverse first-year engineering experiences.
The researchers are evaluating the differences in student development through
the various experiences, focusing on the impacts of structure, content, and
timing. Finally, the study investigates the alignment between institutional
goals and the student experience. This project has four goals: 1) To understand
the first-year engineering experience and the effects of that experience on
students' engineering identity development; 2) To develop recommendations for
promoting engineering communities of practice in first-year programs and
courses; 3) To further the field's understanding of early engineer formation
through triangulated data points; and 4) To develop design strategies for
meeting institution-specific first-year engineering development goals. These
goals have substantial positive impact on engineering education because they
ensure that changes made in first-year engineering are beneficial and help
ensure the success of first-year engineering students. Related to intellectual
merit, this research parses out how first-year engineering structure, content,
and timing help or hinder students' communities of practice and engineering
identities to provide concrete evidence for methods that effectively support or
oppose students' development and retention in the major.