* 1664172
* SI2-SSI: LIMPID: Large-Scale IMage Processing Infrastructure Development
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Nirav Merchant, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,436,422.00

Scientific imaging is ubiquitous: From materials science, biology, neuroscience
and brain connectomics, marine science and remote sensing, to medicine, much of
the big data science is image centric. Currently, interpretation of images is
usually performed within isolated research groups either manually or as
workflows over narrowly defined conditions with specific datasets. This LIMPID
(Large-scale IMage Processing Infrastructure Development) project will have a
transformative impact on such discipline-centric workflows through the creation
of an extensive and unique resource for the curation, distribution and sharing
of scientific image analysis methods. The project will create an image
processing marketplace for use by a diverse community of researchers, enabling
them to discover, test, verify and refine image analysis methods within a shared
infrastructure. As a freely available, cloud-based resource, LIMPID will
facilitate participation of underrepresented groups and minority-serving
institutions, as well as international scientists, allowing them to
address questions that would otherwise require expensive software. The potential
impacts of the project are significant: from wide dissemination of novel
processing methods, to development of automatic methods that can leverage data
and human feedback from large datasets for software training and validation. For
the broader scientific community, this immediately provides a resource for joint
data and methods publication, with provenance control and security. This in turn
will facilitate faster development and deployment of tools and foster new
collaborations between computer scientists developing methods and scientific
users. The project will prepare a diverse cadre of students and researchers,
including women and members of under-represented groups, to tackle complex
problems in an interdisciplinary environment. Through workshops, participation
at scientific meetings, and summer undergraduate research internships, a broad
community of users will be engaged to actively contribute to all aspects of
research, development, and training during the course of this
project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is to create a large
scale distributed image processing infrastructure, the LIMPID, though a
broad,  interdisciplinary collaboration of researchers in databases, image
analysis, and sciences.  In order to create a resource of broad appeal, the
focus will be on three types of image processing: simple detection and labelling
of objects based on detection of significant features and leveraging recent
advances in deep learning, semi-custom pipelines and workflows based on popular
image processing tools, and finally fully customizable analysis routines.
 Popular image processing pipeline tools will be leveraged to allow users to
create or customize existing pipeline workflows and easily test these on large-
scale cloud infrastructure from their desktop or mobile devices. In addition, a
core cloud-based platform will be created where custom image processing can be
created, shared, modified, and executed on large-scale datasets and apply novel
methods to minimize data movement. Usage test cases will be created for three
specific user communities: materials science, marine science and neuroscience.
An industry supported consortium will be established at the beginning of the
project towards achieving long-term sustainability of the LIMPID
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science and Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.