* 1664572
* Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Reaction Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 673,390.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) and Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Programs of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Marsha I. Lester of the University of Pennsylvania is
investigating the chemical properties of reactive atmospheric intermediates that
release hydroxyl radicals, which are fragments of the water molecule, with one
hydrogen atom missing. Hydroxyl radicals are a key oxidant in the atmosphere and
often called the atmosphere's detergent. Professor Lester and her group are
exploring atmospheric chemical reactions that produce hydroxyl radicals. Their
work is leading to a better understanding of the troposphere, the lowest part of
the atmosphere, where we live and breathe, and thus has potential benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The reactive intermediates that give rise to
hydroxyl radicals in the atmosphere are produced by reactions of ozone with
isoprene, a small molecule that is produced in large quantities by plants, and
other alkenes (often called "volatile organic compounds"). When formed, these
intermediates have enough internal energy that they spontaneously fall apart
into an organic fragment and a hydroxyl radical, in a process known as
"unimolecular decay," or react with other molecules. The problem is a difficult
one because the intermediates are large and complex, and understanding their
chemistry requires the use of state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical
methods. Professor Lester and her group produce these reactive intermediates in
the laboratory, and study their unimolecular decay and light-induced
dissociation processes using action spectroscopy and theoretical modeling. The
students working with Professor Lester gain experience in sophisticated
experimental and theoretical methods that probe the physical properties of
molecules and chemical reactions, and thus a significant broader impact of the
project is its contribution to the training of future scientists.