* 1664396
* Documenting Domaaki, an Endangered Indo-Aryan Language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Chris Donlay, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2021
* USD 168,269.00

Many of the estimated 7000 languages worldwide have not been documented or
analyzed, meaning linguists lack a comprehensive understanding of their
grammatical systems. When such languages lack a writing system and the remaining
speakers are elderly, they are especially susceptible to erosion and loss. In
situations such as these, there is an urgent need to document and analyze the
languages while there are still fluent speakers. This work not only preserves
the language for its speakers but also produces language data that can advance
theoretical linguistics and typological studies. This project will document one
of the least known languages in a highly diverse linguistic region. The
importance of this project lies in its ability to understand the genetic
relationships between languages, its potential to deepen the linguistic
understanding of grammatical features poorly understood in the world's
languages, and to better understand the historical development of a language
family. Broader impacts include fostering an international scientific
partnership in a geopolitically significant part of the world. Such
documentation efforts support the national interest by facilitating soft
diplomacy through the scientific training of international colleagues. Another
broader impact is the potential to test and transform the technology of
documentation at a distance, expanding the tools available to linguists for
documenting languages where travel is restricted or otherwise challenging. Areas
of dense linguistic diversity often lie in remote regions, so innovations in
field methods could enable high quality documentation of more languages than is
currently possible. The project will also expand the language documentation
capabilities of the local university partner, setting the stage for future
documentation projects in this particular linguistically diverse region.

This project will document and analyze Domaaki, a highly endangered and
underdocumented Indo-Aryan language spoken in only two villages in northern
Pakistan. This region, and the nearby region of India, is estimated to have
around 50 distinct languages from six different language families. The project
brings together a team of linguists from the U.S. and Pakistan, building on an
existing partnership between San Jos√© State University and the University of
Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The momentum of this partnership, started through a U.S.
State Department program, will enable the creation of a publicly-accessible
digital corpus of the language. The corpus will consist of audio and video
recordings from speakers in both villages in a variety of contexts, such as
ceremonies, folk stories, spontaneous conversation and songs. The recordings
will be transcribed, annotated and translated into English and Urdu, which will
allow for in-depth analysis of Domaaki's grammatical structures. Although much
is yet to be learned about the language, constructions involving aspectual
auxiliaries, split ergativity and switch-reference converbs will be rich areas
of scientific investigation, especially with regard to how they are used in
spontaneous discourse. These data will shed further light on the Indo-Aryan
family and Domaaki's place within it, including its similarity to close relative
Romani. The resulting corpus and annotations will be of use to linguists,
anthropologists and NGOs in the region and beyond.