* 1664052
* EAGER:  Alternative defensive mechanisms of autotrophs from harmful reactive oxygen species
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Eric Milbrandt, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 54,027.00

Cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) are capable of thriving in a
variety of environments. Ecological disturbances often favor growth of
cyanobacteria because of their capability to adapt to rapid changes in the
environment. Sometimes changes in environmental conditions can result in dense
populations of cyanobacteria, (algal bloom) and they may also produce high
concentrations of toxins (cyanotoxins) that kill fish and are a hazard to
humans. The goal of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to test whether cyanotoxins have an important alternative biochemical
and ecological function, namely, to protect the cyanobacteria by removing
hydrogen peroxide. If this proves to be true, it would transform our
understanding of the structure and function of freshwater lakes. The results
from this EAGER project may also lead to more effective and economical
management of harmful cyanobacerial blooms. Cyanotoxins released during harmful
algal blooms can pose health risks, and require millions of dollars to
decontaminate freshwater supplies. The project will also include research
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, with efforts to
broaden participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important
environmental gradients is formed by oxygen, and its availability is fundamental
to the distribution patterns of life. Cyanobacteria were the first lineage to
establish oxygen-producing photosynthesis. Cyanobacterial photosynthesis
captures solar energy, but it comes at the risk of producing reactive oxygen
species such as hydrogen peroxide. The development of a cellular process capable
of handling intracellular reactive oxygen molecules was key to the evolution of
cyanobacterial photosynthesis. This EAGER project will test an intriguing
hypothesis about why cyanobacteria produce cyanotoxins, that they function to
sequester hydrogen peroxide, or otherwise convert it to a non-reactive form. In
this project, toxic and non-toxic cyanobacterial strains will be compared with
respect to hydrogen peroxide production. A new hydrogen peroxide microsensor
will be used to examine the microscale distribution of hydrogen peroxide in thin
surface lake water to determine whether (consistent with the hypothesis) it is
inversely proportional with the abundance of toxin-producing cyanobacteria.
Finally, studies will determine whether the ability to isolate and grow novel
cyanobacteria in culture can be improved by adding alpha-keto acids to scavenge
any hydrogen peroxide produced by cells.