* 1664915
* SusChEM: Stereoselective Polymerization Catalysis of Biomass Monomers by Chiral Transition-Metal and Organic Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Eugene Chen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division support the project by Professor
Eugene Chen. Professor Chen is a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry
at Colorado State University. He is developing new methods of chemical catalysis
for the synthesis of new types of plastics (polymers). These new plastics are
renewable, meaning that they are prepared from grown feedstocks, and thus are
sustainable. The second feature of these new polymers is that they have regular
and well-controlled (stereoregular) chemical structures. Plastics with these
characteristics have better physical properties for many applications. These two
properties, stereoregularity and renewability, are important for new
applications of plastics in the modern economy. The proposed research
encompasses diverse areas of chemistry, materials science, and sustainability,
thereby providing an excellent opportunity for training and teaching of
students, including underrepresented minorities and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study addresses three currently
unmet challenges still facing both the metal catalyzed and organocatalyzed
polymerizations of acrylic monomers. First, existing chiral metal catalysts show
high stereoselectivity in the polymerization of linear, petroleum-based acrylics
but lack of stereochemical control over the polymerization of biomass-derived
compact cyclic acrylics. Hence, the first specific objective of the work is to
design advanced chiral transition-metal catalysts, assisted by theory, to enable
stereoselective polymerization of such challenging bio-derived cyclic acrylic
monomers. Second, the recently developed organocatalyzed proton-transfer
polymerization can convert diacrylics uniquely into biodegradable unsaturated
polyesters, but the current polyester product is an amorphous non-crystalline
material, thus limiting its application. Accordingly, the second specific
objective of the work is to develop the stereoselective proton-transfer
polymerization for the synthesis of stereoregular crystalline unsaturated
polyesters. Third, the current organocatalytic conjugate-addition polymerization
of acrylic monomers produces only achiral acrylic polymers. Thus, the third
specific objective of the work is to establish asymmetric organopolymerization
of acrylic monomers to produce optically active chiral polymers. The education
plan includes training and teaching of a diverse study body with complementary
experimental and computational methods employed in this catalytic chemistry
research, as well as for educating students and the general public about the
central role of chemistry in addressing the global sustainability challenges.