* 1664261
* I-Corps: A C. elegans model using human genes for high-throughput screening
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Federico Sesti, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
improvement of drug discovery. Pharmaceutical companies screen millions of
compounds before a single agent is selected to undergo human clinical trials.
Initial screening of potential therapeutics is conducted in cell culture assays
that allow for low-cost evaluation, but are limited in determining therapeutic
relevance. This limitation is overcome by additional screening in multiple
mammalian models where potential compounds are further assessed for their
therapeutic effects, toxicology etc. Yet, the expenses and time associated with
mammalian model testing means that only a small percentage of compounds that
pass cellculture screening will make it to this stage, effectively overlooking
thousands of compounds that may be potent therapeutics. This project?s
technology aims at bypassing this bottleneck. It is labor friendly and cost-
effective but at the same time will enable companies to test compounds efficacy
on an animal model rather than cells in culture thus allowing for further
informed decision making in regards to the development of their
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project offers an innovative method
to screen compounds targeting the actin cytoskeleton and its associated genes.
C. elegans worms are engineered to replace a cytoskeletal gene, OSG-1, with its
human homolog, (ARHGEF10), and worms lacking OSG-1, (OSG-1 KO), are maintained
in 96-well plates each containing a different compound. Worms are subjected to a
4-hr heat shock and scored for survival. Because the mortality of OSG-1 KO worms
is significantly higher than ARHGEF10, only compounds that target the actin
cytoskeleton pathway can differentially change the mortality rates of the KO
compared to the ARHGEF10 worm. Compounds that are efficacious but affect the
mortality rates of the KO and the ARHGEF10 worm to the same extent do not
impinge on the actin cytoskeleton pathway (they represent a second cut because
they might act on pathways and mechanisms that are not conserved in humans).
Worms are engineered to express GFP through most of the body. Only living worms
express GFP whereas dead ones do not. Survival assessment only requires scoring
fluorescent worms. With costs only accruing from agar and plate costs, early
compounds can be screened for potency at a fraction of the cost of traditional
early phase drug discovery methods.