* 1664494
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the Documentary Record for Two Algonquian Languages of the Great Lakes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Adam Haviland, Saginaw Chippewa Tribal College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2022
* USD 119,592.00

The documentation of a speech community records the linguistic practices of that
community, for example, recording both male and female speakers and documenting
indigenous knowledge about the natural world. By diversifying the pool of
documenters and broadening participation of underrepresented groups, a more
comprehensive record of linguistic behavior can result. This project will
diversify and build corpora for two endangered Algonquian languages, by
cultivating indigenous language specialists to record new documentation of these
Native American languages, and to transcribe and translate archival recordings.
In the United States, the Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of these languages. The number of Native Americans documenting their
own language is small, but growing. This project also has the potential to
increase scholarly understanding of how a record's comprehensiveness can be
addressed when heritage learners of the language lead the projects. It will
record previously undocumented women's language, historical narratives from
boarding school, and traditional knowledge of the natural world, plus make
archival recordings usable through transcription. This will increase scholarly
understanding of linguistic change in Algonquian languages and of scientific
knowledge in ethnobotany and other areas. It will create publicly available
corpora for testing linguistic hypotheses. Broader impacts include collaborative
professional development opportunities in the language sciences for indigenous
scholars and research opportunities for Native American undergraduates. It will
also build capacity in linguistics and language documentation at two tribal
colleges and result in materials usable in language revitalization in schools
and regional communities. The project is co-funded by the NSF Tribal Colleges
and Universities Program (TCUP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaborative partnership between the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee and
Lac Courte Oreilles Ojibwa Community College and Saginaw Chippewa Tribal
College. It will increase the use, documentation, instruction and research of
two endangered Algonquian languages indigenous to the Great Lakes area:
Chippewa, also known as Anishinaabemowin; and Menominee, also known as
Mamaceqtaw. Menominee is the heritage language of only one community in
Wisconsin while Chippewa is the heritage language of over 200 communities in the
United States and Canada. Both languages are extremely endangered today with
very few first-language speakers and no households using Chippewa or Menominee
as the primary language. Each institution has tailored its project to local
community needs, aimed at filling the gaps in the existing record and making
archival materials usable through transcription. The merit and impact of this
project lie in the kinds of information encoded in the recordings, as well as
the creation of a corpora of transcriptions to conduct novel linguistic
investigations. Results include the documentation of fluent women speakers of
Chippewa on topics such as astronomy, ethnobotany and the geosciences, among
others. Another component will record elders' historical recollections,
including Chippewa narratives of boarding schools. Menominee archival recordings
will be transcribed in collaboration with the Great Lakes Inter Tribal Council
and new recordings will be made in partnership with Menominee teachers and
students in the region.