* 1664696
* CNIC: U.S.-Swedish Research on the Structure and Dynamics of Lipopolysaccharides (LPS)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2018
* USD 13,705.00

This one-year research initiation project through the Catalyzing New
International Collaborations (CNIC) program links a new U.S.-Swedish team, led
by Wompil Im at the University of Kansas and GÃ¶ran Widmalm at Stockholm
University, for the purpose of developing cooperative research on the structure
and dynamics of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) using computational and experimental
techniques. An LPS molecule is a complex amphiphatic compound consisting of
lipid A, a core oligosaccharide, and an O-antigen polysaccharide with repeating
units. These large and complex LPS molecules are vital to both the structural
and functional integrity of gram-negative bacteria. The complexity of LPS makes
them particularly challenging to study. With this support, the U.S.-Swedish team
will combine expertise in both computational and NMR techniques to improve our
understanding of the structure and dynamics of individual glycosidic sugar
linkages and the impacts of the linkages on the overall LPS structures. Also of
interest are the differences and similarities of LPS structure and dynamics in
solution and bilayer environments. Peliminary answers to these important
fundamental questions may have broader impact by contributing to future research
yielding new knowledge of the biological impact of LPS molecules in mammals,
such as the cause of fever, septic shock, or other deleterious physiological
effects.

Responding to recent recommendations in the 2012 book "Transforming
Glycoscience: A Roadmap for the Future," published by The National Academies
Press, the U.S. and Swedish partners also plan to integrate an education
component with the research activities of the collaboration in the area of
glycans, a general term for carbohydrates, sugars, and saccharides. In addition
to providing graduate student training for one participant from the University
of Kansas, the PI will involve two undergraduate students for early career
experience with computational glycan biophysics. Therefore while abroad, each
U.S. student should gain valuable exposure to an array of forefront
computational and NMR techniques used by the U.S.-Swedish team.