* 1664629
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Toward Robust and Scalable Discovering of Significant Associations in Massive Genetic Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Xiang Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 122,662.00

A fundamental challenge in life sciences is the characterization of genetic
factors that underlie phenotypic differences. Thanks to the advanced sequencing
technologies, an enormous amount of genetic variants have been identified and
cataloged. Such data hold great potential to understand how genes affect
phenotypes and contribute to the susceptibility to environmental stimulus.
However, the existing computational methods for analyzing and interpreting the
high-throughput genetic data are still in their infancy. The objective of this
project is to systematically investigate the computational and statistical
principles in modeling and discovering genetic basis of complex phenotypes. The
proposed research provides answers to the following fundamental questions in
genetic association study: (1) How to effectively and efficiently assess
statistical significance of the findings? (2) How to account for the relatedness
between samples in genetic association study? (3) How to accurately capture
possible interactions between multiple genetic factors and their joint
contribution to phenotypic variation? In particular, the team will develop a
multi-layer indexing structure for robust and scalable multiple testing
correction, a general phylogenetic tree based framework to account for local
population structure, and an ensemble learning approach for studying joint
effect of multiple genetic factors.

The research provides a computational framework for large scale genotype-
phenotype association study. The outcome includes novel methods for addressing
sample relatedness, capturing confounding factors, and controlling multiple
testing errors which are widely applicable for many common data mining tasks
including frequent pattern mining, multitask learning, and ensemble learning
among others. Collectively, the theoretic framework and algorithms will provide
the research community much better tools to dissect complex relationships
between genotypes and phenotypes, and gain deeper understanding of the roles of
environmental stimuli.

The proposed research directly involves applications in large scale genome-wide
association study. Additional applications exist for biologists in their study
of gene-gene interactions, metabolic pathways and protein-protein interaction
networks. Beyond the applications proposed here, the algorithms can find wide
applications in other areas of biology as well as other scientific disciplines.
The methods will be evaluated thoroughly by both simulation and real data
collected from yeast, mouse, and human. Early versions of the applications will
be made available to the biological community through a web-based server to
evaluate efficacy of the methods and to apply them to a broader set of problems.
The research findings and methods will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate instruction. The team already offer classes in computational
biology and data-mining where the proposed tools will aid students in
comprehending abstract concepts and data relations. They will also continue
their commitment to supporting multidisciplinary educational experiences, and
service to the research community, as well and proving research opportunities
for undergraduate students.