* 1664941
* Metal Chalcogenide and Pnictide OER Catalysts:  The Impact of the Crystalline Precursor on the Active Amorphous Catalyst
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Charles Mullins, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Metal Chalcogenide and Pnictide OER Catalysts: The Impact of the Crystalline
Precursor on the Active Amorphous
Catalyst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing earth-abundant, cheap
materials that can chemically transform water into oxygen and hydrogen is an
important goal in the quest to build a sustainable energy future. This catalytic
process, referred to as water electrolysis or water-splitting, is used to
produce hydrogen in an environmentally-friendly manner. Hydrogen is employed in
many industries (e.g., petroleum processing) and could also be used as a fuel
for transportation as well as other purposes. Currently metal-chalcogenide
(e.g., nickel and sulfur) and metal-pnictide (e.g., cobalt and phosphorous)
materials show great promise as earth-abundant compounds with good catalytic
properties for the water oxidation reaction (which is one of the two reactions
involved in water splitting) but their true chemical compositions and structures
are not well-understood. In this project, Dr. Buddie Mullins is conducting
experiments on metal-chalcogenide and metal-pnictide materials and studying
their chemical and structural transformations during the water oxidation
reaction. Dr. Mullins is actively involved in scientific public awareness and
promotion activities through his research that encourage the participation and
intellectual development of students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities include laboratory internships
for high school students and college undergraduates with the aim of encouraging
these students (especially women and those historically underrepresented in
STEM) to pursue careers in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Buddie
Mullins is working to verify or disprove the hypothesis that (i) metal-
chalcogenide (MC) and metal-pnictide (MP) electrocatalysts are simply precursors
to highly active metal-oxide (MO) electrocatalysts and (ii) that the underlying
layers of MC or MP don't influence the catalytic performance. It is clear that
the outer layers of MCs and MPs transform into MOs under water oxidation
conditions. During this transformation an amorphous high surface area film is
created that is more catalytically active than its' crystalline oxide analog.
Professor Mullins is studying the mechanism by which the amorphous film is
created as well as its enhanced activity. He is also synthesizing both
nanocolumnar and dense films of MCs and MPs for use as model electrocatalysts by
glancing angle physical vapor deposition, which can reproducibly create
electrocatalyst films. Mullins is probing the films with many different ex situ
characterization techniques, including molecular beams and thermal desorption
mass spectrometry for characterization and measurement of the surface area. Dr.
Mullins is actively involved in promoting science and science education to
students of all ages and especially those historically underrepresented in the
sciences. This is accomplished via videos, internships and public
demonstrations; these activities support the broader impacts of the research
project.