* 1664708
* NSF Career:  Enamine-Metal Lewis Acid Bifunctional Catalysts for Asymmetric Organic Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/21/2016,02/28/2017
* Hong Wang, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2017
* USD 81,139.00

Professor Hong Wang of Miami University Oxford Campus is supported by the
Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
bifunctional catalysts combining a metal center with an organocatalytic center
on a single molecule for potential applications in asymmetric organic
transformations. Bifunctional enamine-metal Lewis acid catalysts will be
synthesized and used for asymmetric carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bond
forming reactions which cannot be achieved without the synergistic action of the
two catalytic centers. Direct aldol condensations with ketones and inverse-
electron-demand hetero-Diels-Alder reactions will be investigated. The catalyst
design allows for the combination of different amine bases with different
metals, which broadens the spectrum of applicability of these bifunctional
catalytic systems to a wide range of organic reactions. The development of Lewis
acid-Lewis base bifunctional systems is challenging because the acid and the
base are prone to self-quenching and inactivation. The proposed research
promises to circumvent this problem by judicious molecular architecture with
sufficient flexibility to bring the organic base and the metal Lewis acid into
close proximity but with enough rigidity and steric hindrance to prevent their
binding. The proposed research could significantly impact asymmetric catalysis
and the synthesis of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The results will be
integrated into a new graduate course in catalysis and an outreach plan will be
implemented to provide summer research experience to minority undergraduate
students and their teachers from Texas A&M University-Kingsville and to high
school teachers from area high schools.