* 1664661
* Multi-Excited-State Phosphorescent Molecules With Photoinduced Structural Changes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Biwu Ma, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 363,682.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Biwu Ma of the Department of
Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Florida A&amp;M University - Florida
State University College of Engineering is developing and studying a new class
of phosphorescent metal complexes with interesting photophysical properties. The
goal of this research is to gain fundamental understanding of the excited state
dynamics and kinetics of these molecules with controlled potential energy
surfaces (PES) and photoinduced structural changes (PSC), which have potential
applications in various areas, ranging from molecular electronics, solar energy
conversion devices, to light emitting diodes. The research contains
multidisciplinary elements of molecular design, synthesis, structural
characterization, spectroscopy, computation, and device, which is well suited
for an integrated education of new generation scientists. The research group has
a rich history of training scientists at all levels, including undergraduates
and those from underrepresented groups. Outreach activities involving K-12
students are also a part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoinduced
structural changes (PSC) can lead to the formation of multiple excited states.
However, precise control of PSC to create multiple excited states in equilibrium
is challenging. The group developed a class of pyrazolate bridged platinum
binuclear complexes that possesses multiple excited states in equilibrium as a
result of PSC. To further the study of this class of interesting molecules,
ultrafast time-resolved emission spectroscopy and transient absorption
spectroscopy are utilized to gain fundamental understanding of the optical
transactions and structural change processes, and the effects of molecular shape
and electronic structure on the excited state dynamics and kinetics of these
molecules. In addition, new multi-excited-state photoactive molecules with
tunable PES and PSC are synthesized, with which a new type of molecular
photosensing devices can be developed, considering their unique capability of
converting photonic energy to potential energy to trigger structural
rearrangements with distinct optical and electronic properties.