* 1664070
* Building a Hawaiian Spoken Language Digital Repository
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Keiki Kawaiaea, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 339,526.00

The goal of understanding the range of human linguistic features and the limits
on their distribution requires in-depth data sets from each language in order to
make and test scientifically valid hypotheses. This study will contribute to
that major goal by creating a digital corpus of speech and transcripts of an
endangered language for which no corpus currently exists. The corpus will result
in a large publicly available data set, available for researchers to make new
queries or to test the reproducibility of prior findings. This will foster
robust and reliable research on a diversity of subjects. Broader impacts include
the integration of this corpus into immersion-based language education from pre-
school to university and into the curriculum of the natural sciences and beyond.
The project will also engage underrepresented groups as citizen scientists and
will create a publicly available corpus of an endangered Indigenous U.S.
language, Hawaiian. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of the indigenous languages of the U.S. In addition, the project will
broaden participation in the social sciences by the training of Native Hawaiian
language scholars and is co-funded by the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities
Program (TCUP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team will build
Kani'âina, the digital archive of recordings and transcripts of spoken Native
Hawaiian. Summarily, Kani'âina will be a digital repository that will (i) allow
interactive access to an estimated 900-1200 hours of extant recordings of spoken
Native Hawaiian and transcripts through a bilingual digital library interface
that is already arguably the single most-accessed site for Hawaiian language
materials; (ii) properly preserve those recordings and transcripts permanently
in a world-class OLAC-compliant digital archive (thus making them discoverable
to other scientists); (iii) implement a procedure for crowd-sourced
transcription of additional recordings from e.g. the public and from University
of Hawai'i students of Hawaiian language; and (iv) serve as a catalyst for a
cross-campus graduate educational exchange between students at two campuses of
the University of Hawai'i. The project will use participatory archiving of
language documentation, enabling the public to access and contribute to the
transcription and content-tagging of recordings of spoken language. Project
activities include the transcription and content-tagging of recordings of spoken
language. The merit and impact of this project center on the kinds of
information that are encoded in the recordings themselves. Making this
information freely available will in turn make a wide range of scientific and
ethno-scientific topics accessible and will be revolutionary for STEM education
on Hawaiian subjects, including linguistics, ecological knowledge, environmental
sustainability, and the historical anthropology of the Hawaiian islands. This
project is a cross-campus collaboration between the University of Hawai'i at
Hilo, a US Department of Education Native Hawaiian Serving Institution and the
University of Hawai'i at Mânoa.