* 1664964
* Developing Metallacrown Scaffolds for Luminescence, Magnetism and Supramolecular Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Vincent Pecoraro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 560,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vincent Pecoraro of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor is developing new classes
of metallamacrocylic complexes called metallacrowns. These classes of complexes
exhibit technologically important properties in magnetism and imaging. They have
potential applications in near-infrared luminescent sensors, inorganic light
emitting diodes and bar code labels, and quantum computing. The imaging agents
are patentable and discussions are underway for licensing for cell fixation and
necrosis assays. The project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and
biological chemistry. It is well suited to the education of scientists at all
levels and across international boundaries. It also serves as the basis for a
Marie Curie International Research Staff Exchange Scheme program that brings
junior scientists across Europe to the US for training and students from
Professor Vincent Pecoraro's group to Europe. Outreach activities involving K-12
students and for students underrepresented in science are also part of the
funded project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallacrowns display a rich array of
photophysical properties, including the highest reported quantum yields and
brightness for molecular Lanthanide complexes emitting in the near infrared
spectral region. In addition, binuclear lanthanides encapsulated within
diamagnetic metallacrowns show energy gaps that are appropriate for exploitation
as qubits for the development of quantum computers. The proposed work exploits
these properties to generate luminescent dendrimers and Janus dendrimers for
imaging applications. The simple metallacrown motif will also be used as nodes
to develop luminescent metal organic frameworks that may be used for sensing
applications. These studies broaden the range of synthetic possibilities for
both dendrimers and metal organic frameworks by leading to new structure types
with either magnetic or luminescent properties.