* 1664815
* SCH: EXP: Collaborative Research: Design of a wearable biosensor system with wireless network for the remote detection of life threatening events in neonates
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Premananda Indic, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 144,754.00

In the United States, one in eight infants is born prematurely. These high risk
infants require specialized monitoring of their physiology not only in Neonatal
Intensive Care Units (NICU) but also in home environments. They are prone to
apnea (pause in breathing), bradycardia (slowness of heart) and hypoxia (oxygen
de-saturation), which are life threatening. This project aims at developing a
biosensor system with wireless network for the remote detection and anticipation
of such life threatening events in infants. The proposed research goes beyond
traditional health monitoring systems by incorporating body sensor networks
(BSN) along with advanced signal processing approaches, tailored specifically to
an individual infant's physiology, to accurately detect and anticipate
precursors of life threatening events. The proposed research can have a
significant impact on non-intrusive ambulatory health monitoring for infants
through a wireless biosensor system that integrates lightweight sensor solutions
into the sensing, communication, and computing for monitoring physiology. The
system framework, theories, models, and code developed by this project can be
used by researchers as well as engineers to evaluate the performance of infant
monitoring applications. The project also includes: (1) disseminating the
project information and knowledge to the academic community and industry; (2)
engaging undergraduate, graduate and medical students, especially women and
minorities, into the proposed research; and (3) developing new courses and
revising the existing courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current physiological
monitoring systems used in NICU consist of relatively large sensors attached to
the infants, which are then connected to a data acquisition system with multiple
wires. These sensors along with the wires are a hindrance to the clinical care.
In addition, the existing system cannot be used for home environments because of
the size and cost. While there is an abundance of physiological signals
streaming across NICU monitoring systems, it is challenging for clinicians
caring for preterm infants to determine pathological states, as there is no
method available to translate these signals into validated indices to define
pathology. The primary objective of this proposed research is to explore whether
a dedicated compact device with wearable biosensors along with wireless networks
can be built for the detection and anticipation of life threatening events in
infants in both NICU and home environments. The secondary objective is to
explore whether computational tools that provide real-time indices of cardio-
respiratory risk can be developed to assist clinicians for neonatal care.
Specifically, the project is to develop a comprehensive system, involving four
important components: (1) development of miniature biosensors that can be
attached to infants who are very small and vulnerable; (2) development of
wireless devices with efficient communication protocols that can transmit the
physiological signals from the biosensors; (3) development of efficient signal
processing algorithms that can extract useful information from the biosensor
data for risk stratification and anticipation of life threatening events (data
to knowledge to decisions) and (4) testing and validation of the systems in real
life environment at NICU. The proposed approaches in the project can eventually
lead to a medical device for the remote detection of life threatening events in
infants and also provide guidelines for the design of wearable wireless
biosensor systems for healthcare monitoring applications in general.