* 1664364
* I-Corps: Delirium Prediction and Screening by Non-Invasive Point-of-Care
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Gen Shinozaki, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
reduce negative outcomes associated with delirium. Delirium is a dangerous state
of confusion, with one year mortality as high as 40%, is very common, 20~50%
among general medicine unit, and 70-80% among intensive care unit (ICU),
affecting 2-3 million hospitalized elderly patients annually. Delirium can
result increased hospital stay and increased healthcare costs. To improve the
outcomes associated with delirium, it is critical to detect delirium early on
and initiate appropriate treatment for delirium and the underlining conditions
in a timely manner. Although, various screening instruments and rating scales
for delirium have been implemented in the hospitals, it is still extremely
difficult to identify delirium, because such instruments requires enough
training for hospital staffs, and also there is a challenge of subjectivity.
Thus, such instruments have been shown to have low sensitivity, especially in
busy hospital settings such as ICU. As we live in an aging society, we need
better methods for early detection in more objective
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to detect delirium early on
using a newly created spectral density algorithm to analyze patient's brainwave
signals recorded by a simplified bispectral electroencephalography (EEG) device.
Although it has been shown that generalized slowing brainwave is characteristic
to delirium, due to its complexity of application and necessity of
interpretation by neurology specialist, traditional EEG is not suitable for mass
screening of large volume of high risk elderly patients. However, power spectrum
analysis can reliably calculate different frequency bands of the EEG signals
after filtering artifact effects and has been reported to detect characteristic
EEGs in delirious patients. A preliminary data from a pilot study has shown very
promising data differentiating delirium and normal condition. With continuing
efforts to validate the algorithm and to examine the efficacy of the simplified
bispectral EEG in mass screening for delirium, it is the goal of the project to
implement the approach using simplified EEG device to assist healthcare
providers in clinical practice of delirium assessment and management for better
outcomes with less mortality, shorter lengths of hospital stay, and lower
healthcare cost.