* 1664562
* Detection and Characterization of Precursors to Shear Failure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Laura Pyrak-Nolte, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 398,630.00

Rocks are difficult materials to characterize and monitor because of their
highly heterogeneous nature that leads to complex time- and scale-dependent
behavior. Some of the scale-dependent behavior arises from "defects" or
"mechanical discontinuities" that exist in the rock. These discontinuities range
from the atomic scale, where atom lattices may have irregularities; to the grain
scale, where cracks are pervasive at the grain contacts, and up to the regional
or continental scale where discontinuities such joints occur from the millimeter
scale to faults that range over hundreds of kilometers, such as the North
Anatolian fault or the San Andreas fault. One of the most important limitations
in research and engineering practice on rocks is our inability to detect
accurately the presence of defects and discontinuities inside the rock and to
determine the evolution of discontinuities with stress from external agents.
Current knowledge of rock damage strongly relies on experiments in the
laboratory where direct observations of the surfaces of the rock specimens are
made to observe new crack formation. The objective of the research is to
establish the relationship between mechanical and geophysical responses of rock
under loading to provide a basis for seismic monitoring techniques of rock
systems, and to enable the development of analysis tools to evaluate the
condition of a rock mass during and after construction. The promise of using
elastic wave propagation through fractured rock as an effective monitoring
technique is rooted in previous findings by the two Co-PIs who discovered the
presence of precursors prior to shear failure of frictional discontinuities, in
the form of either distinct maxima or minima in transmitted and reflected waves,
respectively. Advances in our ability to detect impending new damage in the form
of new cracks or slip along pre-existing discontinuities will prevent failures
during construction, ensure long term containment for waste storage, or avoid
earthquakes induced by anthropogenic activities such as mining, underground
fluid storage or deep wastewater injection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of
laboratory experiments will be performed to test the hypotheses that these
precursors (1) result from a reduction in local fracture specific stiffness in
the region monitored by the seismic transducers, and (2) are caused by slip and
damage of the asperities, and the hypothesis that failure along the entire
discontinuity is the result of progressive slip along the discontinuity. The
experiments will consist of subjecting rock joints to biaxial compression
loading, and more specifically to direct shear. Digital Image Correlation and
geophysical methods will be used to monitor slip and slip failure of the joints,
which include wave propagation measurements (both transmitted and reflected
waves, as well as other converted modes). The tests will be conducted on
granite, limestone or sandstone and shale, each rock having different grain size
and anisotropy, and on joints that may be tight or filled with a soil deposit.
Both dry and saturated rock specimens will be investigated to determine the
geophysical signatures associated with changes in rock saturation, and to
identify and quantify the modes that are best-suited for monitoring the
potential shear failure of a discontinuity.