* 1664669
* EAGER:TDM Solar Cells:  Collaborative Research:   30%-Efficient, Stable Perovskite/Silicon Monolithic Tandem Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 03/31/2019
* USD 189,835.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells, which harvest
energy from the sun and generate electricity, are diversifying our energy
portfolio and will be an important part of reducing our dependence on fossil
fuels and preventing undesirable climate change. It is important to make solar
panels as efficient as possible so that the number of panels needed to obtain a
certain amount of power can be reduced in order to save on installation costs.
Tandem cells, comprised of a top cell that harvests the visible portion of the
spectrum and a bottom cell that harvests the infrared portion, are the most
promising way to achieve higher efficiencies. Silicon, which is used in
approximately 92% of the solar panels that are manufactured each year, is ideal
for the bottom cell and typically has 16-21 % efficiency by itself. Perovskite
semiconductors are highly attractive for the top cell because they can be tuned
to have the right bandgap and have efficiency as high as 22%. The objective of
this project is to demonstrate the first 30%-efficient perovskite/silicon tandem
solar cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project
describes plans for a perovskite expert, Professor Michael McGehee, to partner
with a silicon expert, Professor Zachary Holman, to make perovskites/silicon
tandem solar cells. This team has made a prototype two-terminal monolithic
device with a power conversion efficiency of 25.3 %. They hold the world record
for this type of device and are in a very strong position to increase the
efficiency to 30% over the next two years. This development is especially
exciting because their packaged perovskite solar cells have already passed the
PV industry standard damp heat and temperature cycling tests and it is likely
that panels with these cells could be manufactured at a cost of &lt; $100/m2.
The bandgap of perovskites can be tuned from 1.2 eV to 2.3 eV using the
materials set ABX3, where A is a mixture of methylammonium, formamidinium or
cesium, B is a mixture of tin and lead, and X is a mixture of bromine or iodine.
The most important research goal of this project is to find the optimal
combination of these components for making a stable and high-quality
semiconductor with a bandgap of 1.8 eV. The team will thoroughly characterize
the semiconductors it makes to guide the process of optimizing the properties.
Additional research goals of this project are to develop high-mobility TCO
layers for the front of the tandem solar cells, improve the infrared response of
the silicon bottom cell while decreasing its cost via a porous dielectric/metal
rear reflector, and fabricate PDMS layers with scattering textures to be used at
the front of the tandem to reduce reflectance.&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
potential to change our future energy landscape through the development of
efficient yet inexpensive PV technologies. The project will also train a diverse
pool of students and the results will be disseminated broadly. Holman is the PI
of an NSF REU site into which the proposed project will be integrated.
Approximately once every 18 months McGehee gives a lecture that is intended to
be easy to understand even for people who are not yet scientists and posts it on
YouTube. These lectures are typically viewed more than 20,000 times by a wide
variety of people.