* 1664579
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Response to the 2016 M5.8 Pawnee Earthquake: Using MT to map Fluids in Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Kerry Key, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 14,192.00

Since 2008, there has been a dramatic increase in earthquake activity in the
central United States in association with major oil and gas operations. Oklahoma
is now considered one of the most seismically active states. Some of the
earthquakes are occurring near populated cities and also in areas of high
national security such as Cushing, Oklahoma, a major hub of the U.S. oil and gas
pipeline transportation system. Unlike earthquakes in California and Alaska that
can be clearly linked to deformation along plate boundaries, the cause of the
earthquakes in Oklahoma remains a very contentious and highly debated topic.
However, there is an increasing body of scientific evidence to suggest that the
increased level of seismicity is linked to the injection of saline production
wastewaters from drilling activity related to petroleum exploitation. Although
seismic networks are able to detect activity and map its hypocenter, they are
unable to image the distribution of fluids in the fault responsible for
triggering seismicity. The magnetotelluric (MT) technique, uses naturally
occurring electric and magnetic fields measured at Earth?s surface to measure
conductivity structure. The 2016 M5.8 Pawnee, Oklahoma earthquake provides an
unprecedented opportunity for scientists to provide a link between seismicity
and imaging of fluids on or around faults. Thus we will carry out a series of
two-dimensional (2D) profiles located through areas where the fault recently
ruptured and seismic activity is concentrated and also across the faults in the
vicinity that did not rupture. The integration of our results and ongoing
seismic studies will lead to a better understanding of the links between fluid
injection and seismicity. Results of this study can inform decisions by policy-
makers.

Electrical geophysical methods are ideally suited to image fluid bearing faults
since the produced waters are highly saline and hence have a high electrical
conductivity. To date, no study has imaged the fluids in the faults in Oklahoma
and made a direct link to the seismicity. Several injection wells are located
within a 20 km radius of the epicenter; and studies have suggested that
injection of fluids in high-volume wells can trigger earthquakes as far away as
30 km. This proposal will collect MT geophysical data that will constrain the
distribution of fluids in the fault zone that ruptured during the 2016 M5.8
Pawnee earthquake. Because most injection activities have been temporarily
suspended following the September 3, 2016 earthquake, we have the unique
opportunity to capture the state of the fluid induced seismicity process before
the system is altered by additional wastewater injection. Given that seismicity
in in Oklahoma has been met with public outcry, with demands for action by
legislators. However, any decision by stakeholders and policy makers must be
guided by sound science and unbiased data. Geologically informed approaches to
characterizing induced seismicity for inclusion in seismic hazard evaluations is
critical for evaluation of sensitive facilities. As a result, our proposed MT
survey has multi-faceted broader impacts: (1) It will produce data-constrained
results that will lead to a better understanding of migration of wastewater ?
fault interactions. (2) We will produce relevant data that can be used to inform
the decisions of policy-makers and stakeholders when assessing seismic hazards
related to wastewater injection. (3) Our project will engage several students.
Students will assist with the data acquisition and will gain hands-on experience
from MT experts in how to deploy MT instrumentation. At least two of the
students will come from under-represented groups, thereby building a diverse
workforce in science and engineering