* 1665391
* High-Valent Nonheme Iron-Oxo Complexes: Synthesis and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Lawrence Que, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division. Professor Lawrence Que of the University of Minnesota prepares iron
compounds that mimic biological molecules that convert normally unreactive
species to more useful ones. An example is the conversion of methane, the main
component in natural gas, to methyl alcohol, an industrially important
feedstock. Since the biological systems have only fleeting existence, they are
very difficult to study. The model compounds prepared in this project are
designed to be more stable than the biological ones. The additional stability
permits an investigation of exactly how the biological systems function. This
not only reveals basic biochemical information, but also allows the design of
"bio-inspired" catalysts for difficult reactions with industrial and
environmental applications. Additionally, the project educates graduate students
in a multidisciplinary context. The training and development that these students
receive is critically important for preparing the next generation of domestic
science and technology personnel capable of competing in the global marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research is to generate synthetic
analogs of the mononuclear nonheme iron enzymes that activate oxygen. Toward
this goal complexes of doublet spin Fe(IV)=O and Fe(V)=O are prepared and
characterized by X-ray crystallography and spectroscopic methods including EPR,
Mössbauer, resonance Raman, NMR, and X-ray absorption. These methods provide a
detailed insight into the geometric and electronic structures of the complex.
This information is used to understand the electronic factors that govern the
reactivity of a high-valent iron-oxo center. The results guide the development
of catalysts for the oxidations of C-H bonds. This project provides training for
graduate students and requires them to gain expertise in synthesis, design,
spectroscopy, kinetics and mechanism, and to interpret these results in light of
related biochemical and computational studies.