* 1665276
* Metastable electronic states: electronic structure, dynamics, and chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Ksenia Bravaya, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 405,000.00

Electron-molecule interactions often lead to complex chemistry initiated by
electron capture into a temporary state that has enough energy to eject an
electron, yet, lives long enough to trigger a chemical reaction. The lifetime of
this metastable state, therefore, sets the timescale for the chemical
conversion. Metastable electronic states are key intermediates in radiation
damage of biomolecules and they are also routinely formed in highly energetic
environments, e.g. plasmas. This research program proposes development of new
models enabling quantitative predictions of the energies and lifetimes of
metastable electronic states. The outlined computational studies are aimed at
advancing the understanding of the role of metastable states in radiation damage
of biological systems, in photovoltaics, and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the proposed research are three-fold: (i) enabling robust correlated
treatment of Feshbach and multiply-excited resonances; (ii) incorporating
nuclear motion via Born-Oppenheimer ab initio dynamics models; (iii) integrating
electronic structure methods for resonances with density functional embedding
approaches for the description of chemical reactions on metal surfaces. The
proposed methods will be applicable to realistic molecular systems (~ 50-100
atoms). Specifically, a new method combining the complex absorbing potential
approach and extended multiconfigurational quasidegenerate perturbation theory
is proposed to enable calculations of Feshbach and multiply-excited resonances'
position and widths. Since resonance decay via electron ejection and nuclear
relaxation often occur on the same timescale, taking into account nuclear motion
is crucial for understanding electron-molecular interactions. Born-Oppenheimer
ab initio dynamics on complex potential energy surfaces will be implemented in
the on-the-fly manner to describe interdependent electron ejection and nuclear
motion. The simplicity of the model makes it applicable to large molecular
systems. Finally, a hybrid approach combining electronic structure methods for
resonances with density embedding techniques is proposed to account for the
metastable character of temporary states involved in reactions on metal
surfaces. A special emphasis is placed on implementing the developed
methodologies as efficient codes available through widely used software packages
and as open-source modules via the PI's website. The outreach program includes
an annual computational chemistry workshop for high-school summer research
students hosted by PI at Boston University.