* 1665032
* CDS&amp;E: Adaptive Biomolecular Free Energy Simulations on Massive Computational Grids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ronald Levy, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 524,348.00

Ron Levy of Temple University is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods Program in the Chemistry Division for the
development of powerful computational and statistical tools to provide a
fundamental understanding of how proteins function in controlling cellular
processes. This project is co-funded by the Computational and Data-Enabled
Science and Engineering in Mathematical and Statistical Sciences Program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences, and contributes to the National Strategic
Computing Initiative. Understanding how proteins function requires extensive
surveys of the molecular landscapes that control which structural states are
functional, and knowing the free energy costs associated with transitions
between states, including "active" and "inactive" protein states. The adaptive
computational techniques based on stochastic reweighting that are being
developed in this project make it possible to perform more reliable and accurate
simulations of protein-ligand binding and conformational free energy changes of
proteins, and to do so at extreme scale, on large computing grids consisting of
hundreds of thousands of processors. This capability has important applications
in the pharmaceutical industry and for biotechnology. The research is being
carried out in an academic environment, where students are trained in state-of-
the-art simulation techniques. A key aspect of the research is the creation and
dissemination of the new theoretical and computational approaches, implemented
as computer scripts and programs made freely available to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is on developing new
sampling protocols for performing biomolecular simulations on massive but
minimally communicating computational grids. The algorithms are designed to
scale from campus grids with ~5K processors to the IBM World Community grid with
~500K processors. New free energy reweighting techniques based on stochastic
solutions to the unbinned weighted histogram analysis equations are being
formulated which can be used to estimate free energies from multi-state
biomolecular simulations, when the simulations are locally equilibrated but not
close to globally equilibrated at some of the states. Professor Levy is
developing an adaptive version of asynchronous replica exchange that
incorporates stochastic solutions to the free energy reweighting equations
directly into the algorithms used to propagate the trajectories. This project
addresses the significant computational and statistical challenges associated
with performing and analyzing biomolecular simulations using multi-canonical
sampling schemes designed specifically for use on computational grids, and which
span sizes from thousands of processors (campus grids) to hundreds of thousands
of processors (the IBM World Community Grid (WCG)). Two applications are used to
illustrate the new approach and its implementation on the WCG: designing
inhibitors of HIV-1 integrase, and exploring the effect of sequence on
functional transitions in kinases. Professor Levy provides lectures and hands-on
experience with the new codes and techniques through summer schools and
workshops in the U.S. and Europe. Codes and scripts are freely disseminated for
use by the simulation community, and can be interfaced to widely-used open
source molecular dynamics codes such as GROMACS and OpenMM.