* 1665327
* Highly Active Mechanochemically Generated Main Group and Lanthanide Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Timothy Hanusa, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 01/31/2022
* USD 435,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division. Professor Timothy Hanusa of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt
University explores the extent to which common metals can replace rare-earth
metals in various applications. The rare earths have hundreds of uses in
medicine, electronics, and chemistry. However, they are expensive and at present
there is no active source of these elements in the United States. This has
resulted in uncertainties over the future supply and availability of the rare
earths. As a consequence efforts to develop replacements for the rare earths is
a strategic priority. This project targets the development of compounds that
contain aluminum, calcium, or strontium (common inexpensive metals) and whose
behavior resembles that of the rare earths. This is done using a unique
technique called mechanochemistry to prepare normally inaccessible compounds of
the three metals. In mechanochemistry reagents are ground or ball milled
together without solvent. Because these compounds lack solvent, rare earth like
behavior can be induced in them. These are then developed as replacements for
rare earths in a various applications. An additional advantage of
mechanochemistry is that no solvent must be disposed of and, consequently, there
is less chance for pollution. The project also provides research opportunities
for a variety of students including women, underrepresented minorities, and both
middle and high school students. Such training and development of students is
critically important for preparing the next generation of domestic science and
technology personnel capable of competing in the global marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project emphasizes the use of sterically bulky allyl
ligands that are compatible with a wide range of metals and possess high
conformational flexibility. In conjunction with the solventless synthesis, these
ligands stabilize complexes with low coordination numbers and corresponding high
reactivity. The new compounds are studied with NMR spectroscopy, X-ray
crystallography, and density functional theory calculations. The most promising
are tested for their catalytic polymerization activity. The broader impact of
the research includes the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and
participation in various educational and outreach programs involving Vanderbilt
during the academic year and summer. These activities encourage the students to
participate in multiple areas of modern science.