* 1665271
* State-Resolved Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Chemical Transients
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Nesbitt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 617,785.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms -
A Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. David J. Nesbitt from the
University of Colorado is using state-of-the-art laser- and molecular beam-based
methods to characterize the short-lived molecular structures ("chemical
transients") that occur as reactants are transformed into products during
chemical reactions. The overall goals of this experimental program are to
develop tools to probe the molecular structure and reactivity of chemical
transients. This project combines fluorescence microscopy and laser heating
methods for studying both the kinetics and energetics of folding/unfolding of
biologically-important species (e.g., nucleic acids, proteins, etc).
Fluorescence is a process by which a molecule is exposed to light of a given
wavelength, the molecule then gives off light of a different wavelength (the
"color" of which is characteristic of that molecule). This research is expected
to have impacts on a wide range of science, examining the chemical reactions of
both living biological cells and the stars. The graduate students involved in
this project are gaining experience in a wide range of tools (lasers and optics,
electronics, and microscopy) that are highly valued in industry and advanced
manufacturing. The results of these studies are also providing invaluable
opportunities for graduate student participation in national professional
meetings, outreach through scientific open houses, mentoring at the local high
schools, as well as operation of the "CU Wizards" Science Outreach Program for
elementary and middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of
this experimental program are threefold: i) exploit quantum state resolved
resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) and 3D velocity map imaging
for the study of inelastic and hydrogen/deuterium (H/D) reaction dynamics at
chemically tunable gas-self assembled monolayer interfaces, ii) develop and
implement novel spectroscopic tools for probing quantum state-resolved
evaporation/collision dynamics at the surface of high vapor pressure liquid
(e.g., water) "microjets" and iii) utilize the powerful combination of time-
resolved fluorescence microscopy and laser nano bathtub heating methods for
fundamental chemical physics studies of temperature/viscosity dependent
folding/unfolding of RNA at the single molecule level. Intellectual merits of
this work derive from the variety of fundamental problems addressed involving
highly reactive molecular transients, ranging from aerosol chemistry at the
marine boundary layer and to novel proton coupled electron transfer (PCET)
promoted H/D exchange at gas-liquid interfaces, to the conformational dynamics
of single biomolecules. The broader impacts of this work involve training
graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art areas of chemical
physics (e.g., quantum optics, pulsed and continuous wave lasers, plasmas,
electronics, low noise photon detection, etc.), while furthering the discovery
of fundamental new research knowledge.