* 1665144
* RUI: Development of a Non-Cooperative Ruthenium Catalyst for Ester Hydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Anthony Chianese, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 294,593.00

Many of the current methods for carrying out chemical reactions rely on the use
of expensive and/or toxic reagents, and often produce large amounts of chemical
waste. In this project, Professors Anthony Chianese and Jason Keith are working
to develop more sustainable methods to achieve the same results by designing
robust, highly active metal catalysts, in particular for hydrogenation
reactions. In developing the next generation of improved catalysts for these
reactions, it is essential to understand how the catalysts work at the molecular
level. Therefore, an important part of this project involves combining
experimental and theoretical knowledge to build a comprehensive and detailed
understanding of these catalysts and their reactions. All of the research for
this project is being conducted by undergraduate students in the PIs'
laboratories at Colgate. Participation in undergraduate research, especially
early in a student's career, is increasingly recognized for its positive impacts
on students. PI Chianese and the students working in his research group devote a
day each summer to running an outreach activity for high school students
attending Camp Fiver, a residential summer camp that hosts a group of at-risk
students New York City and rural upstate New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Anthony Chianese and Jason Keith of Colgate University are developing
new catalysts for the hydrogenation of esters. Recently, highly efficient
catalysts have been developed for the hydrogenation of a wide array of polar
substrates, spurred by the disclosure of Milstein's PNN-pincer-ruthenium system
that is active for the hydrogenation of esters to alcohols and the reverse
reaction. Currently, all of the most efficient catalysts for this class of
transformation are developed based on an expected metal-ligand cooperative
mechanism. Chianese and Keith have recently discovered a catalyst for ester
hydrogenation based on a CC-chelating ligand whose structure suggests that a
non-cooperative mechanism is likely operative. The goal of the project is to
develop and optimize this catalyst system through modification of the catalyst
structure, while devoting significant effort to building a thorough mechanistic
understanding through experiment and computation. All of the research for this
project is being conducted by undergraduate students in the PIs' laboratories at
Colgate. Participation in undergraduate research, especially early in a
student's career, is increasingly recognized for its positive impacts on
students. PI Chianese and the students working in his research group devote a
day each summer to running an outreach activity for school students attending
Camp Fiver, a residential summer camp that hosts a group of at-risk students New
York City and rural upstate New York.