* 1665285
* Collaborative Research: The Structure of Nonlocal Operators and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Russell Schwab, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This project seeks to answer questions about, to develop an improved
mathematical understanding of, and to build more sophisticated tools involved in
the modeling of phenomena driven by nonlocal interactions. A nonlocal
interaction can be illustrated by its contrast to a local interaction in a
simplified picture of a population of agents (say, people) interacting across a
shared network. A local model is one in which people can share information only
with their immediate neighbors, whereas a nonlocal model is one in which they
can share information more broadly, possibly across an entire network, and do so
instantly. This simplified picture actually manifests itself in many situations
in which a nonlocal paradigm is more fruitful than a local one, and the
inclusion of nonlocal interactions often fundamentally changes the underlying
mathematics that describe aspects such as the propagation of information. This
project aims to improve the study of such phenomena through the introduction of
new mathematical tools. Along the way, this project will support the mentoring
of graduate students and undergraduates through involvement in research on these
topics. It will also create new graduate course material that provides a more
unified approach to nonlocal tools of use in treating certain current topics in
data science.

In the realm of mathematics surrounding nonlocal problems, there has been a
surge of activity during the past twenty years. Experts have found themselves
addressing questions in roughly two categories: (1) What properties of nonlocal
equations should be studied for the sake of nonlocality itself; and (2) what
properties of nonlocal equations should be studied for the sake of integrating
them with other fields? In this project the principal investigators focus on the
second type of question. They aim to develop nonlocal tools that can be applied
to some classical problems that are not, at first glance, necessarily nonlocal,
including questions about oscillatory boundary-layer phenomena for elliptic
equations and free-boundary problems of one or two phases. The key point is that
there are powerful tools in the nonlocal world that could shed new light upon or
produce new results for some of these equations that were not approached from
this perspective earlier. Such tools include, but are not limited to, the fast
growing regularity theory for nonlocal equations and theory of weak solutions
for nonlocal equations (still in its infancy). Through representation techniques
for general (nonlinear) operators that enjoy a global comparison principle, the
principal investigators hope to bridge the gap between some aspects of these
previously disjoint classes of equations and to use this "nonlocal" bridge as a
pathway to new discoveries.