* 1665110
* Photoinitiated charge transfer in tailor-made molecules studied with 100 kilohertz two-dimensional white-Light spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2020
* USD 496,966.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Martin T. Zanni of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison is studying charge transfer in tailor-made
molecules using a new technique called two-dimensional white-light (2D WL)
spectroscopy. Charge transfer processes play a central role in chemistry, such
as for delivering electrons to speed up chemical reactions. A detailed
understanding of charge transfer is difficult, because one must know the
structures of the molecules, how much energy they contain, and how fast the
electrons transfer from one place to another. Professor Zanni is addressing this
challenge by studying a series of tailor-made molecules with well-defined and
systematically varied structures. This series of molecules is being synthesized
by the research group of Professor Michael Wasielewski at Northwestern
University. Since these molecules absorb light of different colors, Professor
Zanni uses white light spectroscopy to study the energy levels of the molecules
and the rates of charge transfer. White light is a combination of all other
colors of visible light. Absorption spectra are graphic descriptions of how
atoms or molecules absorb light of different colors (wavelengths). By exciting
the molecules with brief light pulses separated from each other by a few hundred
femtoseconds (a femtosecond is one quadrillionth of a second), Professor Zanni
is able to generate two-dimensional spectra, which look like topographical maps,
and provide clues about how charge and energy are moving within or between
molecules. The insights provided by this research may advance our understanding
of charge transfer processes in living systems, and may have implications for
the design of materials relevant to solar energy technologies. Professor Zanni
and his group are involved in various activities focused on the public science
education. They give presentations at the Wingra Elementary School Science Night
and host an Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) high school teacher as
part of their research dissemination plan. Professor Zanni and his group have
also designed and prepared a televised lecture for Wisconsin Public Television
on transitioning technologies from university research into the commercial
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of custom-made molecules are being studied
by the Zanni research group using a 2D WL spectroscopy technique developed by
this group. The series of molecules, prepared by the Wasielewski group, is
designed to vary the electronic couplings and charge-transfer character in a
systematic way. One set of compounds are caged complexes designed to capture and
deliver multiple charges for use in multielectron redox reactions. Another set
are bridged dimers of terrylene and perylene diimide, held in specific
geometries. The bridged dimer systems have systematically controlled electronic
couplings relevant to charge transfer in singlet fission. Two dimensional WL
spectroscopy uses continuum generation for the pulse sequence, creating spectra
that span nearly the entire visible and near-IR region of the spectrum. White-
light is much weaker than the output of an optical parametric amplifier (OPA),
and so the spectrometer is paired to a 100 kHz laser source and a shot-to-shot
pulse shaper. With a broad spectral range and high signal-to-noise, this 2D WL
spectrometer is well-suited for studying Professor Wasielewski's compounds.
Initial 2D WL spectra contain cross peaks that reveal charge-transfer
transitions that were previously unobserved in absorption spectra, uncovering
the photophysical pathway for charge transfer in these compounds. The
sensitivity of this 100 kHz spectrometer is so high that the final aim of this
research is to implement it as a microscopy tool to measure spatially resolved
2D WL spectra. This research may extend our understanding of charge transfer and
to develop new optical technologies. The experiments made possible by the
combination of these tailor-made molecules and new 2D WL spectroscopy may
overcome existing challenges and extend the understanding of charge transfer in
chemistry.