* 1665201
* Advanced Programmable Logic Controllers, Robotics, and Networking
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* javaid siddiqi, Lone Star College System College District
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 198,671.00

According to the Wall Street Journal, manufacturing executives indicate that
they struggle to find workers with the required skills to operate in the modern
factory, despite the presence of two unemployed manufacturing workers per
manufacturing job opening (Sussman, 2016), because there is a knowledge gap
between traditional and current and future industry requirements due to the
accelerated pace of technological advances. In collaboration with industry
partners, this project at Lone Star College University Park (LSC-UP) in Texas
entitled Advanced PLC, Robotics, and Networking is designed to better prepare
technicians to operate and maintain modern factory machines and work in the
digital plant of the future, thus enhancing the employability of graduates and
developing a diverse, globally competitive science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) workforce. Project activities will include curriculum and
educational materials development, the evaluation of curriculum, and
dissemination of the knowledge gained. It will assist employees as they become
more employable and are trained on cutting edge industry standard equipment.
This will allow future employees to enhance their personal well-being and that
of their families while increasing the economic competiveness of the United
States by ensuring that employee education and training keeps pace with employer
demand and is aligned with industry skill needs. The knowledge obtained from
this project will allow for the dissemination of industry driven curricula to
transform the education and training of technicians to account for advancing
technology and lead to long term enhanced technician education at the college as
the courses are institutionalized through the Energy &amp; Manufacturing
Institute. The curricula will be disseminated through a paper for publication,
conference presentations, and submission to the Workforce Education Course
Manual (WECM), impacting the education of technicians at higher education
institutions across the state and the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
the industry needs for a multi-skilled technician to work in the manufacturing
plant of the future that will rely heavily on integrated and intelligent
ecosystems that use real-time and historical data to run efficiently and safely,
the college will stack computer networking courses upon their current
Mechatronics Technician education and training programs. Two new Mechatronics
courses will be developed to incorporate computer networking to better prepare
technicians for the modern digital plant. These new networking courses will
provide students with the knowledge, skills, and competencies necessary to
utilize the distributed control systems used to control manufacturing processes
that are continuous or batch-oriented as well as the Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems used for remote monitoring and control in
technical workplaces. This project will advance knowledge regarding technician
education and training by identifying the emerging needs of employers hiring
graduates of Mechatronics programs. The curricula will be evaluated by industry
partners to ascertain its compliance with the current and projected needs of the
occupations supported by Mechatronics programs, such as engineering technicians,
process technicians, and mechatronics technicians.