* 1665501
* Investigating the Use of Information and Communication Technologies in Violence Interruption
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Sheena Erete, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 01/31/2019
* USD 150,002.00

Although crime has decreased across most major US cities, violent crime is still
a prominent issue in many urban environments. Neighborhoods that are plagued by
such excessive violence endure negative effects on social and economic
development. Though there are several approaches to addressing gun violence, one
successful public health approach to reducing violence focuses on violence
interruption, a neighborhood-level model whereby trained intervention workers
identify potential violent events and provide immediate alternatives to disrupt
violent incidents in their communities. This project investigates the potential
of a mobile phone application to help intervention workers predict and interrupt
violence during crimes and violent incidents. Violence interruption workers also
provide long-term outreach in an attempt to permanently change violent behavior,
including providing access to resources such as mental health services, social
services, educational opportunities, and work training. This award will also
support the design and development of a mobile application that uses predictive
analytic techniques to provide violence interruption workers with the most
effective intervention strategies based on data from over a decade of prior
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with a leading violence
interruption organization, this project examines how a mobile application can
improve violence interruption outcomes by providing recommendations for the most
effective strategies for resolving violent conflicts. The PI and her students
will evaluate the mobile application in a 3-month deployment in Chicago during
the summer, typically the most violent period of the year. In addition to
supporting the reduction of violence, results from this project will lead to a
deeper understanding of how to design technology to scale effective violence
interruption techniques informed by public health principles. Furthermore, using
computational analysis techniques to provide the most effective interruption
techniques to violence interruption workers will not only advance our knowledge
of the role of technology in violence interruption, but also extend prior
literature pertaining to the social and behavioral impact of technology use in
crime prevention and violence for those most affected by violent crime. This
work will support improvements in the science of broadening participation, in
that the focus will be on residents in low income, high crime neighborhoods and
local, nonprofit organizations attempting to reduce and mitigate violence in
their communities.