* 1665386
* Access to the Gig Economy: Infrastructural Competence and the Participation of Underrepresented Populations
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 68,299.00

This research advances our understanding of how people from disadvantaged
backgrounds pursue work in the the so-called knowledge-based gig economy, doing
contract work such as programming and writing. The research will delve into how
these workers obtain, assemble, and organize digital resources, such as mobile
devices, software and services, storage, security, and interconnectivity, to
accomplish their jobs. These workers, especially if they lack an office, may
work in coffee shops, libraries, co-working centers, and other on-the-go places.
Some have routine circuits of travel and can rely on co-working spaces; some are
more nomadic. Either way, they must organize and reconfigure their work
resources, creating "mobile offices" that provide cognitive space (attention),
physical space (room to work), communications (relationships with others), and
direct work resources. Digital technologies are usually necessary and require
technical and social competence and financial resources. Recent studies show
that this kind of work is likely to become a larger part of the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal of this research is to understand in
greater depth what will be needed to make this kind of work successful, and to
identify the particular challenges and needs of workers who come from
disadvantaged backgrounds (such as single parents, rural workers, etc). A second
goal of this work is to develop better methods for collecting data on contract
or gig workers, and how to understand the alternative uses of these workers'
digital platforms, applications, and devices. It is probable that unobtrusive
data collection about application uses, connections, and access to digital
resources will be needed to complement current field-based data collection
methods. Data collection will focus on the ways in which disadvantaged workers
create their digital collections and pursue work. The research will also involve
integrating data collected unobtrusively. This project will employ graduate
students who themselves come from disadvantaged backgrounds to contribute to
their development and to gain from their perspectives. The research will
contribute to our expectations for training and preparation of a digitally-
enabled workforce of the future.