* 1665208
* Stable and Easily Activated Thioglycosides for the Stereoselective Synthesis of Oligosaccharides
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Justin Ragains, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2021
* USD 503,930.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Justin Ragains. Professor Ragains is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State University. He is developing
synthetic methods for bonding monosaccharides to each other. These methods are
critical for the synthesis of oligosaccharides. Oligosaccharides, in turn, play
important roles in biology, most of which are poorly understood. Because of
difficulties in isolation and purification, obtaining serviceable quantities of
oligosaccharides for biological studies requires chemical synthesis. The
synthesis of oligosaccharides suffers from a number of technological
shortcomings including poor stability of chemical intermediates and technically
challenging procedures; these limitations are being addressed by the current
project. Scientific advances from this work result in improved syntheses of
oligosaccharides, which in turn facilitate discoveries in biology and enable the
development of oligosaccharide vaccines and therapeutics. Professor Ragains is
committed to the scientific training of women and underrepresented minorities in
the sciences and underprivileged students at all levels of education. Public
outreach activities include summer chemistry lab activities for Baton Rouge high
school students from underprivileged backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
project involves the development of 4-aryl-3-butenylthioglycosides (ABTGs) as a
class of O-glycosylation electrophiles that combine the stability of
thioglycosides with the straightforward activation of glycosyl
trichloroacetimidates using catalytic acids. O-Glycosylation methods using ABTGs
derived from sugars that are commonly found in mammalian oligosaccharides are
under investigation. In addition, 1,2-cis-selective glycosylations with ABTGs
that exploit their unusual mechanism of activation are being developed. Finally,
a synthesis of the human milk oligosaccharide lacto-N-neotetraose using ABTGs as
key intermediates is underway. This research program provides a series of
O-glycosylation electrophiles in ABTGs that can be utilized by scientists with
little training in chemical synthesis. The well-established utility of Boc- and
Fmoc-protected amino acids has placed polypeptide synthesis within the reach of
non-experts. Similarly, the ABTGs saccharides, when fully developed, place the
synthesis of oligosaccharides in the hands of scientists who require these
compounds for the study of glycobiology. The educational plan involves outreach
to underprivileged high school students, many of whom are women and
underrepresented minorities. Outreach activities include summer chemistry lab
activities geared toward the development of laboratory skills that assist these
students in college-level laboratory courses. Carbohydrate chemistry is a
particular focus of these outreach activities.