* 1665280
* SusChEM: CO2 Photo-Electrochemistry on Metal Oxides Surfaces Studied by Vibrational Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy and Density Functional Theory
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Aravind Asthagiri, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 449,541.00

Catalysts are chemical substances that provide lower-energy reaction pathways to
increase the speed of a chemical reaction. Catalysts can be recycled many times
during a chemical reaction. Some catalysts, called photo-electrocatalysts, are
able to use light as an energy source to produce the reaction of interest. In
this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professors L. Robert Baker and Aravind Asthagiri are using a
combination of an experimental technique called sum frequency generation (SFG)
vibrational spectroscopy and computational modeling called density functional
theory (DFT) to investigate carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction by a series of copper
and copper/iron containing photo-electrocatalysts. SFG vibrational spectroscopy
is able to show how molecules important in CO2 reduction interact with the
catalyst surfaces during the reaction. DFT calculations are used to help explain
the SFG data generated during the reaction. The combination of the two
techniques leads to a complete picture of the surface reaction mechanism,
allowing for better design of the catalyst and the photo-electrocatalysis
process. The ability to photo-electrochemically reduce CO2 using sunlight has
the potential to enable us to recycle carbon and stabilize the environmental
impacts of CO2 emissions from automobiles and other sources. This research helps
to address the challenge of making fuels in an environmentally friendly and
economically viable way. These research activities are integrated with an
outreach plan to improve student recruitment and retention in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. Through the TEK8 program
at the Ohio State University, undergraduate students and K-12 teachers gain
hands-on experience in the investigators' research groups. The students then
translate this experience to middle school students through age-appropriate
learning modules designed to inspire K-12 students to pursue future STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of understanding CO2 surface
chemistry on a photo-electrocatalyst requires a combined knowledge of metal
oxide surface chemistry as well as the semiconductor photo-physics that
determine the localized atomic sites of photo-excited electrons responsible for
driving the reductive chemistry. In this project funded by the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors L. Robert Baker and
Aravind Asthagiri are using sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy and
complementary density functional theory (DFT) computational modeling to
investigate CO2 activation and subsequent reduction on a series of CuO/CuFeO2
surfaces as a function of relative phase composition. CuO/CuFeO2 catalysts with
varying amounts of CuO and CuFeO2 show tunable selectivity between acetate and
formate production. The ability to probe the molecular intermediates associated
with these reaction pathways, coupled with the ability to tune these relative
rates, is providing a valuable case study for a thorough mechanistic
investigation of the surface properties that mediate reaction kinetics leading
to tunable selectivity for CO2 reduction. Complementary measurements using
femtosecond soft x-ray spectroscopy show electron thermalization kinetics and
site-specific charge localization with element specificity. Through information
from the soft x-ray spectroscopy and DFT-derived band structure, the team
obtains the reduction potential of site-localized photo-excited electrons in the
oxide surface and compares these potentials to the calculated change in free
energy of formation of elementary steps on these respective atomic sites. This
combination of approaches bridges the fields of semiconductor photo-physics with
surface chemistry and catalysis in order to provide a fundamental framework for
understanding the selectivity of CO2 photo-electrochemistry on metal oxides
surfaces. This research helps to address the challenge of environmentally
friendly and economically stable fuel production and chemical synthesis from CO2
using earth-abundant metal oxide catalysts. These research activities are
integrated with an outreach plan to improve student recruitment and retention in
STEM fields. Through the TEK8 program at the Ohio State University,
undergraduate students and K-12 teachers gain hands-on experience in the
investigators' research groups. They then translate this experience to middle
school students through age-appropriate learning modules designed to inspire
K-12 students to pursue future STEM education.