* 1665125
* Stereoselective Hydrofunctionalization Reactions of Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Simon Meek, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

The development of chemical reactions to prepare organic molecules that are
chiral, i.e., exist as non-superimposable mirror images, is vital to addressing
human healthcare. This is because most pharmaceutical molecules are chiral. In
this project, Dr. Meek is developing new catalytic reactions to make chiral
molecules, using organic compounds containing carbon-carbon double bonds as
building blocks. Using new transition metal catalysts designed in his
laboratory, Dr. Meek and his team are demonstrating that even unreactive double
bonds can be transformed into important and useful chiral products. Dr. Meek is
actively engaged in outreach activities that build upon his research and open
lines of communication between students interested in pursuing STEM careers, and
more broadly serve to scientifically educate the general public. These
activities, which include editing online articles and increasing undergraduate
participation, are directed at improving science education and encouraging
students of all backgrounds to be exposed to the opportunities of STEM career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the
Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Meek and his team of
graduate and undergraduate students at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, design and develop new robust rhodium (Rh)-based catalysts that are
easily accessible and promote the stereoselective addition of common organic
nucleophiles to olefins. Such hydrofunctionalization methods provide versatile
and atom-economical approaches for the formation of new carbon-carbon and
carbon-nitrogen bonds with minimal waste. In general, these processes involve
activation of readily available pi-bonds, and address issues concerning reaction
site- and stereoselectivity. High levels of selectivity are critical to
synthesizing acyclic and cyclic molecular scaffolds that exhibit specific
biological and physical properties, as well as rendering the resulting processes
more time and cost effective. Dr. Meek is actively engaged in STEM outreach
activities that focus on broadening the dissemination of scientific concepts and
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in science.