* 1665255
* Voltage-dependent interfacial structure and properties of room temperature ionic liquids: operando X-ray studies
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2022
* USD 295,426.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Pulak Dutta of Northwestern
University is using X-rays from synchrotron radiation sources to study liquids
composed purely of molecular ions (known as room-temperature ionic liquids, or
RTILs). These novel liquids have been proposed for a variety of applications
such as electrolytes in batteries and supercapacitors, solvents, etc., and they
have a number of properties that are quite different from those of more commonly
known water-based liquid electrolytes. The nanoscale origins of these unusual
properties are investigated by studying how the ions arrange themselves near
electrodes when variable voltages are applied, and how these arrangements
develop and change with time. These studies will develop the knowledge necessary
to not just understand the observed properties of RTILs, but ultimately to
design and control these behaviors. This would potentially allow improved
batteries and capacitors, easy ways to manipulate small droplets in microfluidic
systems, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on room-temperature
ionic liquids (RTILs), which are molten salts with molecular anions and/or
molecular cations The objectives are to study experimentally how the static and
dynamic arrangements of RTIL ions near electrode interfaces respond to electric
fields; to correlate this behavior with the molecular structures of the ions
present in the RTIL; and to seek to understand how the structures determine or
affect the observed electrochemical and electrowetting properties. The primary
experimental probe is in situ X-ray reflectivity and grazing incidence X-ray
diffraction from solid-RTIL interfaces, using national synchrotron facilities.
The dependence of the interfacial structure and its dynamics on the ions
present, the nature of the electrode surface, and on applied direct and
alternating voltages, are being studied and compared to existing theoretical
predictions. The anticipated outcome is a better fundamental understanding of
the nanoscale interfacial behavior of RTILs, and thus improved knowledge of how
to select or design ionic liquids in order to optimize desired properties for
practical applications.