* 1665021
* Collaborative Research: Ultrafast Excited State Electron and Nuclear Coherences in Transition Metal Dimer Complexes and Their Roles in Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Lin Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 275,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Lin X. Chen and Felix N.
Castellano are developing the spectroscopy and chemistry necessary for the study
of transition metal complexes featuring dimetallic cooperativity. These targeted
molecules convert and accumulate energy from sunlight that can ultimately drive
photocatalytic reactions for generating fuels. The knowledge obtained through
these studies could be transformative for the chemical sciences and will enhance
our ability to rationally design chemical materials/devices for catalysis,
optoelectronics and energy sustainability. The research engages university
graduate students to use advanced laser spectroscopy for characterization,
incorporates state-of-the-art computational chemistry for quantum mechanical and
molecular dynamics modeling, and utilizes advanced chemistry laboratory
facilities for molecular synthesis, providing them with an expansive training
ground for the development of multidisciplinary expertise. Such training is
urgently needed for the next generation STEM workforce in order to explore the
frontiers of chemical science and to ensure US global competitiveness at the
frontiers of scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work studies quantum
coherence in a series of di-metallic compounds, such as platinum, molybdenum,
and tungsten dimer chromophores through systematic variation of structural
factors. Mechanistic details enabling multiple-electron conversion processes are
to be investigated through two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy and by the
design of new molecular architectures. The research seeks an understanding of
intrinsic electronic couplings between multiple metal centers in transition
metal complexes and their influence on photochemical reactivity. Using ultrafast
laser pulses as light sources, transient bond-making or bond-breaking processes
will be induced between the two metal centers, which enable detailed studies on
origins of their catalytic activities and fundamental reaction dynamics.