* 1665279
* EAGER: TDM solar cells: Next generation perovskite-silicon tandem solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Ajeet Rohatgi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative research
effort, the PIs will combine their work on perovskite solar cells and marketable
silicon solar cells, to produce a high efficiency tandem device with the
potential to be available commercially. The multidisciplinary research team
couples expertise in the design of electronic and photonic materials and
processes for advanced applications and the design, synthesis and
characterization of inorganic functional materials, with expertise in the
research, development and manufacturing of high-efficiency, low-cost crystalline
silicon cells. The research initiative will lead to the next generation
photovoltaic that will allow for the robust fabrication of perovskite-silicon
monolithic tandem solar cells, applicable for use in widespread industrial-scale
manufacturing of energy harvesting modules. It is expected that the materials
and fabrication protocols associated with the tandem photovoltaic devices will
help enable widespread implementation of the technologies. Thus, this research
will have substantial influence on the energy sector and achieve the goal of
bringing the potential benefits of nanotechnology to society in general, as well
as the everyday energy consumer. Overall, the results of this research will make
a significant contribution to the scientific community and provide an
intellectual and experimental framework for future investigations into tandem
devices for the widespread application of innovations in nanotechnology. Low-
cost, ubiquitous, environmentally sustainable, high-efficiency, tandem solar
cells are expected to be transformational for industries ranging from
healthcare, environmental quality, energy and security. In addition to providing
access to sustainable, high-efficiency, energy harvesting devices, the current
project provides opportunities for the integration of research and education in
technologies of societal significance. Participants will benefit from the
multidisciplinary, collaborative nature of the program; all will be cross-
trained in multiple areas to further expand their knowledge and experience
through relevant additional collaborations. Students will grow in an environment
that promotes an understanding of all aspects of the project necessary for
success. The investigators maintain strong and long-running commitments to
broadened participation in science and engineering, and to serving the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;This research effort aims
to develop the next generation perovskite-silicon tandem solar cells with
efficiencies exceeding 30%. Exploratory research will focus on two critical
aspects: i) fabrication of high efficiency, semi-transparent top metal-halide
perovskite solar cells and bottom silicon solar cells; and ii) engineering of
highly effective interconnecting layers between sub-cells to achieve monolithic
tandems with efficiencies greater than 30%. Integration of metal-halide
perovskites in tandem with commercially available solar cells, such as silicon,
provides opportunities to significantly upgrade device and module performance.
Further, the solution processability of metal-halide perovskites offers a cost
effective option for upgrades to existing manufactured units. Through this
collaboration, the most critical issues associated with AMX3 lead based
perovskite-silicon monolithic tandem solar cells which prevent their achieving
theoretically predicted efficiencies will be addressed. Specifically, this
research will i) develop the materials and processes that will allow deposition
of transparent conducting electrodes on perovskite thin film solar cells while
maintaining high efficiencies and ii) engineer a transparent interconnecting
electrical connection between the sub cells. The research team will identify
transformative, practical materials engineering approaches to resolve both these
key problems. The materials and fabrication protocols developed here will enable
integration of perovskites with existing silicon solar cell technologies and
facilitate the widespread commercialization and implementation of perovskite-
silicon tandem solar cell technologies.