* 1665336
* Ab initio molecular dynamics with quantum nuclear effects: potential surfaces and gradients from on-the-fly fragment based electronic structure methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Srinivasan Iyengar, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 435,000.00

Srinivasan S. Iyengar of Indiana University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program. Many problems at the
forefront of energy, environmental and biological research demand the quantum
mechanical treatment of electrons and nuclei. But the detailed quantum
description of such problems is much too complex even in today?s high
performance computing environment. This is because the computational complexity
in these problems grows exponentially with system size, which makes them
intractable. Iyengar and his research group are developing new computational
methods to address these issues. These methods are poised to have major impact
on the study of a wide class of problems in biological enzymes, atmospheric
chemistry and materials science including study of hydrogen transfer in polymer
electrolyte fuel cells. The methods are at the forefront of modern computational
quantum chemistry and chemical physics. Hence students in the PI's group have
the opportunity to learn and develop new theoretical methods and apply these
methods to important practical problems. The results, involving computer codes
as well as novel scientific ideas are widely disseminated to the scientific
community. Specifically, the computer programs when completed will appear as
part of the NSF-funded SEAGrid science gateway. In addition, the PI continues to
initiate participation and mentoring of freshman by chemistry faculty. The PI
further envisions homogenizing the chemistry curriculum by developing student
directed web-based learning methods to connect the sub-disciplines of chemistry
and achieve a continuous rather than discrete education of undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing accurate classical trajectories and potential
surfaces in agreement with high levels of electronic structure for complex
chemical systems is a major challenge in computational chemistry and chemical
physics. Iyengar and co-workers are making contributions in this area, including
the development of on-the-fly molecular dynamics methods that allow accurate
treatment of electronic structure at the MP2 and Coupled Cluster level, using
methods that scale like DFT. Furthermore, they are computing potential surfaces
for quantum-mechanical nuclear degrees of freedom that are in good agreement
with higher levels of electronic structure methods such as MP2 and Coupled
Cluster, at computational costs comparable to DFT. While ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD) methods are appealing because they do not need an a priori
fitted potential surface, this advantage is normally precluded since on-the-fly
evaluation of potential and forces is a strong computational constraint. Hence
most implementations of AIMD are limited to density functional theoretic (DFT)
treatment of electronic structure. The goal of this project is to alleviate this
computational constraint and make AIMD more routinely and broadly applicable
using efficient methods that allow higher levels of electronic structure, post-
Hartree-Fock accuracy. Specifically, the proposal deals with (a) the development
of new methods to efficiently compute on-the-fly electronic structure for AIMD
and Car-Parrinello-like methods in agreement with MP2, Coupled Cluster and other
post-Hartree-Fock methods, (b) the computation of potential surfaces using these
approaches to facilitate on-the-fly quantum dynamics. Chemical problems to be
studied include, (i) the study conformation dynamics and vibrational properties
of protonated water clusters, and (ii) the determination of accurate potential
surfaces for reaction paths and quantum wave packet dynamics studies on hydrogen
transfer reactions involved in the oxidation pathways of hydroxyl-isoprene,
which is a biogenic volatile organic compound.