* 1665466
* Coarse-Graining of Molecular Liquids in Time and Space
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Marina Guenza, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 539,999.00

Marina Guenza of the University of Oregon is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Dr. Guenza develops computational and theoretical methods to study
complex molecular liquid. Such computer simulations are useful because they can
explain experimental findings based on the molecular nature of the liquid.
However, they have severe limitations in the size of the system that they can
study. To allow simulation of larger systems, Guenza and coworkers employ a kind
of coarse graining, the Integral Equation theory of Coarse-Graining (IECG). This
approach uses only essential details in the description of the molecules thereby
reducing computational time. This allows for the study of large and more complex
systems. The method has been shown to be very accurate in its predictions of
structural, thermodynamic, and dynamical properties. Further optimization of the
method, its extension to many systems, and making the method accessible to the
scientists that want to use it, are the main goals of this project. A second
aspect of the project focuses on the further development of an approach to study
proteins, nuclear acids and their complexes. Guenza and her research group
engage in outreach activities to high school students from rural Oregon school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to extend the
range of length scales and time scales where complex molecular liquids can be
simulated. In the first project, Guenza and coworkers are extending the
capabilities of the Integral Equation theory of Coarse-Graining (IECG) approach
to treat non-uniform molecular liquids, for example, at solid interfaces. In the
second project, they are working to extend the Langevin Equation for Protein
Dynamics (LE4PD) to treat proteins, nucleic acids, and their complexes. The
approach is based on a Langevin equation for the dynamics of macromolecules in
solution, which also accounts for the presence of local conformational barriers
and the internal hydrophobic region in the macromolecule. Developing the theory
to describe the long-time barrier-crossing dynamics by integration with Markov
State Models is a key component of this work.