* 1665189
* Probing Reactivity and Mechanism of Alkyl Transmetallation in Palladium-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Mark Biscoe, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 414,168.00

Cross-coupling reactions, where two molecules are coupled to produce a new
molecule, are routinely employed by synthetic chemists in efforts to produce new
drug candidates. However, these reactions are not especially well-suited for the
synthesis of chiral molecules, e.g., molecules with three-dimensional structures
that can exist as non-superimposable mirror images, similar to your right and
left hands. Because these different mirror images usually display distinct
properties, precise control of their three-dimensional structure is essential in
the drug discovery process. One mirror image may serve as the active therapeutic
agent, while the other may prove harmful to biological systems or may
significantly reduce the efficacy of the active one. Dr. Mark Biscoe is
investigating new strategies and catalysts to produce only the desired mirror
image structure of molecules produced by cross-coupling reactions. This work is
contributing to the improved safety and efficacy of new drug candidates. Dr.
Biscoe is also active in projects that are designed to increase the diversity of
students participating in the STEM fields. Summer research internships for high
school and undergraduate students constitute an important part of these outreach
activities.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Mark Biscoe of the City College of New York is exploring the factors that
control the reactivity and mechanism of alkyl transmetallation in palladium-
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. These studies utilize a combination of
catalytic and stoichiometric processes, stereochemical probes, modern data
analysis techniques, and DFT calculations to deconvolute the factors that
influence the rate and stereochemistry of the transmetallation process.
Particular focus is placed on the transmetallation of alkyltin
(alkylcarbastannatrane) and alkylboron nucleophiles, with the ultimate goal of
developing new, robust methods to employ optically active alkyltin and
alkylboron nucleophiles in stereospecific cross-coupling reactions. These
studies expand our fundamental understanding of transmetallation in transition
metal-catalyzed reactions involving alkyl coupling partners, and facilitate the
development of new, stereospecific chemical transformations through the
exploitation of this knowledge. Additionally, these activities include summer
research internships designed to increase the participation of underrepresented
and minority groups in STEM fields.