* 1665299
* EAGER: TDM Solar Cells: Collaborative Research: Monolithic 2-Junction Polycrystalline II-VI / Silicon Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Stuart Bowden, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 179,899.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;This research program investigates a
strategy to make solar cells dramatically more efficient, providing a route to
lower-cost solar electricity. The research examines barriers to combining the
two most commercially successful photovoltaic (PV) technologies - cadmium
telluride (CdTe) from the II-VI family of semiconductors and crystalline silicon
(Si) solar cells - to form a tandem structure with the II-VI solar cell
deposited on top of the Si cell for a much higher efficiency than either cell
individually. The fundamental scientific issues investigated will directly
enable high-efficiency multijunction cells with only two electrical contacts,
greatly simplifying their manufacture and lowering costs. The program benefits
society on several different levels. On a global and national level, the high-
efficiency solar cell technologies would accelerate deployment of photovoltaics
- which produce over 1% of the world's electricity today - reducing greenhouse
gas emission and international security concerns that accompany other
electricity sources, and increasing access to electrical power for disadvantaged
populations in the U.S. and around the world, while creating high-paying, high-
technology U.S. jobs. On an educational level, this cutting-edge research
provides key scientific training for students from many backgrounds to give them
the skills and experience necessary to enter the rapidly-growing U.S.
photovoltaics workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project are to develop the scientific understanding needed to integrate a
II-VI top cell, for example the CdMgTe alloy with 15% Mg and 1.75-eV band-gap
energy, with a crystalline silicon bottom cell to form a monolithic tandem solar
cell with only two terminals for ease of manufacture and use in PV modules, and
with a target efficiency over 28%. The project investigates five key scientific
areas: 1) factors controlling the bulk lifetime and grain-boundary recombination
of CdMgTe as its band-gap energy is increased from that of CdTe; 2) changes in
semiconductor quality caused by reversing the usual growth order of II-VI cells;
3) composition, interface properties, and deposition conditions of the
interconnection layers between the top and bottom cells; 4) interactions between
the chemically different top and bottom cells that may degrade minority-carrier
lifetime in the Si bottom cell; and 5) integration technology for demonstrating
prototype 2-junction CdMgTe/Si solar cells with a target efficiency of 28%, well
above the highest efficiencies of either solar cell material alone. Areas 1 and
2 will be investigated at Colorado State University (CSU) with CdMgTe cells made
with its single-vacuum, multi-source deposition system. The quality of the
CdMgTe absorber layer will be evaluated by time-resolved photoluminescence and
cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy. Cells deposited with the n-type
layer over the p-type CdMgTe will be primarily analyzed through standard
current-voltage, quantum-efficiency, and capacitance measurements and the
application of device-analysis techniques developed at CSU. Areas 3 and 4 will
be studied at Arizona State University (ASU). Varying interconnection layer
compositions and combinations will be deposited by sputtering, plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition, and atomic-layer deposition, on high-lifetime Si
cells built at ASU. Evaluation will focus on the key metrics of electrical
transport, optical transmittance, and suitability for high-quality II-VI growth
on top. Potential changes in the Si cell due to the thermal budget and
recombination activity of impurities associated with top cell growth will be
characterized by secondary-ion mass spectroscopy, temperature-dependent current-
voltage, and inductively-coupled carrier-lifetime measurements. Area 5, cell
integration, will be accomplished jointly by the two universities with target
efficiency of 28%, which would profoundly impact the penetration of solar-
generated electricity in the global economy. The value of the project, however,
extends beyond photovoltaic cells, shedding light on the fundamentals of defects
in low-cost polycrystalline semiconductors, and providing insight on other
applications such as integration of light emitters on low-cost silicon for high-
speed computing.