* 1665122
* Achieving Challenging Transformations with 1,2,3-Triazole Based Novel Metal Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiaodong Shi, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2021
* USD 405,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division. Professor Xiaodong Shi of University of South Florida develops new
catalytic systems for the synthesis of azaborine compounds and for the C-H bond
activation. The inclusion of boron in organic compounds (compounds composed
largely of carbon and hydrogen) is important in biomedical applications and
optoelectronic materials. However, boron is not part of most organic compounds.
To address this difficulty, this project is developing new ways of inserting a
boron-nitrogen unit into organic compounds. In addition, these methods devised
are being modified so that they can be used to increase the reactivity of
organic molecules. This latter goal is very important in many chemical processes
including the conversion of natural gas into valuable chemical feedstocks. The
project also brings undergraduate students into research early in their college
careers. This permits them to work with graduate and postdoctoral students in a
multidisciplinary project that prepares them for graduate education and/or
careers in chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new
catalysts based on triazole complexes of gold, palladium, iron, cobalt and
nickel as well as the synthesis of azaborine and asymmetric methods toward C-H
bond activation. Various catalyst structures are examined, and the most
promising ones are studied further using X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy
and mass spectrometry. The reaction mechanism of each catalyst is investigated
using typical kinetic analyses including NMR spectroscopy and reactive IR. The
project provides training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
in multidisciplinary catalytic science. In addition, an outreach program to
undergraduates is providing a platform to gain research experience for their
future career development.