* 1665264
* Toeplitz Order and Spectral Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Alexei Poltoratski, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2020
* USD 186,000.00

This project is related to the area of the Uncertainty Principle (UP) in
Harmonic Analysis. Briefly, this principle says the sets where a function and
its Fourier transform are non-zero cannot be simultaneously small. Stemming from
the work of Norbert Wiener in mathematics and Werner Heisenberg in physics, the
area of UP still presents many mathematical challenges. Its problems have a
number of applications in adjacent fields. Several classical problems of UP,
posed decades ago by such prominent mathematicians as Norman Levinson, Andrei
Kolmogorov and Norbert Wiener, remain open. Some of such problems are studied in
this project. Modern methods of Complex and Harmonic Analysis that appeared in
the last 30 years suggest new approaches to the classical challenges of UP.
These problems have a number of important applications in Approximation Theory,
Prediction Theory, Spectral Theory of differential operators and Mathematical
Physics. Among the proposed topics of research are generalizations of the so-
called Gap and Type problems in Harmonic Analysis, an extension of the well-
known Gelfand-Levitan theory in the area of spectral problems for differential
operators and connections between Krein's canonical systems of differential
equations and asymptotics of the Riemann zeta-function. Successful completion of
this step of the project will create a systematic view of the large variety of
problems in the area of UP based on the new notion of Toeplitz Order discussed
in the proposal. The study of Toeplitz Order is a continuation of the study of
the so-called Toeplitz approach to UP developed in recent papers of Nikolai
Makarov (Caltech) and the principal investigator. The next stage of the
applications of the Toeplitz approach contains several classical open problems
of Harmonic Analysis and Spectral Theory, including general completeness
problems, spectral problems for Schroedinger and Dirac operators and a Toeplitz
operator version of the so-called Krein - de Branges theory, which was designed
to connect Complex and Spectral Analysis. Among other applications, the project
includes a problem on Uncertainty Quantification in the settings of spectral
problems for Schroedinger opearators and canonical systems of differential
equations.