* 1665028
* EAGER: TDM Solar Cells: Collaborative Research: Exploration of High Open-Circuit Voltage and Stable Wide-Bandgap Cu2BaSnS4 Solar Cells for Monolithic Tandem Cell Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Yanfa Yan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 219,892.00

Abstract Nontechnical The successful development of low-cost and high conversion
efficiency solar cells will enable widespread use of solar electricity as an
abundant source of electricity for a sustainable energy economy in the U.S. A
proven method for producing the most efficient solar cells is to stack two
materials in tandem such that one material absorbs the blue part of the solar
spectrum and the other the red part. However, most solar cells that successfully
employ this technique to date can only be produced using highly specialized
single crystal materials. The complexity of growth methods and their use of
expensive single crystal substrates have prevented these tandem solar cells from
achieving low cost. This project proposes to explore stable and low-cost
polycrystalline thin-film semiconductors, in particular one that absorbs the
blue part of the solar spectrum, to enable low-cost and high conversion
efficiency tandem solar cells. The integrative nature of the research and
education will train and mentor graduate and undergraduate students in cross-
disciplinary skills that are essential for developing innovative solutions as
they enter the workplace and contribute to the U.S. leadership in the burgeoning
field of electronics. The proposed project will benefit the education and
research of graduate and undergraduate students and prepare them as the
workforce of future energy industries.

Technical This project will develop the fundamental scientific knowledge that
will lead to the fabrication of stable and efficient wide bandgap solar cells
and eventually tandem cells made with two dissimilar materials. Polycrystalline
thin film photovoltaic devices offer much lower production cost and complexity
than epitaxial thin films, but their ultimate conversion efficiencies cannot go
beyond the theoretical Shockley-Queisser limit for single-junction solar cells.
A tandem cell made with two dissimilar materials, both low-cost polycrystalline
thin films, would be an ideal choice for next generation low-cost and ultra-high
conversion efficiency photovoltaic devices. The chief reason for failure to
achieve high conversion efficiency polycrystalline thin-film tandem devices is
the lack of an efficient top cell using suitable polycrystalline wide-bandgap
semiconductor materials. Since the efficiency of a tandem device predominantly
depends on the combined open circuit voltages of both semiconductors, a
promising top cell must be able to produce high open circuit voltage. The
proposed project will yield several break-through results: 1) approaches for
synthesizing high-quality wide bandgap thin films will be developed; 2)
fundamental defects physics of such wide bandgap semiconductors will be
thoroughly understood; 3) buffer layers forming front and back junctions will be
discovered and optimized; 4) Wide-bandgap top cells with high conversion
efficiency and high open circuit voltage will be demonstrated; 5) If successful,
it will enable the fabrication of low-cost and high conversion efficiency thin-
film tandem solar cells.