* 1665157
* Unraveling Connections Among Biomolecular Structure, Interfacial Solvent Dynamics, and Conformational Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Vinh Nguyen, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2022
* USD 441,598.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program (CSDMB) of the
Chemistry Division supports the project by Professors Katie Mitchell-Koch and
Vinh Nguyen. Professor Mitchell-Koch is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at Wichita State University, and Professor Nguyen is a faculty member
in the Department of Physics at Virginia Tech. Their research focuses on the
dynamics or movement of solvent molecules around enzymes. Enzymes are molecules
that effect chemical reactions in living systems. They do so with remarkable
efficiency and selectivity. Their ability to perform these tasks depends on
their ability to be flexible. This flexibility is strongly influenced by
interactions between the surface of the enzyme and the solvent it is dissolved
in, and in particular how well different parts of the enzyme can "slip through"
that solvent. Because of the importance of these interactions, the design of new
artificial enzymes relies on understanding how enzymes influence the movement of
solvent molecules on their surface and in turn how those features influence how
the enzyme moves and behaves. With this in mind, Professor Nguyen is developing
unique methods that allow his group to gather data on both solvent movement and
movement within the enzyme at the same time. To compliment these efforts,
Professor Mitchell-Koch employs computational chemistry techniques to provide
insights into how specific features of the enzymes surface change the way the
surrounding solvent behaves and ultimately improve performance of the enzyme. In
this way, the work is poised to guide protein engineering and design of new
biocatalysts for greener production (lower energy costs, higher atom efficiency)
of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. The research provides valuable
opportunities and resources for interdisciplinary training and mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students. Professors Mitchell-Koch and Nguyen have a
strong track record of training undergraduate and graduate students including
those from underrepresented groups in STEM, and they will continue to recruit
and train students to contribute to our nation's capacity for science and
technology. Their outreach activities with middle school and high school
students as a part of the project will strengthen the impacts of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solvent-compatible enzymes (those that function
in organic solvents) present an ideal platform for studying connections between
interfacial solvent dynamics and molecular structure, dynamics, and mechanism,
since enzymatic activity is influenced by protein conformational dynamics. The
project employs the world's highest precision, highest sensitivity and largest
continuous-frequency gigahertz to terahertz spectrometer (with power signal-to-
noise up to 1015 and spectral resolution less than 100 Hz), combined with
molecular dynamics simulations to map protein solvation and molecular
interactions around the surface of biomolecules. Solvents with differing
chemical properties serve as variables, altering intermolecular interactions
with the surface that in turn modify solvent dynamics. Literature reports
support a connection between interfacial solvent dynamics and protein dynamics
in both aqueous solutions and organic solvents. In this effort, the PIs
hypothesize that there is a feedback loop between structure-modified solvent
dynamics and solvent dynamics-protein dynamics that may serve as a protein
design principle. A distinction in the work is that it focuses on local (region-
specific) solvation environments (mapped around the entire protein) rather than
analyzing solvation layer properties as a whole (or relying on bulk solvent
characteristics), as it is thought that these local effects are the primary
arbitrators of solvent dynamics-biomolecular structure-dynamics connections. The
project undertakes the first comprehensive study of organic solvent dynamics at
the enzyme interface, and their relationship to enzyme structure-dynamics-
activity, tying results to measured collective motions and published kinetics
values. Since solvation processes are also critical in charge transfer (electron
and proton transfer), substrate transport, and molecular recognition, it is
imperative to characterize relationships between organic and aqueous solvent
dynamics and surface-solvent interactions to inform design of many interfaces,
from functional materials to de novo proteins. Interdisciplinary training for
undergraduate and graduate researchers with diverse backgrounds is provided in
the Mitchell-Koch and Nguyen laboratories. Outreach activities provide awareness
of terahertz research, dynamics of biomolecules, and computational chemistry
methods to the public and community groups. The Summer NanoCamp at Virginia Tech
gives students, including those in under-represented groups, their
parents/guardians, and school teachers, the ability to participate in activities
designed to foster engagement and interest in nanoscience, including gigahertz
to terahertz science. A workshop on Brownian motion will provide experimental
observations and videos of simulations data, reaching middle school girls at
annual Expanding Your Horizons events at Wichita State. This program will also
be available in K-12 outreach presentations. Assessment of broader impacts
includes longitudinal tracking of research students and teacher/student/parent
surveys for outreach activities.