* 1665407
* SusChEM: Design of Organocatalysts through Computational Screening
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Steven Wheeler, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 358,931.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Steven E. Wheeler. Professor Wheeler is a faculty member in the Center
for Computational Quantum Chemistry, Department of Chemistry at the University
of Georgia. He is developing a free, open-source computational toolkit (AARON)
to facilitate the design of transition-metal free asymmetric catalysts. This
toolkit is being implemented to help develop new catalysts with applications in
the synthesis of complex natural products and pharmaceuticals. This project will
make it easier for non-specialists to use computational chemistry to design and
evaluate new organocatalysts. The primary goal of this project is to provide
computational tools that reduce the time and materials required to design new
catalysts, thereby streamlining the catalyst design process. The project
combines ideas from computational quantum chemistry, software development, data
analytics, and organic synthesis, and provides graduate and undergraduate
students with diverse training in highly transferrable skills. The project also
supports a workshop on computational organic chemistry that is held in
conjunction with an annual undergraduate computational chemistry conference
organized by the MERCURY consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new
asymmetric organocatalysts typically depends on the experimental screening of a
library of potential catalysts to identify the best catalysts for a single
substrate. The substrate scope of this catalyst is then tested. The AARON
program provides an alternative path for the development of organocatalysts with
broad substrate scope by enabling the automated computational screening of
virtual libraries of catalysts applied to multiple substrates simultaneously. In
this way, the synthesis and testing of new catalysts can be prioritized based on
predicted stereoselectivities and catalytic activities across a range of
substrates. AARON is designed to identify novel bifunctional hydrogen bonding
catalysts and chiral phosphoric acids for several reactions and to unravel the
origin of stereoselectivity in ion-pairing catalysis. The development of an
accompanying graphical interface for AARON enable its widespread use among
organic chemists, while an online public database provides access to transition
state structures, energies, and stereoselectivities, facilitating the
application of modern data analysis tools to these rich datasets. Educational
activities include the training of undergraduate and graduate students in
computer programming, advanced electronic structure theory, and physical organic
chemistry. Outreach activities include the development of a computational
organic chemistry workshop for undergraduates, and the training of students in
modern data analytics through the Georgia Informatics Institutes (GII).