* 1665287
* CHE: Combined experimental and theoretical study of solvent effects in heterogeneous catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Liney Arnadottir, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 419,894.00

Many chemical processes essential for our energy future depend on heterogeneous
catalysis, here, the use of a solid material to aid in chemical conversion of
molecules in the liquid state. Examples of important heterogeneous catalysis
processes include biomass conversion to liquid fuels and chemical feedstocks,
electrocatalysis in fuel cells, and photoelectrocatalysts for solar energy
harvesting and storage. The fundamental insights that result from a study of the
solid catalyst surface and the molecules adsorbed to it are able to help in the
design of new and more effective catalysts. Dr. Liney Arnadottir is studying
catalytic processes at the atomic level both with advanced theoretical
calculations of model catalyst-adsorbate complexes and by measuring electronic
structure with x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Broader impacts of the
research are far-reaching in the development of more efficient catalytic
systems. In a parallel effort, broader impacts are made in the development of
human resources. In this study, Dr. Arnadottir provides significant mentorship
of graduate student and undergraduate student researchers in both the scientific
and educational realms. In interactive training with the Dr. Arnadottir,
students apply and hone their own mentoring skills by nurturing high school
students recruited from underrepresented groups as a part of a yearly, one-week
long residential summer camp at Oregon State University known as the Summer
Experience in Science and Engineering for Youth (SESEY). The mentoring
activities during the SESEY camp provide critical communication skills to the
up-and-coming generation of new scientific leaders and also exposes them to the
need for continued STEM outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
Dr. Liney Arnadottir of Oregon State University combines surface
characterization of acetic acid and ethanol in solvent environments using near
ambient pressure X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (NAP-XPS) with theoretical
modeling using Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. With this combined
experimental and computational project, Dr. Arnadottir is able to elucidate
solvent effects in catalysis and thus gain the fundamental understanding
required to predict how solvents change the rates of elementary steps in
catalytic reaction mechanisms. Dissociation of acetic acid is the first step of
vinyl acetate synthesis, which is of great industrial interest. Acetic acid and
ethanol represent common functional groups in larger oxygenates with broad
scientific interest. Three solvents are investigated in this study: water, which
is a common and widely used solvent; 1,4 dioxane, which has been shown to
enhance hydrodeoxygenation activity of Pd(111) over water; and heptane,
representing a non-polar solvent. Broader impacts of the research are far-
reaching in the development of more efficient catalytic systems. In a parallel
effort, broader impacts are made in the development of human resources.
Theoretical and experimental studies are performed in a closely-coupled feedback
loop intended to improve the investigative efficiency and to serve as a learning
vehicle for the mentorship of the graduate and undergraduate student
researchers. Underrepresented high school students are part of the research
team, brought in through a mini-research project as a part of the Summer
Experience in Science and Engineering for Youth (SESEY) camp at Oregon State
University. All graduate and undergraduate students in this project serve as
mentors for the SESEY participants providing the opportunity to participate in
outreach activities and develop their ability to teach, mentor and communicate
their research to different audiences. This carefully designed study provides
valuable insights into catalytic solvent effects, allows identification of
trends regarding the interactions between solvent and adsorbed reaction
intermediates, and simultaneously creates a vehicle for training the next
generation of STEM leaders.