* 1665375
* SusChEM: Design Principles Inspired by Symmetry for Controlling Singlet Fission in Structurally Well-Defined Covalent Dimers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Tarek Sammakia, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2021
* USD 530,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professors Niels H. Damrauer and Tarek Sammakia of
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Colorado
Boulder are synthesizing new organic molecular systems that contain two
chromophores (i.e., parts of the molecules that can absorb light) and using
spectroscopy to explore their photophysics. The goal is to develop design rules
for how the arrangement of the chromophores controls excited state reactivity
following visible light photoexcitation. The particular reaction of interest is
important in certain next-generation strategies to increase the efficiency of
solar cells by limiting waste heat production that generally occurs when higher
energy solar photons are absorbed. This proposal establishes a fundamental
research program where students are exposed to a considerable breadth of ideas
in synthesis, spectroscopy, and applications of electronic structure theory. A
specific outreach effort in collaboration with local high school teachers is
part of the funded work that aims to provide sophisticated but affordable
spectroscopic tools and curriculum ideas to Colorado high school science
programs.

Singlet fission is a photophysical phenomenon observed in certain organic
materials wherein light absorption produces a spin-allowed singlet excited state
that then non-radiatively converts to a pair of triplet excitations. If these
triplets can be further transformed to charge carriers, it is possible to
envision device scenarios where the solar spectrum is more efficiently utilized
compared to devices in operation today. This research is predicated on the idea
that molecular dimers are the fundamental unit for singlet fission and that they
can provide a platform wherein synthetic manipulations that control the spatial
juxtaposition and covalent interaction of chromophores are called upon to affect
key photophysical rate constants. The most important design opportunity that is
being tested relates to dimer point group symmetry and the idea that it can
control the interference (constructive vs. destructive) of pathways in the
quantum mechanical description of diabatic coupling for singlet fission. Other
strategies will call on substituents to affect the relative energy of charge
transfer states.