* 1665247
* Hemispheric Energy Balance and Tropical Precipitation Shifts: The Impacts of Forcing Location
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2022
* USD 594,498.00

Rainfall in the tropics can be highly variable, and much of the region's large
population is vulnerable to water stress. Recent research has identified remote
radiative heating and cooling, for example the cooling effect volcanic and
anthropogenic aerosols, as a driver of north-south shifts in tropical
precipitation associated with the intertropical convergence zones (ITCZs; narrow
regions of high preciptation over the oceans near the equator). Such shifts are
implicated in the prolonged drought in the Sahel region of North Africa during
the latter half of the 20th century, and could be consequential for other
regions as well. Research on the role of remote heating and cooling has also
produced an explanation for why the Pacific and Atlantic ITCZs are typically
north of the equator, and for the southward shift of the Atlantic ITCZ shown in
proxy data from the last ice age, when much of the Northern Hemisphere was
covered with highly reflective ice and snow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
relationship between ITCZ shifts and remote radiative forcing is explained in
terms of inter-hemispheric heat transport: if one hemisphere is cooled relative
to the other heat will be transported from the warmer hemisphere toward the
colder hemisphere, and atmospheric energy transport across the equator will take
place through the upper-tropospheric branch of the Hadley circulation. But the
overturning motion of the Hadley cell requires that as energy is transported in
one direction at upper levels moisture must be transported the other way near
the surface. Thus moisture crosses the equator from the colder hemisphere to the
warmer hemisphere, resulting in a shift of ITCZ precipitation toward the warmer
hemisphere (in today's climate the Northern Hemisphere is colder on average than
the Southern Hemisphere, thus the ITCZ is north of the
equator).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues the PIs' exploration of
the relationship between radiative forcing, inter-hemispheric heat transport,
and north-south shifts of ITCZ precipitation. One key issue is that the theory
assumes that cross-equatorial heat transport will occur in the atmosphere, and
the theory was developed using atmospheric models coupled to "slab" ocean models
which do not allow changes in ocean transport. Preliminary evidence suggests
that the extent to which the transport occurs in the ocean rather than the
atmosphere depends on where the radiative forcing occurs, for example heat
transport in response to radiative forcing in the middle and high latitudes of
the Southern Hemisphere appears to occur primarily in the ocean, while radiative
forcing in the North Atlantic yields more transport in the atmosphere than in
the ocean. The PIs perform experiments with the Community Earth System Model
(CESM) to understand the dependence of the partitioning of heat transport
between the atmosphere and ocean and to determine how this partitioning depends
on the region in which the radiative forcing is applied. Other issues pursued
here include differences in ITCZ response when the radiative forcing occurs over
land rather than ocean surfaces, and differences in the response depending on
the magnitude and sign (heating versus cooling) of the radiative
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shifts in tropical precipitation are of great
practical as well as scientific interest given the region's large population and
vulnerability. Attempts to anticipate future changes in tropical precipitation
rely on output from climate models, but such guidance is hampered by large
differences in simulated precipitation change from one model to another. A
theoretical framework for understanding precipitation change is thus highly
desirable. Beyond the societal broader impacts of the research itself, the PIs
perform a variety of outreach activities, including educational videos for
grades K-12 and at local venues such as the Seattle Science Center. In addition,
the project supports and mentors a graduate student and a postdoctoral research
associate, thereby providing for the furture workforce in this research area.