* 1665367
* Models and Dynamics for Energy and Charge Transfer in Light Harvesting
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 515,003.00

David Coker from Boston University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop new theoretical and
computational tools for understanding how light is harvested through
photosynthesis both in natural systems like plants and bacteria, and synthetic
ones. He develops methods for modeling, analyzing and predicting spectroscopic
signatures of energy transport and charge separation processes that are
essential components of photosynthesis. Nature has developed remarkable ways of
adapting nano-scale structures at the molecular level to optimize function under
varying conditions. Mimicking this versatility in new bio-inspired nano-
materials and technologies requires a fundamental understanding of the workings
of these microscopic processes. Such understanding is currently missing or
poorly developed. The new theoretical and computational methods explored in this
research will provide the means to interpret and guide experiments with the goal
of developing fundamental understanding of the behavior of these systems. Such
knowledge is key to the design of versatile functional molecular nano-structures
for light energy harvesting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
Coker and his team will first focus on extending, first principles, excited
state quantum chemical methods and conformational sampling techniques to compute
the distributions of parameters in models of the biological light harvesting
systems that have received much attention in recent ultrafast nonlinear
spectroscopy studies. Such models are usually employed to interpret the results
of these averaged experiments. These best-fit, average models have many
parameters that can be difficult to estimate and they are not generally unique,
often leading to ambiguous interpretation. The theoretical methods being
developed by the Coker group, however, enable detailed analysis of fluctuations
underlying the average and the sampling of an ensemble of unique models that
include, for example, highly performing structural outliers whose
characteristics will give important understanding for optimal design, rather
than mean behavior. In the second project, dissipative quantum dynamical methods
are employed to compute spectroscopic properties and study relaxation processes
including energy transport and charge separation using the ensembles of computed
models. A suite of techniques will be implemented ranging from standard
perturbative approximations including Redfield theory, and variants of Forster
theory, to more general non-perturbative approaches including path-integral,
semi-classical, and mixed quantum-classical methods like the partial linearized
density matrix dynamics approaches developed in previous work. An efficient,
automated scheme for switching between different dynamical treatments will be
implemented using criteria to decide which approach will provide an optimal
description of the dynamics, balancing accuracy and reliability with
computational cost for a given sampled model. The development of this scheme is
important to make the sampling of these widely fluctuating models efficient, as
the ensemble may explore models in very different dynamical regimes. This
adaptive approach to computing the ensemble dynamics will be benchmarked against
exact calculations that can be performed on smaller simplified models before it
is implemented to study large-scale realistic systems.