* 1665315
* From Theory of Energy Decomposition Analysis to Rational Force Field Design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Teresa Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 776,552.00

Teresa Head-Gordon and Martin Head-Gordon are supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop computational and theoretical models and methods that can
be used to make accurate predictions for the behavior of complex molecular and
bimolecular systems. This collaborative project combines the mutual development
of advanced force fields and energy decomposition analysis (EDA). The field of
biomolecular modeling and simulation currently relies on a simple representation
of the potential energy surface of molecules based on what is known as the
"pairwise additive" force field. But to design new drugs or new biomaterials the
field needs new and higher accuracy molecular mechanics (MM) force fields. These
new force fields introduce new terms that describe processes not considered in
simple pair-wise force fields, for example, polarization and charge transfer.
The introduction of such terms pose great challenges for rational force field
design as well algorithmic and software challenges. The force field development
is enabled in part by using information from an energy decomposition method
(EDA) that is based on state-of-the art quantum mechanical (QM) calculations.
This collaborative proposal is a partnership that couple's advances in EDA
methods with the design and validation of next generation force fields, in a way
that permits each to advance the impact of the other. These methods are used to
help synthetic chemists make new drugs, to aid in the design of new functional
materials, and to create new catalysts that speed up chemical reactions by many
orders of magnitude. All the methods developments resulting from this proposal
are being implemented in many widely used computational chemistry software
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
built on three main thrusts. First, to impact the efficiency of polarizable
force fields, a new procedure to avoid self-consistent iterations is being
developed for use in MM dynamics, and within the inner loop of QM/MM
calculations. Second, the two research groups are engaged in a major effort to
test and improve MM parameters in polarizable force fields for condensed phase
modeling, to assess non-bonded parameters for Pauli-exclusion, permanent
electrostatics, polarization, and to explore models for additional short-range
contributions from charge penetration, charge transfer, and exchange repulsion.
In addition, attention is paid to torsional and solute-solvent interactions in
biomolecules, where there is significant scope for improvement. These efforts,
informed by EDA tools, are complemented by validation studies including scalar
couplings in polypeptides, Stark effects and melting curves in three proteins.
Specific outcomes include an upgraded polarizable potential of the AMOEBA
family, as a well as more advanced model that includes additional non-classical
terms. The third thrust is the development of EDA methods. New capabilities that
inform the MM developments include force decomposition analysis, partitioning of
polarization into direct and indirect terms and the many-body decomposition of
the latter. A soundly based EDA for coupled cluster (CC) theory is being
developed. Finally, new advances in variational EDA for chemical bonds are
pioneered including multiple bonds and dynamical correlation. When developed the
advanced MM potential energy surfaces methodology and models will be provided to
OpenMM, OMNIA, TINKER, and LibEFP, and the new proposed EDA capabilities to
Q-Chem and ONETEP. The Head-Gordon groups develop training materials based on
this research for use in computational chemistry community workshops and
schools. Plans are to distribute these materials through interaction with the
Molecular Sciences Software Institute (MolSSI) as well as through Q-Chem's
instructional support web pages