* 1665370
* CDS&amp;E: Massively Parallel Quantum Dynamics: Computing many accurate quantum states for real molecular applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Lionel Poirier, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 562,407.00

Lionel "Bill" Poirier of Texas Tech University is supported by a CDS&amp;E
(Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering) award from the Chemical
Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division, and
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. He and his research group are
developing methods to scale exact quantum dynamical molecular simulations across
the next generation of massively parallel supercomputers. Molecular simulations
promise to enable computers to replace expensive and time-consuming laboratory
experiments. Thus, these simulations used routinely in many areas (energy, drug
design, nanomaterials, etc). However, most simulations treat the atomic nuclei
that make up the molecules as classical particles and ignore quantum dynamical
effects of nuclear motion. Quantum effects can be important, and excluding them
may lead to unreliable results. Including them, on the other hand, presents
daunting numerical hurdles and difficult mathematics. To meet this challenge,
Poirier and coworkers are developing the world's first massively parallel exact
quantum dynamics code, SwitchIT, which is also designed to be easy to use (even
for "non-experts") and easy to access (anyone may download the package for
free). SwitchIT may thus dramatically improve the accuracy, reliability and true
predictive power of molecular simulations, in the many areas where these are
employed. Poirier and coworkers plan to release the SwitchIT as open source and
build a user community around the language by ensuring that interested
researchers can contribute to the SwitchIT codebase. This permits a wider growth
of the project. This aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for
this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in
supercomputing technology promise great leaps forward in scientific computation,
with the potential to significantly advance a broad range of scientific fields.
Increasingly, cutting edge science has come to rely on large-scale
interdisciplinary collaboration, shared infrastructure, and massively parallel
high performance computers (HPC). At the same time, within the chemical dynamics
field, there has been a shift towards larger and more diverse systems, including
nanomaterials and biological molecules. Finally, the need to incorporate quantum
dynamical (QD) effects in numerical simulations in order to obtain accurate
results is becoming increasingly recognized, even for large systems (e.g.,
electron transport in photosynthesis). The convergence of these trends is
inevitable. Yet, due to steep learning curves and/or lack of access, relatively
few chemists currently benefit from either HPC or exact QD. Poirier's research
seeks to leverage the power of HPC, to enable exact QD calculations for larger
and more challenging molecular applications than heretofore realized. Such
calculations constitute a pioneering advance over previous exact QD efforts,
with massive parallelization a vital CDS&amp;E feature of the approach taken.
The implementation also fuses together two linear algebra innovations that: (1)
enable efficient parallelization of sparse iterative linear solvers and
eigensolvers across 1000 - 10000 cores; (2) use wavelets to reduce the basis
size to a manageable level, even for exact QD systems with as many as 12 atoms.
"Expert" QD practitioners can tap into SwitchIT at a low level to introduce HPC
capability into their own QD codes, whereas SwitchIT provides non-experts with
an easy-to-use front end and extensive documentation. In addition, Poirier and
group members regularly provide guidance and training, as well as access to the
Texas Tech Chemistry Computation Cluster. Poirier's group members themselves
receive intensive interdisciplinary training in computational science and next-
generation HPC highly relevant skills, e.g., for American competitiveness. In
short, this NSF award extends the complexity of systems that can be studied with
exact QD, while simultaneously cyber-enabling a much broader cross section of
the community to perform such calculations.