* 1665029
* Dielectric Loss Processes and Microwave Effects on Reactions in Homogeneous Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Albert Stiegman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 07/31/2022
* USD 469,999.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Albert E. Stiegman at Florida State
University and Professor Gregory B. Dudley at West Virginia University are
developing a better fundamental understanding of how microwave heating can
impact dynamic chemical processes. The discovery that microwave energy can
create heat within a system has had profound impacts on society, but only in the
last few decades has this technology found tactical use in organic chemistry.
The long-term goal of this project is to harness microwave energy strategically
to expand the capabilities of organic chemistry. This multidisciplinary project
lies at the interface of chemical reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and
chemical synthesis. It provides excellent education and training for students
from diverse backgrounds, including those from under-represented groups, to
enter a dynamic and multidisciplinary workforce in the global innovation-based
economy. An emphasis is being placed on widespread dissemination of emerging
theories of microwave dielectric heating through online tutorial websites,
scientific workshops, and perspective articles aimed at helping the research
community with the strategic application of microwave heating in organic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microwave dielectric heating is known to enable
volumetric heating of homogeneous systems and selective heating of heterogeneous
systems, but selective heating of multicomponent solutions is not well
documented. The planned experiments are expected to demonstrate that: (1)
selective heating can perturb thermal equilibrium in multicomponent solution,
(2) perturbation of thermal equilibrium produces chemical dynamics and
reactivity patterns that cannot be produced with convective heating, and (3)
solutions that are amenable to selective heating can be rationally designed and
optimized. The proposed research efforts could advance knowledge and
understanding of chemical dynamics under microwave dielectric heating, including
how they differ from convective heat-transfer processes. Selective heating in
multicomponent solution can have profound impacts on synthetic chemistry,
including fine-chemical synthesis, catalysis, green chemistry, flow chemistry,
etc.