* 1665212
* Next-Generation NMR Crystallography Through Ab Initio Structure Refinement
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Gregory Beran, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 486,122.00

Gregory Beran of the University of California Riverside is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to develop new computational tools that will facilitate the
determination of three-dimensional crystal structures via nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Knowledge of molecular crystal structures is
essential in pharmaceuticals and many other areas of chemistry. Different
crystal packing motifs ("polymorphs") of the same molecule can exhibit vastly
different properties, and occurrences of undesirable polymorphs have caused
major drug recalls and other serious problems for patients and pharmaceutical
manufacturers. NMR spectroscopy is increasingly used to determine crystal
structures and characterize different polymorphs. Translating the set of peaks
present in an NMR spectrum into a three-dimensional crystal structure frequently
involves trial-and-error computational modeling of potential structures to
identify the structure whose predicted NMR spectrum best matches the
experimentally observed one. This project develops computational tools to
circumvent this trial-and-error process and enable direct crystal structure
refinement which can automatically solve for the crystal structure that produces
the experimentally observed NMR spectrum. These new tools will significantly
improve the utility of NMR for solving crystal structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving these goals requires research advances in three
areas. First, new computationally practical electronic structure methods for
modeling the non-covalent interactions that govern crystal packing are being
developed to enable identification of good initial crystal structures. Second,
because accurate predictions of the NMR chemical shifts for a given structure
are essential to discriminating between correct and incorrect structural
assignments when comparing predicted and observed spectra, models which predict
NMR chemical shifts more reliably than widely used existing techniques are being
developed. Third, to enable direct NMR-driven crystal structure refinement,
machine learning models that reproduce how changes in molecular conformation and
crystal packing impact the chemical shifts are being developed. Success will
lead to greater ability to engineer molecular crystals with desired properties.
In addition, this award is supporting outreach activities at a local elementary
school and production of online tools to educate new users about computational
chemistry approaches.