* 1665117
* Collaborative Research: A Study of Interactional, Organizational and Professional Mechanisms of Disadvantage in the Underrepresented and Marginalized STEM Workforce
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Erin Cech, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 508,387.00

This award is supported the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. This research project is making contributions to the field in the areas
of STEM workforce development and broadening participation in STEM. The proposed
work is advancing basic understanding about the intersectional mechanisms of
disadvantage, at the interpersonal, organizational and professional levels, for
underrepresented groups in STEM. There is a pressing need to ensure that a
diverse STEM workforce is engaged to advance our nation's progress in science,
engineering and education, to address national societal needs through STEM
research and education, and to contribute to the 21st century U.S. workforce. By
better understanding the professional, workplace and interactional variables
that contribute to mechanisms of disadvantage, marginalization and
underrepresentation of STEM professionals, our nation can better address
barriers to success, can more strongly facilitate the integration of STEM
education and research, and can enhance our engagement of a diverse 21st century
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project leaders at the University of Michigan
and Temple University are collaborating to collect survey and interview data
from STEM professionals about social and cultural variables found at the
interpersonal, organizational and professional levels that produce disadvantage
and marginalization in the workplace. They are examining demographic variables,
such as race, ethnicity, age, gender, sexuality, and disability, and the
researchers are conducting numerous measures of workplace policies and
practices, of interactional climates on the job, and of professional cultures.
The data is being used by the researchers to better understand the interactions
among these data to advance knowledge about disadvantage for underrepresented
STEM professionals in the U.S. At the completion of this exploratory study, it
is anticipated that results will inform future basic and applied broadening
participation in STEM research about our nation's underrepresented STEM
workforce. The results of this work are expected to be shared with education and
STEM researchers in professional publications and shared with STEM professional
organizations, employers and the public in study briefings.