* 1665136
* Ligand-centered copper, zinc, and metal-free hydrogen evolution catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Craig Grapperhaus, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professors Craig A. Grapperhaus and Pawel M. Kozlowski. Professors Grapperhaus
and Kozlowski are faculty members of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Louisville. They are developing novel ligand-centered
electrocatalysts for the evolution and oxidation of hydrogen. Hydrogen serves as
a promising alternative carbon-free fuel and is an essential building block for
industrial and agricultural processes. Currently, 95% of industrial hydrogen
derives from unsustainable fossil-fuel cracking. The catalysts in this project
employ a ligand-centered approach. Ligands are small molecules that bind a
central metal into a complex. A major advantage of the ligand-centered approach
is that the organic framework functions as the active site, allowing the
development of catalysts that are metal-free or promoted by sustainable
transition-metals (e.g. copper) or non-transition metals (e.g. zinc). The
project facilitates the development of sustainable hydrogen evolution/oxidation
systems, which have practical applications. It further strengthens connections
between the researchers and the Conn Renewable Energy Center, a center that
promotes partnerships among Kentucky's colleges and universities, private
industries, and non-profit organizations dedicated to renewable energy
solutions. Graduate students and undergraduate participants learn a diverse
combination of skills including synthesis, characterization, electrochemistry,
and computation. The project is well suited for undergraduate research students,
who participate and make contributions on a topic of interest and concern to
many young scientists-in-training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The catalysts in this
project are at the forefront of an emerging ligand-centered approach that avoids
traditional metal-hydrides, which have been well studied. In contrast, the
ligand-centered approach remains underdeveloped, and fundamental questions
regarding structure-activity relationships remain to be answered. Symmetric and
asymmetric N2S2 bis-thiosemicarbazone catalysts are prepared under three metal
loading conditions: 1) transition metal (copper); 2) non-transition metal
(zinc); 3) metal-free. The functional groups on the ligands and metal-component
are varied to evaluate ligand- and metal effects on catalytic activity. The
requisite features required for ligand-centered hydrogen evolution/oxidation are
being established through a systematic "trimming" of the bis-thiosemicarbazone
framework involving the synthesis of new catalysts based on fragments of the
larger ligand. Using insights developed during the project, a third-generation
of ligand-centered catalysts are under design as "active site pockets" that
position key components in the proper geometric positions to promote activity.
The educational plan includes graduate and undergraduate training with an
emphasis on minority and first-generation college students.