* 1665521
* Technical Career Pathways for Rural Manufacturing: Using a Sector Approach to Support the Northwest Intermountain Metal Manufacturers (NIMM)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jeffrey Ober, Lewis-Clark State College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 839,809.00

The Technical Career Pathways for Rural Manufacturing project is developing a
program to raise awareness and interest in computer aided drafting, machining,
and electronics technician careers and prepare students with the critical skills
necessary to enter the workforce and pursue higher education to be better
positioned for successful careers in the manufacturing sector. This project will
provide unique educational opportunities and pathways for rural communities with
large populations of underrepresented and first-generation college students.

The goals of this project are to create and deliver a program that develops
entry-level Mechanical CADD technicians and Electro-mechanical technicians and
to generate student interest and participation in manufacturing education and
careers. This project is meeting these goals by: 1) developing and delivering
online courses in employability skills, CADD and Blueprint reading, 3D modeling,
and Introduction to Engineering Design; 2) developing and delivering summer
skill academies in machining and electronics; 3) recruiting and retaining
underrepresented students from participating schools in Northcentral Idaho and
Southeastern Washington; and, 4) delivering structured career counseling and
mentoring. The unique hybrid model of online and in person CTE delivery of
technical and soft skills identified through a skills inventory will greatly
enhance our knowledge of evidence based workforce development practices.