* 1665305
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Understanding Hydrogen Interactions with Metastable Surfaces for Tunable Catalysis Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 437,265.00

The ability to transform abundant resources, such as carbon dioxide and water,
into energy-dense fuels and high-valued chemicals plays an important role in our
pursuit of sustainable energy and chemical technologies. These processes often
benefit from the presence of a heterogeneous catalyst, a solid substance that is
able to direct the chemical reactions along faster, more efficient pathways.
Designing catalyst materials with structure and compositions tailored to
accelerate the desired chemical transformations is an important area of chemical
research. In this project, a collaborative effort among Dr. Richard Hennig, Dr.
Richard Robinson, and Dr. Jin Suntivich targets variation in composition and
structure to create catalysts known as "metastable catalysts" since they fall
outside of the normal solubility and structural ranges. The team is examining
how to design and build metastable catalysts that efficiently and selectively
convert carbon dioxide and water to hydrogen and high-valued compounds. Beyond
creating new knowledge that can bring more sustainable energy and chemical
technologies closer to reality, the investigators are actively engaged in
outreach educational activities. These include a summer internship in the
principle investigators' laboratories for undergraduate students and the
creation of catalysis demonstration kits designed to disseminate the concepts of
atomic building blocks and their role in catalysis technology. These activities
are directed at improving student interest in chemical science and materials
technology from the K-12 to undergraduate levels, and particularly target women
and members of underrepresented minorities to build diversity in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical Catalysis program
of the Chemistry Division, a collaborative project among Dr. Richard Hennig, Dr.
Richard Robinson, and Dr. Jin Suntivich is examining how metastable surfaces can
be structured to control the surface hydrogen interaction, and, consequently,
the hydrogen evolution reaction and carbon dioxide reduction catalysis. The
surface hydrogen interaction is believed to play an important role in
stabilizing the intermediates of the hydrogen evolution reaction and the
selectivity of the carbon dioxide reduction reaction. This project exploits
metastable oxysulfide nanocrystals as model systems with expanded compositional
ranges to enable a systematic analysis of composition, surface interaction and
electrocatalytic performance. Combined theoretical and experimental studies are
used in collaboration to verify the structure - activity connection at the
atomic level and allows the PIs to determine how to design the surface structure
and composition rationally to improve the catalysis performance. Broader impacts
of the research result from an improved understanding of catalyst function and
design in sustainable energy and chemical technologies. Broader impacts made
through educational activities include graduate and undergraduate student
trainings in chemical catalysis research from both theory and experiment sides
in the principal investigators' laboratories. Additionally, catalysis
demonstration kits are created to visually illustrate how to build catalytic
nanomaterials from atomic building blocks and how each different building block
can affect selected catalysis performance.