* 1665067
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Punishment and Work in the US Prison System
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Jeffrey Sallaz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 04/30/2018
* USD 11,869.00

This project will address how inmate labor in US prisons is organized, what
strategies and practices inmates draw on in different work contexts, and how
different inmate groups experience and are affected by work behind bars. The US
now has more prisoners than any other nation. Most eligible inmates work during
their time in prison. These working prisoners facilitate daily prison functions,
perform services for surrounding municipalities, and provide goods and services
for state and private entities. Debates persist over the implications of inmate
labor for individual offenders and society as a whole. This dissertation
research will address ongoing theoretical debates and public discussions
regarding punishment and work by foregrounding the structure of inmate work
programs and the on-the-job experiences and understandings of inmates and prison
staff members alike. It will move beyond questions of who is sent to prison in
the first place or how offenders fare post-release; instead, this project
contributes to an understanding of how penal labor practices impact different
segments of the inmate population in the time between initial incarceration and
eventual release, as well as implications for individuals? outcomes and
aspirations. This research will provide novel insights into prison labor that
may be useful to prison administrators and policymakers tasked with addressing
these issues.&lt;br/&gt;Two central questions guide this research: (1) How are
prison work programs and employment systems structured (i.e., what types of
positions are available, how must inmates compete for assignments, what skills
or qualities are prioritized in the prison labor market)? (2) How does this
structure help shape the experiences, outlooks, and outcomes of working
offenders? To address these concerns, this research draws on 18 months of
ethnographic observations in prison work programs within one anonymous state
prison in the US Sunbelt region, as well as 82 in-depth interviews with inmate
laborers and prison staff members. Online and archival data detailing the
characteristics of prisons and prison work programs throughout the Sunbelt
region help situate findings from this field site in broader contexts. Much
research on penal labor and its outcomes relies on quantitative analyses of
aggregate trends or post-release reports from ex-offenders. This study provides
a rigorous assessment of prison labor from the inside, utilizing sociological
theories of the labor process, punishment, and social reproduction to help
explain how nuanced experiences of work in prison may impact those behind bars.
Findings contribute to carceral sociology, the sociology of work, and to prison
and labor policy.