* 1665145
* Asymmetric Synthesis of Alkaloids Enabled by Novel Methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Rodrigo Andrade, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 05/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Rodrigo B. Andrade. Professor Andrade is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Temple University. He is developing new chemical
reactions to quickly build complex nitrogen-containing molecules. The
overarching goal is to maximize the efficiency by which complex, three-
dimensional molecules are prepared by using new reagents and reactions
discovered in his laboratory. Such an approach reduces the time, energy, and
cost associated with synthesizing complex molecules composed of carbon and
nitrogen atoms. Many such molecules are biologically active, and so they can be
employed as molecular probes to better understand biochemical pathways or as
therapeutics to be used in medicine. Beyond the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, the broader
impacts of this project touch the fields of organic chemistry (e.g., total
synthesis, synthetic methodology), chemical biology, molecular biology,
biochemistry, and medicine.

N-Sulfinyl metallodienamines (NSMDs) have emerged as powerful asymmetric
synthons for chemical synthesis. The focus of this project is to determine both
the mechanism and scope of reactions using acyclic NSMDs with a variety of
electrophiles, which logically builds from previous efforts on arene-fused
congeners. Specifically, in Aim 1 the researchers are studying the scope of the
reactions of acyclic NSMDs with electrophilic olefins to afford cycloadducts
through a Domino Michael/Mannich (formal Diels-Alder) process. In Aim 2, the
research group is applying optimal reaction conditions determined from Aim 1
toward the step-efficient, asymmetric total syntheses of complex Iboga alkaloids
(+)-catharanthine, (+)-coronaridine, and (+)-ibogamine. In Aim 3, the research
students are systematically investigating the reactions of NSMDs with aldehydes
(vinylogous aldol) and imines (vinylogous Mannich). In Aim 4, researchers are
probing the reactions of NSMDs with electrophilic oxygen and nitrogen sources to
access alpha-functionalized N-sulfinyl imines, which can be further modified to
access chiral building blocks for organic synthesis. Computer modeling is used
in all mechanistic analyses. Professor Andrade has demonstrated a strong
commitment to the inclusion of undergraduates, particularly from
underrepresented groups, in his research activities.