* 1665265
* Mechanistic Insights into Covalent and Ionic Contributions to Molecular Adsorption and Reaction on Transition Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zhenmeng Peng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 311,847.00

Catalysis is a process in which one chemical substance provides a new and easier
pathway for reactant (feedstock) chemicals to produce more desirable products.
Catalytic chemicals can greatly enhance the reaction rates, which allows the
reactions to proceed under milder and more controllable conditions, and improves
the selectivity to the desired product (fewer by-products). Currently,
developing a good catalyst for a specific, desirable reaction is challenging and
requires good knowledge of how the reactants and catalyst interact. In this
project, Dr. Zhenmeng Peng is researching the key factors that determine
reactant-catalyst interactions for transition metals in carbon monoxide (CO)
oxidation catalysis. Dr. Peng's approach is to improve upon an adsorption model
for accurate calculation of these interactions from easy to perform
measurements. Knowledge gained in this research helps to significantly
accelerate the search for new catalysts. Catalysis plays an essential role in
chemical, petrochemical and energy industries, with catalytic materials being
widely used for chemical conversions and energy generation, and thus the
research has broad societal impact. Dr. Peng is also actively engaged in a
number of outreach activities, aimed at creating early scientific interest in
high school students and influencing their career development in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. He is involved in the
development of a nanocatalysis learning module for K-12 teachers, mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students, development of a community learning network
course, and diversity outreach efforts with Women in Engineering (WIE) and
Increasing Diversity in Engineering Academics (IDEA) programs at the University
of Akron. THe also mentors undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them
for future careers in areas that require chemistry and engineering
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Zhenmeng Peng at the University of Akron is
developing an improved model of d-band theory of adsorption energy (Ead) using
readily-measured catalyst parameters. He is using a multi-approach mechanistic
study of carbon monoxide oxidation to test this improvement. To this aim, Dr.
Peng is synthesizing model catalysts with a controlled d-band center and work
function parameters and examining their correlations with CO and O2 adsorption.
The research employs Ead of the reacting species to obtain information on the
reaction mechanism and other important catalytic properties which are
challenging to measure experimentally. Establishing an exact Ead-catalyst
parameter relationship allows Dr. Peng to characterize adsorbate and reactive
intermediate bonding to the metal substrate, the knowledge of which helps to
understand the catalytic mechanism, identify reactive intermediates, and guide
catalyst research. Driven by the hypothesis that implicit inclusion of both
covalent and ionic contributions to d-band theory can significantly improve the
accuracy of the theory, Dr. Peng relates the metal d-band center and work
function to Ead for inclusion of the covalent and ionic fractions, respectively.
Knowledge gained in this research helps to significantly accelerate the search
for new catalysts. Catalysis plays an essential role in chemical, petrochemical
and energy industries, with catalytic materials being widely used for chemicals
conversion and energy generation, and thus the research has broad societal
impact. Dr. Peng is actively engaged in a number of outreach activities, in
support of the broader impacts of the project, to educate students and improve
the public interest in chemistry knowledge and technology. K-12 students and
underrepresented minority students are particularly targeted in the outreach
activities.