* 1665141
* New Lewis Bases for Chemical Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Karl Scheidt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

New Lewis Bases for Chemical Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by Professor
Karl Scheidt. Professor Scheidt is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at Northwestern University. He is developing new classes of chemical
catalysts. Chemical catalysts enable the efficient and sustainable synthesis of
new small molecules and materials that are important for pharmaceutical,
material science, and biomedical research communities. Because of their utility
in these areas, catalysts derived from Lewis bases (molecules capable of
donating an electron pair), and in particular N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs),
have been of particular interest, and work with these systems has exploded
during the last decade. In this effort, NHCs have frequently been employed as
ligands to generate chiral metal complexes as well as catalysts in their own
right in the absence of a transition metal (metal free or organocatalysis). Yet
in spite of this effort, little is known about how NHC-based catalysts can be
tuned in order to optimize their performance in new classes of reactions. For
this reason, the Scheidt group is exploring a novel family of NHC-transition
metal complexes as catalysts. These new systems can be used to systematically
study how changes in structure alter the properties and catalytic behavior of
the NHC. The work has broad implications for how new catalysts in the NHC-family
will be designed in the future. The project lies at the intersection of organic,
asymmetric synthesis, and catalysis and thus is excellent for training and
education in interdisciplinary science. In terms of broader impacts of the
project, Dr. Scheidt is actively engaged in outreach activities focused on
underrepresented group recruitment into the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sustainability and advancement of
society relies on new discoveries based on molecular science. One such discovery
is the general utility of new electron-rich molecules (Lewis bases) as catalysts
for a broad range of reactions, many of which have implications for materials,
biological, and pharmacological efforts. In the specific work being pursued, Dr.
Scheidt is using a novel family of N-heterocyclic carbine (NHC)-metal complexes
to both catalyze new asymmetric bond forming reactions and to provide new
mechanistic insights into how the nucleophilicity of an NHC-catalyst can be
tuned. The specific synthetic targets selected for the effort are alpha-boryl
amines. Since there are major limitations to the currently available methods for
alpha-borylation reactions that have hampered the use of the chosen targets as
synthetic building blocks, the choice of the alpha boryl amines as targets
nicely highlights the broad synthetic implications of the catalysts being
developed. The mechanistic insights being gained center on advancing our
knowledge of Lewis base and transition metal catalysis and determining the
structure-reactivity relationships that govern catalyst behavior. Dr. Scheidt's
outreach activities build on his research and target the improved recruitment of
underrepresented groups into the chemistry doctoral program at Northwestern
University.