* 1665440
* Asymmetric Formal [4+1]-Cycloadditions for the Stereoselective Assembly of Quaternary Stereogenic Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Brandon Ashfeld, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Brandon L. Ashfeld. Professor Ashfeld is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Notre Dame, and is
developing new synthetic methods that enable construction of functionalized
heterocyclic and carbocyclic frameworks that contain very difficult to
synthesize tetrasubstituted carbons. Cyclic systems that contain
tetrasubstituted (or quaternary) carbons are found in a great number of
molecules used in biological and materials science settings. Yet in spite of
their importance, these ring systems remain difficult to synthesize, especially
if they need to be constructed as a single "right-handed" or left-handed" mirror
image in order to control molecular interactions with a biological system. To
address this issue, Professor Ashfeld and his students are developing new
methods for constructing both the hetero- and carbocyclic systems and the highly
hindered quaternary carbons they contain. These methods take advantage of a
transition metal catalyzed formal [4+1]-cycloaddition between a single carbon
unit and a polarized four atom substrate. The catalyst used is chiral so that
the reaction affords predominately one mirror image of the product. The project
outcomes are broadly impacting the disciplines of synthetic and physical
organic, organometallic, medicinal, and materials chemistry both in terms of the
methods developed and the products generated. The scientific goals of the
project integrate seamlessly with the education/outreach pursuits through the
implementation of a target-based pedagogical philosophy toward STEM education at
the secondary and post-secondary levels. These educational efforts are being
complimented by Professor Ashfeld's contributions to the Upward Bound College
Preparatory program in South Bend Indiana that serve to extend the program's
reach beyond his labs to the larger community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quaternary
stereogenic carbons and carbo- and heterocycles are pervasive architectures
across numerous facets of academic and industrial chemical research. Despite the
ubiquitous presence of 5-membered carbocycles and heterocycles in medicinal
chemistry (e.g., CNS drugs, analgesics, antibiotics, etc.) and materials science
(e.g., ionic liquids, high energy materials, etc.), the number of reliable
methods for the assembly of highly substituted rings with flexible site-specific
functionalization capabilities is relatively limited. Additionally, the
synthesis of quaternary carbon centers is far from trivial, and to do so with
control of absolute stereochemistry remains a significant obstacle in target-
directed synthesis. Using the biologically active spirooxindole alkaloids as a
motivating template for design, this project concurrently addresses these
challenges through the development of a transition metal-catalyzed, formal
[4+1]-cycloaddition for the fragment coupling of a diazo compound with a vinyl
ketene to access cyclopentenones bearing a neighboring quaternary center, and
vinyl isocyanates to construct the N-heterocyclic counterpart. By employing a
well-defined chiral ligand-metal complex, assembly of the quaternary ring
stereogenic carbon in a stereocontrolled fashion while acting as a point of
spiro-attachment en route to numerous oxindole alkaloids, is tenable. Due to the
chemoselective nature of the transition metal catalyst and relatively mild
reaction conditions, this retrosynthetic disconnect is broadly applicable to a
diverse array of synthetic targets. Completion of this study will ultimately
lead to improved synthetic efficiency toward these important molecular
scaffolds, and lay the keystone for long term significance in stereoselective
quaternary carbon and carbo/heterocycle formation. The educational plan will
integrate our findings in the training of graduate students in their approach
toward synthesis, and the introduction of undergraduates to synthetic methods in
laboratory offerings. The incorporation of a target-based approach toward
molecule construction, such as quaternary carbon and heterocycle synthesis with
tangible applications (i.e. pharmacophores), rather than the traditional
reaction-centered lab design prevalent today, is an immediate goal. Graduate and
undergraduates alike will gain a better appreciation for reaction design, and
the discovery of new chemical reactivity, if their focus is on a series of
specified target functionalities that are translational in nature.