* 1665211
* EAGER: Tandem solar cells of two dissimilar material systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* S. Bedair, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,921.00

ECCS-1665211&lt;br/&gt;Bedair, S. M.&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;EAGER: Tandem Solar Cells of Two Dissimilar Material
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tandem solar cells
are an approach capable of achieving a conversion efficiency higher than 45%.
This approach involves stacking several cells with different properties for the
optimum utilization of the solar spectrum. Currently all satellite and space
communication systems are powered by tandem solar cell structures. However these
structures suffer from several limitations such as cost and material related
issues. They thus cannot compete for terrestrial applications which are
currently dominated by silicon and inexpensive cell technology with efficiencies
less than 20%. The goal of this EAGER project is to develop the science and
technology to allow the high efficiency tandem cell concept to be applied to
cells made from inexpensive material systems. We propose a new approach that
relies on intermetallic bonding (IMB) to assemble two or more cells that may be
composed of dissimilar material systems into a tandem cell structure. This IMB
approach can impact several different fields such as LEDs emitting at different
wavelengths and dual wavelength photodetectors. Graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project will gain experience in device fabrication,
testing and modeling. Students will be part of research activities that can
impact the national goals of renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMB
approach relies on the adhesion properties of indium (In) metal. Indium films
will be deposited on the existing grid contacts of various solar cells. Bonding
between the cells will take place by applying pressure at room temperature,
resulting in In-metal bonding between the two cells. The research program will
focus on the development of the IMB technique, aligning the bottom contact of
the top cell and top contact of the bottom cells, finding the optimum conditions
for both mechanical strength and a low resistance connecting junction with
minimum shadowing losses. We will investigate MJ structures from off-the-shelf
bottom cells [Si (1.1 eV) or CIGS (1.0 eV)] and epitaxially grown junctions from
the PI's lab for the top cell based on InGaP/multiple quantum well structures or
AlGaAs to tune the band gap between 1.55 and 1.7 eV. The above combinations can
approach efficiencies close to 30%, in a two terminal device structure. We have
successfully applied the IMB technique to bond GaAs/InGaP and Si/GaAs showing
both mechanical stability and electrical conductivity. We have shown that the
IMB offers a very low resistivity interconnects and was successfully applied to
demonstrate the proof of concept in the case of GaAs/Si tandem cell.