* 1665373
* Variable Coefficient Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Christopher Sogge, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 273,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will study several problems in
geometric Fourier analysis. The settings for these problems involve objects
known as geometric manifolds of dimension two or greater. Associated to a given
manifold are fundamental objects called its eigenfunctions. These are the
fundamental modes of vibration of the manifold, and they are the higher-
dimensional analogs of the familiar trigonometric functions for the circle.
Designers of musical instruments are well aware that the shape of, say, a drum
or the soundboard of stringed instrument affects the basic tones that it omits.
Similar phenomena arise for manifolds, and the principal investigator wishes to
study precisely how their shapes, such as how they are curved, affect the
resulting eigenfunctions. Just as in music, one particularly expects different
shapes and geometries to become more apparent in the behavior of the fundamental
modes of vibration as the frequency becomes larger and larger. These
eigenfunctions are solutions of a differential equation that is similar to the
wave equation, and the project will also study similar problems involving it.
The general theme is to study how solutions of wave equations are affected by
their physical backgrounds, such as whether or not black holes are present or
whether the background becomes very close to a vacuum near infinity.

Among the specific problems the principal investigator will study, he seeks to
obtain improved estimates that measure the size and concentration of
eigenfunctions. In order to do this he will develop what he calls "global
harmonic analysis," which is a mixture of classical harmonic analysis,
microlocal analysis, and techniques from geometry. The basic estimates that one
has in mind are estimates for eigenfunctions and quasimodes, and related highly
localized estimates that are sensitive to concentration. The main questions
center around how the geometry and the global dynamics of the geodesic flow
affect the estimates and the kinds of functions that saturate them. The latter
issue is closely related to the much-studied (but still not well-understood)
questions of concentration, oscillation, and size properties of modes and
quasimodes in spectral asymptotics. These questions are also naturally linked to
the long-time properties of the solution operator for the wave equation and
resolvent estimates coming from the metric Laplacian. The principal investigator
is also interested in understanding the harmonic analysis and spectral theory of
operators that arise from boundary traces.