* 1665120
* Pd-Catalyzed Allylic Oxidation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Shannon Stahl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The oxidation of organic chemicals to make specific target chemicals using
oxygen, a green oxidant, remains a significant challenge for the chemical
industry. Dr. Shannon Stahl of the University of Wisconsin-Madison is developing
catalysts that enable oxygen to be used as an oxidant in selective conversions
of simple feedstock chemicals into pharmaceuticals. The oxidation of C-H bonds
is of particular interest to the pharmaceutical industry because it enables drug
molecules to be prepared efficiently or modified to optimize their properties.
Organic molecules have a large number of different C-H bonds, and the reactions
being developed by Dr. Stahl are designed to oxidize only specific C-H bonds in
those molecules. This selectivity is accomplished by catalyst design, combined
with novel experimental techniques in collaboration with scientists at Merck
Research Laboratories. This university-industry collaboration is leveraged to
enhance the broader impact of the research. Students participating in on-site
research visits at Merck are working with Dr. Stahl and campus safety
representatives at UW-Madison to help implement new industry-based safety
protocols within the University research environment. Human resource development
efforts target enhanced diversity in the graduate student population by
leveraging multiple programs in place at UW-Madison.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Shannon Stahl of the University of Wisconsin at Madison is developing new
allylic C-H oxidation reactions that are compatible with the use of O2 as the
stoichiometric oxidant. The targeted reactions proceed with unprecedented
catalyst-controlled chemo-, regio- and stereoselectivity, enabled by the
discovery, design and development of new ancillary ligands for the Pd catalyst.
The catalyst and reaction development efforts are closely coupled to rigorous
mechanistic studies that implement innovative mechanistic tools such as a high-
pressure NMR reactor capable of on-line continuous delivery of O2 at pressure
and operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy. A strategic collaboration with
scientists at Merck Research Laboratories provides access to high-throughput
experimentation and analysis to discover catalytic allylic oxidation reactions
that enable selective late-stage functionalization of natural products or
existing pharmaceuticals. Students participating in on-site research visits at
Merck are working with Dr. Stahl and campus safety representatives at UW-Madison
to help implement new safety protocols they encounter during their time at
Merck. In addition, these students are working with Dr. Stahl to develop a
reaction screening and optimization statistical analysis module for
implementation in the graduate curriculum at UW-Madison.