* 1665392
* Organic Acids, Bases, Catalysts, and Anion Recognition Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Steven Kass, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 690,734.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Steven R. Kass of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Minnesota explores charge-enhanced acids, bases,
hydrogen bond catalysts. The goal of this research is to develop new and useful
catalysts, and obtain a better understanding of how these species operate to
facilitate their development. More efficient catalysts are needed in the
preparation of chemicals required in our daily life, such as the production of
pharmaceuticals and polymers. This project lies at the interface of organic,
physical, and analytical chemistry, and is particularly well suited for
educating and training young scientists. Two patents have resulted from NSF-
supported work in this group and a wealth of practical applications ranging from
human health and the environment to agriculture and chemical industry may arise
from this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge-enhanced acids, bases, and
hydrogen bond catalysts (salts) are being prepared and characterized. Their
catalytic abilities are being examined in a variety of organic transformations,
and structural variations are being probed to increase their reactivity. The
role of covalent incorporation of the counterion at a remote location in these
salt based catalysts are being studied. Chiral substrates (e.g., thioureas,
binols, binol-derived phosphoric acids, and alkaloid bases) are being prepared
and their enantioselectivities are being determined. Catalysts with chiral
counterions for double stereodifferentiation are also being investigated.