* 1665286
* Cohomology of Noncommutative Rings: Structure and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sarah Witherspoon, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2020
* USD 159,000.00

Representation theory is a branch of mathematics that studies symmetry and
motion algebraically, for example, by encoding such information as arrays of
numbers, or matrices. It arises in many scientific inquiries, for example, in
questions about the shape of the universe, symmetry of chemical structures, and
in quantum computing. Cohomology is a tool that pulls apart representation-
theoretic information into smaller, more easily understandable components. The
PI's research in cohomology and in representation theory aims at answering hard
questions about fundamental structures arising in many mathematical and
scientific settings. Her research program impacts that of many other
mathematicians, particularly the students and postdocs that she mentors. She
leads research teams both at her university and internationally, she co-
organizes conferences in her research area, and she is writing a book at an
advanced graduate level.

This project concerns several inter-related problems on the structure of
Hochschild cohomology and Hopf algebra cohomology, and on applications in
representation theory and algebraic deformation theory. Hochschild cohomology of
an associative ring has a Lie structure that is an important tool and yet is
difficult to manage. Some of this difficulty was recently overcome through work
of the PI and others in developing new techniques for understanding the Lie
structure in terms of arbitrary resolutions. This opens the door to much more
potential progress in understanding the structure of Hochschild cohomology, for
example, to making connections to other descriptions such as by coderivations
and loops on extension spaces. The PI will also work on related questions in
deformation theory. Another part of this project concerns a finite generation
conjecture in Hopf algebra cohomology. The PI will prove the conjecture for some
important classes of Hopf algebras using a variety of techniques, including
resolutions for twisted tensor products and the Anick resolution. The PI will
work on related support varieties for understanding questions about
representations of these Hopf algebras and related categories, using techniques
she is developing with a postdoc for handling module categories over tensor
categories.