* 1665159
* Improving the Accuracy of the Amber Force Field for Biomolecular Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Carlos Simmerling, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Carlos Simmerling of Stony Brook University (SBU) is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop improved computational models of protein molecules. Proteins
are the workhorses of biology. They perform more than 20,000 different chemical
and mechanical functions in humans, and in all other living organisms. A major
challenge in understanding the detailed mechanisms of biology is that proteins
are not rigid objects. They move and twist in ways that are essential for their
function. This is often where the crucial recognition between molecules takes
place, as molecules adapt and pull on each other to confirm that they are
interacting with the correct partner, much as two hands adapt during a
handshake. These crucial motions can be studied via atomically-detailed computer
simulations, using classical approximations to the underlying quantum mechanical
forces, known as force fields. Force fields enable the accurate simulation of
proteins and their interactions, studies that would otherwise be intractable,
even on the largest supercomputers. In addition to fundamental biological
studies, accurate force fields are essential for drug discovery and the design
of novel nanoscale and biomimetic materials. Professor Simmerling, in
collaboration with Qin Wu of Brookhaven National Laboratory, is performing a
comprehensive, systematic, physics-based reshaping of one of the most important
models used in molecular dynamics simulations of biophysical and biomolecular
systems, the Amber force field. The goal of the project is to significantly
improve the force field's accuracy and fidelity, while preserving its ability to
simulate large biomolecular systems for long times. The newly-parameterized
force field will be made freely available for download and use by the simulation
community, for use within the most widely-used molecular dynamics simulation
codes running on XSEDE supercomputers and small lab clusters. Outreach efforts
for the project include regular research and recruitment trips to HBCU
institutions, coordinated through the SBU Center for Inclusive Education, and
the recruitment of undergraduates from underrepresented minorities to
participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
systematically and consistently address several key limitations of existing
protein classical force fields in order to improve their accuracy without
dramatically increasing computational complexity. Current models work in some
cases, but fail to agree with experiment in many others, including quantitative
reproduction of amino-acid specific properties such as helical propensity.
Professor Simmerling, in conjunction with collaborator Qin Wu of Brookhaven
National Laboratory, is developing more accurate descriptions of the energy
profiles for protein backbone structure and dynamics, with better sequence-
dependent structure and dynamics, in order to extend and reparameterize the
Amber force field. The project has three principal aims: (1) to improve the
description of backbone energetics through fitting to multidimensional scans
using high-level QM calculations in solution, (2) to expand the Amber force
field parameter library to include non-standard amino acids encountered in
biology and those frequently used as experimental probes, and (3) to begin to
address longstanding weaknesses in the treatment of short-range van der Waals
interactions, by taking advantage of recent advances in quantum mechanical
energy decomposition methods to train alternate functional forms. These should
improve the ability of the model to reproduce the known influence of side chain
rotamer on backbone conformational preference. The new force field models are
being validated, documented, and distributed via the widely-used Amber molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation program, and can be independently downloaded for use in
conjunction with other widely-used MD codes. Education and outreach is focused
on recruiting and providing lab research experiences for students from
underrepresented groups at SBU, and encouraging student interest in science and
research through outreach trips to HBCU institutions.