* 1665267
* Metallocene-based compounds for redox flow batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Christopher Ziegler, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2022
* USD 393,919.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program (CSDMB) of the
Chemistry Division supports this project by Professors Christopher J. Ziegler
and Aliaksei Boika. Professors Ziegler and Boika are faculty members in the
Department of Chemistry at The University of Akron. Professors Ziegler and Boika
are working to develop new compounds for use in improving the performance of
redox flow batteries (RFBs). Redox flow batteries can potentially serve as a
scalable solution for storing the energy derived from renewable sources such as
wind and sunlight. The batteries use the energy to make a charged species at
each electrode. These charged species are then flowed into a holding cells where
they are stored. When the energy is needed again, the charged species are flowed
back into the cell and the battery run in the opposite direction giving back all
of the energy initially used to make the charges. Key to this approach is the
stability charged species that are stored and the reversibility of their
formation. To date, the chemical compounds used for this purpose have not been
ideal and lack many of the characteristics needed for a RFB to be practical.
Professors Ziegler and Boika are approaching this problem using a compound
called ferrocene as a building block; ferrocene has been known for more than
half of a century and has optimal properties for a redox flow battery. The
charges species are very stable, and their formation is perfectly reversible. By
designing new materials incorporating multiple equivalents of this building
block, the Ziegler and Boika research groups hope to advance development in
scalable RFB technology. This research will additionally provide excellent
training for future scientists, and will provide education opportunities for
underrepresented groups in chemistry. Their work will also include outreach
activities involving K-12 students as part of the funded project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox flow batteries (RFB) remain highly desirable targets
for scalable energy storage, but the chemistry used in these devices can be
improved significantly. The redox chemistry used in these cells suffers from low
open circuit potentials, undesired side reactions, and caustic reaction
conditions. Ferrocene, in many ways an ideal redox reagent, will be investigated
by the Ziegler and Boika groups as a functional structural component in four
types of RFB candidates: monoferrocenyl compounds, polyferrocenyl compounds,
"all metallocene" single component materials, and ferrocene-based ionic liquids.
The Ziegler lab has elucidated new sulfonyl based ferrocene chemistry which can
be used as the linking moiety in the syntheses of these new materials. Both the
Ziegler and Boika labs will fully characterize all new RFB candidates and
evaluate their performances using electrochemical methods. The broader
educational impacts of the proposed activity include the training of graduate
students at The University of Akron, supporting the collaborative activities of
the PI, and the promotion of underrepresented groups in chemistry, specifically
through the ACS Project SEED, as synergistic activities. The PIs are developing
an outreach program for K-12 students focusing on energy storage from renewable
resources and how chemistry can assist with this central problem.