* 1665341
* Spectroscopic Interrogation of Reactive Intermediates Implicated in Hydrocarbon Combustion and Pyrolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Neil Reilly, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 402,084.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Neil Reilly of the
University of Massachusetts Boston is using sensitive laser techniques to study
the burning of hydrocarbon molecules (also known as combustion or pyrolysis). He
is interested in characterizing the structure of the molecular fragments that
occur as the reaction proceeds from reactants to products. These "intermediate"
species are short lived and difficult to study, but capturing information about
their structure can tell us details about how these reactions (and chemical
reactions in general) occur. The project is also providing knowledge that is
relevant to hydrocarbon molecule behavior in environments that range from
internal combustion engines to the atmospheres of Earth and of moons of distant
planets. Post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students working on this
project are receiving training in laser spectroscopy and vacuum technology.
Elements of the research are integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses
on analytical instrumentation. High school students within the Boston Public
Schools district are introduced to chemical analysis through workshops in which
they build their own spectrometers (instruments that tell how molecules absorb
or emit light at different wavelengths) using readily available materials. This
research provides fundamental understanding of fossil fuel combustion, biomass
incineration, and atmospheric oxidation of organic molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on resonance-stabilized radical (RSR)
motifs, including substituted benzyl, cyclopentadienyl, allyl, propargyl, and
vinyl chromophores, with and without oxygen, that are important in the early
stages of fossil fuel combustion, biomass incineration, and atmospheric
oxidation of anthropogenically and biogenically emitted alkenes. Professor
Reilly and his research group generate the target radicals by a range of
methods, including pulsed electric discharge and laser photolysis of judiciously
chosen molecular precursors, and cool them in supersonic expansions prior to
laser interrogation in the optical band. A suite of synergistic spectroscopic
methods is employed to identify and characterize newly observed species,
centering on laser-induced fluorescence and dispersed fluorescence (LIF/DF) and
resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI). REMPI is used to record mass-
resolved electronic spectra and ionization potentials of single species present
in complex mixtures, and provides a spectral "atlas" for LIF surveys, while DF
spectroscopy of molecular bands common to REMPI and LIF spectra yields ground-
state vibrational frequencies of species of known molecular mass. Isomers are
distinguished by optical hole-burning spectroscopy and detailed spectroscopic
assignments are obtained from single-vibronic-level emission spectra, in concert
with quantum chemical calculations. These investigations are of broad impact in
several ways: they enable unambiguous, isomer-specific, in situ monitoring of
the targeted species in a wide variety of environments, facilitate the
extraction of mechanistic insight, and aid the validation of model chemistries
of processes important to energy production. Several of the targeted
intermediates are of fundamental theoretical interest and provide opportunities
for benchmarking quantum chemical treatments of vibronic interactions in
molecules of low symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.