* 1665176
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Manipulation of Reaction Selectivity in the electrochemical environment for biomass-to-chemicals conversions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* J.William Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 429,998.00

Manipulation of reaction selectivity in the electrochemical environment for
biomass-to-chemicals conversions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Fuels and chemicals
derived from plant matter (biomass) are a promising means to sustainably meet
demands for energy and commodity products. Biomass is a "carbon neutral"
feedstock because it grows by incorporating CO2 from the atmosphere while only
consuming solar energy. This project is finding new and efficient outlets to
generate useful chemicals from components of biomass that are currently
difficult to process. While most biomass conversions are presently performed
using catalysts and energy supplied by heat, this work is exploiting unique
aspects of electricity-driven catalytic reactions in order to achieve synthesis
of useful chemicals at low temperatures and pressures. The electricity required
for these processes may, in turn, be derived from renewable sources such as wind
and solar. A fundamental approach is being taken in which experimental
techniques that probe the nature of the catalytic reactions are combined with
computer simulations to build a comprehensive picture of the factors that govern
reaction selectivity and to design more efficient processes. Insights from this
work have broader application in extending the scope of green chemistry. This
research is also being used to promote science education by involving
undergraduate student researchers for summer internships, and the PI's are
additionally developing a series of interactive educational modules related to
understanding the physical processes governing electro-catalytic reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is investigating electrochemical control
over selectivity in the conversion of biomass-derived feedstocks to desired
chemical targets. Electrochemical conversions offer advantages in sustainable
processing since they generally operate at low temperatures and utilize aqueous
feedstocks directly. Using selective oxidation of furfural and 5-hydroxymethyl
furfural over Pt electrodes as probe systems, this work focuses on determining
the different mechanisms by which selectivity can be manipulated through control
over electrode potential and composition. Mechanisms being explored include
differentiation of charge-transfer reactions relative to neutral atom transfer
reactions, variation in surface coverage of oxygen and organic species, and the
role of promoters with specific reactivity or geometry. Three complementary
research approaches are being integrated to characterize these effects.
Measurement of electrochemical kinetics on metal catalysts is combined with in-
situ spectroscopy to identify reaction pathways; surface science experiments are
used on a model Pt(111) surface to study oxidation elementary steps in detail;
and finally, density functional theory calculations are used to investigate the
same surface chemistry, including simulation of electric potential effects and
the water-metal interface. The three research thrusts provide complementary
information and enrich the depth of understanding of the electrochemical
environment. Insights from this work have broader application in extending the
scope of green chemistry and electrochemical synthetic routes. This research is
also being used to promote science education by involving undergraduate student
researchers for summer internships, and the PI's are additionally developing a
series of interactive educational modules related to understanding the physical
processes governing electro-catalytic reactions.