* 1665008
* SusChEM: Complexity-Building Reactions from Feedstock Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Jeffrey Johnson. Professor Johnson is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The
synthesis of organic molecules is central to a wide variety of scientific
endeavors ranging from the discovery of new drugs to the development of new
materials. Typically, these synthetic efforts have at their origin a small
molecule that it built upon by various functional groups. Professor Johnson is
developing new methods for rapidly accessing these valuable small starting
blocks from inexpensive, abundant feedstock chemicals. The transformations are
accomplished using catalysts that are not consumed in the reactions along with
environmentally-friendly chemicals like molecular oxygen and molecular hydrogen
in order to ensure that the processes are sustainable. This project provides an
ideal platform for training graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
from all backgrounds. Professor Johnson's group has a history of inclusion and
diversity, and as department chairperson, he is in an excellent position to
continue advancing initiatives that contribute to the overall diversity of the
department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of highly functionalized,
stereochemically-defined small molecule building blocks is central to many
scientific endeavors, particularly in the realm of drug discovery and chemical
biology. An ongoing challenge is the development of tools that not only deliver
novel chemical entities, but do so in a way that is sustainable. This proposal
seeks to develop new chemical reactions and sequences that operate at the
intersection of these two issues in chemical synthesis. This project provides
reveals uniquely enabling mechanisms for reactions of strained ring compounds.
It is expected that this expansion of the strained ring paradigm into
substructures derived from commercial, readily available feedstock chemical may
provide unique, efficient access to heretofore unknown chemical matter. The
reactions under study rapidly develop complex three-dimensional architectures
from planar aromatics in a few chemical operations. The outreach plan integrates
the research team into the local community for STEAM Day at Northside Elementary
School, which serves a majority non-white student population in North Carolina.