* 1665322
* Quantum simulations of electron dynamics in aqueous systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* John Herbert, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

John M. Herbert at The Ohio State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division to study the properties and reactivity of solvated electrons
and their impacts on biological systems. The interaction of high-energy
radiation with water in organisms generates a cascade of highly reactive species
that can go on to damage biological material. Amongst these reactive species is
the so-called "hydrated" or "solvated" electron. The solvated electron was first
discovered more than 50 years ago but detailed structural information is still
lacking. This is due in part to its ultra-short lifetime, generally not more
than a few microseconds. This poses experimental difficulties, and Herbert is
conducting theoretical and computational studies to simulate the structure and
properties of the solvated electron and its interaction with the key molecular
components of DNA. These studies make contact with a promising new experimental
technique which can provide a direct probe of the energy-level structure of
liquid systems, but for which theoretical calculations are often required to
interpret its results. The ultimate goal of the project is to understand whether
these solvated electrons are capable of directly damaging DNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish this goal, new theoretical and
computational tools are being developed. These include new simulation protocols
for ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, employing continuum boundary
conditions that can be used in conjunction with a Gaussian-orbital-based (rather
than plane-wave-based) density functional theory (DFT) code. These developments
allow use of accurate hybrid functionals, which are too expensive for plane-wave
simulations. In addition, because the deposition of high-energy radiation can
generate molecules in excited states, improved versions of time-dependent
(TD-)DFT are being developed that can properly describe conical intersections
while retaining proper spin (S2) symmetry. These methods are being used, along
with "real-time" TD-DFT, to simulate electron injection and removal
(photoemission) in aqueous systems.