* 1665525
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Interaction of Long Term Canal Irrigation and Wetland Development
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Rachel Cajigas, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 22,793.00

The archaeological study of traditional Native American agricultural techniques
is essential for the evaluation of long-term land use because it allows for the
examination of environmental change at the time scales necessary to test for
sustainability. The earliest farmers on the floodplains of the Sonoran Desert
used careful planning, group cooperation, and experimentation in the massive
reconfiguration of the natural environment for agricultural purposes. The
diversity in size and complexity of these early farming communities requires
examination of the specific factors that favored the significant investment in
landscape modification in order to understand the development of these
practices. The examination of local environmental conditions and their
relationship to the timing of agricultural practices is key in understanding the
regional development and demise of early earthen irrigation canals. This
information will contribute to the growing body of knowledge of sustainable
earthen irrigation systems, an agricultural technology commonly used in arid
environments today. Results from this interdisciplinary research have
international impacts in earth science, archaeology, and sustainable
agriculture. This project supports student training in fieldwork, research, and
specialized laboratory techniques for women and underrepresented groups and is a
component of a twenty-year collaboration between the University of Arizona and
Mexico's Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will investigate the earliest agricultural
technology in the Southwest United States/Northwest Mexico region and evaluate
local environmental impacts to determine when and why this technology was
developed and subsequently abandoned. Dr. Vance Holliday and Rachel Cajigas from
the University of Arizona will use high-precision dating techniques combined
with environmental data to determine the timing of early agricultural practices
and the relationship to floodplain conditions at the La Playa site in Sonora,
Mexico. This site has important implications for the understanding of the
development of agricultural techniques because it is the single largest Early
Agricultural Period (2100 B.C.-A.D. 50) site in the greater Southwest. Modern
erosion is actively destroying large portions of the archaeological site,
highlighting the urgent need for study. This research will test the hypothesis
that canal irrigation created a wetland environment, eventually leading to
unstable depositional conditions. These unstable conditions may have contributed
to social reorganization and abandonment of irrigation technology. Radiocarbon
and Optically Stimulated Luminescence dating methods will be used to determine
the timing of canal use and abandonment. These data will be compared with
sedimentological and soils data to characterize floodplain conditions throughout
the Early Agricultural period. The results from this study will advance the
understanding of early agricultural techniques in arid environments and
contribute to a comprehensive chronology of the archaeological site within the
greater context of the origins of early agriculture in the Southwest
U.S./Northwest Mexico.