* 1665169
* EAGER: Strengthening Communities Through ICT-Enabled Indirect Resource Exchange
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Nicola Dell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2020
* USD 314,333.00

This research will combine user-centered design, hardware and software
development, and a mix of quantitative and qualitative methods to collect
empirical data and user feedback through experimental deployments of a novel
indirect resource exchange (IRE) system. Communities in urban environments,
particularly underserved communities, could benefit from the positive economic
and social outcomes offered via indirect exchange of resources, where
individuals provide benefits to others but do not receive direct benefits in
return. IRE services have the potential to provide direct and indirect benefits
for local communities, particularly underserved communities in urban settings,
by supporting economic vitality through reducing expenses and waste, building a
greater sense of community, improving social connections between neighbors, and
contributing to more resilient communities. Although there have been many prior
attempts to create successful IRE services, none have been widely adopted or
successfully scaled. However, recent advances in Information and Communication
Technologies (ICTs), including the advent of low-resource computing, 3D
printing, and laser-cutting, make it feasible to build and deploy low-cost
hardware and software systems that could transform the landscape of IRE
services. For this potential to be realized, we need to understand and overcome
a complex set of technical, social, behavioral, and psychological challenges
that will ultimately determine the adoption and use of these services by
communities.

Through experimental deployments of a novel IRE system that we develop with
underserved communities in New York City, this research will address three major
challenges associated with IRE: (1) understanding and overcoming challenges
associated with trust and social friction; (2) learning the best way to
coordinate the exchange of resources between individuals; and (3) investigating
how to motivate use and incentivize participation. The system will be packaged
and released as an open-source platform and set of guidelines that enable
communities to construct and deploy their own IRE services. The intellectual
contributions of this work include: (1) designing and building novel hardware
and software technologies that successfully coordinate IRE in a variety of
communities; (2) developing and testing a range of interdisciplinary - social,
behavioral, and psychological - mechanisms that influence use and adoption of
IRE services; (3) distilling insights and lessons learned from experimental
deployments that reveal the benefits and challenges of IRE in different
contexts; and (4) contributing empirical data, design guidelines, and concrete
software and hardware artifacts that will be useful for advancing both academic
research and local communities.