* 1665031
* Theory and Techniques for Controlling the Collective Behavior of Dynamical Systems under Stochastic Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Tryphon Georgiou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2019
* USD 251,285.00

Physical systems such as micro-mechanical components experiencing thermal noise,
particle beams, and laser-driven molecular reactions can all be modeled as
dynamical system with stochastic excitation. The control of such processes
requires that we steer the collective behavior of the individual constituents
towards a specified terminal goal. Due to the stochastic uncertainty of their
initial state as well as due to various stochastic effects (measurement noise,
stochastic forcing, fluctuation-dissipation phenomena, etc.) one can only hope
to be able to specify a target distribution for corresponding parameters and not
their precise final values. Further, for such inherently stochastic systems, it
is often the case that the performance of a control strategy can only be
quantified in a statistical sense. Thus, the proposed research aims at
developing theory and techniques that will allow steering such systems towards a
desired end-point distribution for their parameters (position, velocity,
temperature, etc.) while utilizing minimal amount of resources, typically
energy. A wide range of physical systems and applications are envisioned and,
accordingly, a range of mathematical models with linear, nonlinear, mean-field,
etc. dynamics will be studied. The tools are expected to impact technology that
relates to the aforementioned physical systems and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific technical goal of the proposed
research is to study the controllability and the optimal control of stochastic
systems in the sense of being able to steer their state from a given initial
probability density to a final target one. In effect, this is the problem to
control the Fokker-Planck equation that specifies the flow of the state-
probability density. Problems of optimal transport for mass and resources that
obey nontrivial dynamics will also be considered; in these the stochastic
uncertainty for the state remains while the stochastic excitation becomes
negligible. Furthermore, problems of interacting particles and mean-field
potentials will also be studied as will be the effect of observation noise and
ensuing limits to performance. The development of theory and tools will make use
of recent advances at the interface between Monge-Kantorovich optimal mass
transport, Schroedinger bridges, and the contractive properties of stochastic
maps in the geometry induced by the so-called Hilbert metric.