* 1665258
* Development of Polycarbonate Micelles for Encapsulation of Dinitrosyl Iron and Diiron Hydrogenase Biomimetics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Donald Darensbourg, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2020
* USD 503,184.00

Nature often encapsulates highly reactive molecules within an environment that
offers protection from unwanted reactions. The goal of this research is to
prepare similar encapsulation devices (micelles) that are made from plastics and
are capable of protecting their pharmaceutical drug "cargoes" until they reach
their destination in the human body. This project is funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division. Professors Marcetta Y. Darensbourg
and Donald J. Darensbourg of Texas A&M University are preparing the plastic
micelles from the abundant gas, carbon dioxide. Since the micelles are
biodegradable, they fall apart in living organisms and slowly release their drug
cargo. One of the specific systems to be investigated involves entrapping nitric
oxide (NO)-releasing drugs. Nitric oxide is implicated in vasoregulation and
immune function. The broader impact of this work is to heighten students'
awareness of the roles chemists play in issues of societal importance, like
medicine. Professor Marcetta Darensbourg and her group are leaders in programs
such as Women in Science and Engineering, Broadening Horizons for 6th Grade
Girls, and the Chemistry Olympiad. These activities reach out to school children
in the Bryan/College Station communities. Professor Donald Darensbourg focuses
on carbon dioxide utilization and its impacts on carbon management. He develops
courses and education materials on Green Chemistry for advanced undergraduates
in chemistry and chemical engineering.

This project focuses on the preparation of triblock, "ABA", polycarbonates that,
on addition of water, self-assemble into micelles as the A blocks are
hydrophilic and the B blocks are hydrophobic. The hydrophobic interiors of the
micelles are loaded with molecular payloads of pharmaceutical potential, binding
either by non-covalent van der Waals interactions or by covalent attachment.
Syntheses and full characterization of the polymers are conducted. The
protection of reactive NO-release drugs within the hydrophobic region of a
biodegradable micelle may tune and control NO delivery in
biological/pharmaceutical applications. Chemical assays and cell studies
(cytotoxicity and cell uptake) test this assumption and compare dinitrosyl iron
complexes of NO release ability in solution and imbedded within the micelles.
Further, the synthesis of polymer immobilized diiron complexes, linked by
cyanide to metallo-porphyrin photosensitizers are oriented towards development
as hydrogen production catalysts, initially in the absence of water. The
research team looks for the stabilization of the fragile diiron or nickel-iron
complexes by attachment to (organic solvent) soluble polymers, generating base
metal, organometallic catalysts protected from oxygen degradation and
aggregation.