* 1665040
* GOALI: Utilizing Rapid Assays for Determining Enantiomeric Excess and Catalyst Discovery in Pharma
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Leo Joyce, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The creation of new pharmaceuticals remains a primary strategy to combat
disease, such as cancer and heart disease. The need for increasingly simple and
rapid methods to synthesize and quickly evaluate new molecules for the
pharmaceutical industry has arisen due to the advent of new and modern
experimental methods. The drug development process requires thousands of
chemical reactions to be conducted each and every day. Unfortunately, standard
analytical methods needed to verify the structure and the purity of the
molecules synthesized are often slow and unable to operate at such a pace. In
this project, new and rapid optical techniques reported previously by the Anslyn
group are being employed in real-life screening protocols typical of the
workflow carried out at Merck, a global pharmaceutical company. This University
of Texas-Merck collaboration tests the utility and generality of the methods,
while also highlighting their power to benefit industrially-relevant, synthetic
organic chemistry efforts in applications beyond pharmaceuticals. The Merck team
provides their reactions to the Anslyn group, while the Anslyn group provides
their analytical methods to Merck. Dr. Anslyn involves teams of students in a
Freshman Research Initiative and Advanced Research Initiative laboratory in
parallel projects, with the same goals and deliverables as his graduate
research. These activities involve specialized laboratory courses that teach
freshman college students the challenges and rewards of scientific discovery,
while improving the retention rates of these students in STEM
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the NSF Chemistry Division,
Dr. Anslyn of the University of Texas at Austin working with Merck to design and
develop rapid chemical assays for enantiomeric excess (ee) that involve three
stages referred to as screening, training, and analysis. The screening exploits
the previously reported Anslyn multi-component assemblies that report ee values
via circular dichroism (CD). The training is performed with enantioenriched
samples of the chiral analyte, and involves standard linear calibration curves
or chemometric analysis, as necessary. This step creates a protocol specific to
a particular analyte, relating the resultant CD ellipticities to ee. Finally,
the analysis step determines ee values in a truly high-throughput fashion,
commensurate with a rate of hundreds of samples every hour. Each of these
protocols is being created for the types of analytes that are of interest to the
pharmaceutical community. In addition to the pharmaceutically-relevant
compounds, significant effort is directed toward addressing samples in the
complex matrices that industry uses. Graduate students at the University of
Texas at Austin become familiar with the instrumentation required for and the
processes undertaken to support high-throughput experimentation (HTE) within the
pharmaceutical industry. Via quarterly visits to Merck, these students gain an
understanding for the practical challenges associated with this approach through
interaction with industrial scientists. Throughout the process, the scientists
from Merck identify new substrates and reaction classes that have the greatest
potential to positively impact asymmetric synthesis.