* 1665004
* Research Initiation Award: Thermodynamic Phase Separation in a Living, Active Matter System
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Chih-Kuan Tung, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/28/2023
* USD 337,940.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities who are building a research program. It is expected
that the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at his home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University has potential broader and
societal impact in a number of areas. The project seeks to investigate the
dynamics of active matter systems. The research crosses the fields of
mathematics, physics, and biology. Undergraduate students will gain research
experiences and the research will be integrated in a number of biophysics
courses. The project will also contribute to the development of a Biological
Physics Concentration at the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike ensembles
traditionally discussed in Statistical Mechanics research, active matter systems
consist of objects that consume energy and propel themselves, and thus are never
in equilibrium. Building on the discovery of bull sperm collective dynamics in
viscoelastic fluids, this project focuses on using experiments to quantify and
understand the phenomenology of phase separation in active matter systems. The
primary objective of this project is to map out the coexistence curve of
clustered and isolated phases. The research goal will be approached by two
methods: a "pressure" based method that involves building a microfluidic device
to increase cell density, and a "temperature" based method, in which the
relative strengths of alignment and randomizing factors are tuned by changing
fluid properties. Findings from this project will answer fundamental
thermodynamics questions, such as how to quantify parameters like pressure or
temperature in a living active matter system, and how to formulate an equivalent
equation of state. Moreover, since viscoelastic fluids are naturally present in
the mammalian female reproductive tract, this project would also help to
understand the regulation and mechanisms of sperm movement. The results provide
underlying basic science knowledge that could potentially be used to improve
animal husbandry.