* 1665435
* RUI: Metal complexes with Benzothiophene and/or NHC ligands: Synthesis and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Craig Anderson, Bard College
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2023
* USD 245,922.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Craig M. Anderson of the Chemistry
Program at Bard College investigates the synthesis of transition metal complexes
with ligands containing moieties that bond to the metal through multiple
coordinating atoms. The optical characteristics and biochemical reactivity of
these compounds depend on the ligand architecture, which can be tuned to
optimize properties used in potential applications, such as the emission
wavelength in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). The project adds to the
understanding of metal-ligand bonding, offers promise for the development of
more efficient and robust OLEDs and anti-cancer agents. A vital component of
this work is that it involves the training of undergraduate students and these
students gain proficiency in the practice of science in a contemporary chemistry
laboratory. They are involved in the dissemination of research results through
conference presentations and peer-reviewed journal articles, and thus gain the
experience needed in order to continue in their future scientific
studies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project studies metal complexes and
cyclometalated complexes that are bonded to ligands with N-heterocyclic carbene
and/or cyclometalated benzothiophene moieties or fragments. These complexes have
potential applications in acting as catalysts, sensors, artificial
photosynthetic devices, and bio-organometallic agents. Specific objectives
include: 1. the synthesis and characterization of platinum, iridium, and nickel
metal complexes with benzothiophene and N-heterocyclic carbene derived ligands;
2. examination of the photophysical properties and reactivity of the metal
complexes; and 3. exploration of potential applications of the newly synthesized
compounds in OLED device fabrication, bio-organometallic Chemistry, and chemical
catalysis.