* 1665049
* EAGER: Identifying Technical and Non-Technical Feature Requirements to Generate Income-Earning Opportunities for Inexperienced Entrepreneurs
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Joyojeet Pal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2019
* USD 159,830.00

This project seeks to discover some of the technical and non-technical "hidden"
requirements for technology-driven, shared-economy entrepreneurship. This
research will uncover the degree to which these hidden requirements are a
challenge, especially for those who are not habitual shared-economy
participants. Sharing economy platforms such as Uber, Lyft, eBay, Etsy, and
Airbnb connect buyers and sellers and allow novice entrepreneurs to do business
online. The sharing economy narrative emphasizes job creation and an easy ramp
to small-scale entrepreneurship. Critics, however, have called into question
what these systems actually provide for the least well-off, many of whom have
limited experience with entrepreneurship and digital technology. This project
very intentionally seeks broader impacts that aim to make the sharing economy
more inclusive by simultaneously harnessing the strengths of local citizens,
increasing community engagement, and raising economic prospects for the less
well-off. A direct outcome of the research is to kick-start a working model for
turning everyday citizens into tech-enabled, small-scale
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will follow a case study
approach consisting of observations, participatory design exercises, informant
interviews, and focus groups to examine the foundational factors that enable
participants to successfully operate in a shared economy around tourism.
Actively participating with the community, the team of researchers will use a
participatory approach to embed this investigation into the working of an
enterprise in which community members conduct neighborhood tours as a way to
earn additional income. Participants will design the tours, handle logistics,
and ultimately deliver the tours. For the purposes of analysis, documentation,
and recording of all technical and non-technical support required to run the
business, the research will elicit participant aspirations, run design exercises
to determine tour content, and provide technical assistance and connections with
legal and business advisors. The factors enabling successful participation in
the sharing economy are poorly understood, especially with regard to non-
technical components. The intellectual goal of this investigation will be to
uncover the hidden needs and limitations of traditional sharing economy
platforms and to identify methods required to meet these needs and requirements,
especially as they relate to inexperienced entrepreneurs.