* 1665077
* SusChEM:  Energies of Adsorbed Catalytic Intermediates on Transition Metal Surfaces:  Experimental Benchmarks for Computational Catalysis Research
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Charles Campbell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 510,000.00

Catalysts are chemicals that provide more efficient and selective pathways for
desirable chemical reactions. Transition metal catalysts are particularly useful
in the production of bulk chemicals and fuels, and for cleaner fuel combustion
and pollution cleanup. For these solid catalysts, metals at the catalyst surface
bind the reacting chemicals with just the right strength (or "bond energy") to
enable their chemical conversion to the desired products. Too tightly bound, and
the product will not desorb but will remain attached to the catalyst surface.
Too weakly bound and the reactant will not adsorb, and cannot react
catalytically with it. Improving the energetics of such catalysts is essential
for producing and using chemicals and fuels with higher energy efficiency and
less pollution, as needed for sustainable living into the future. The key to
improving the catalysts is to find materials whose surfaces bind the reacting
chemicals with the optimum bond energies. In principle, this can be achieved by
solving the equations of quantum mechanics (a branch of physics) with computers.
Unfortunately, the math is very difficult, so mathematical approximations must
be made for even the fastest computers to solve the equations in reasonable
times. Experimental measurements of some of the bond energies are needed to
compare to the computer results, to assess whether these approximations lead to
incorrect bond energies. In this project, Dr. Charles T. Campbell is measuring
bond energies for selected chemicals bound to transition metal surfaces,
carefully chosen to enable development of new quantum mechanical methods for
more accurately predicting such energies, and to improve the basic understanding
of the catalyst's action. Improving the energy accuracy of such fast
computations is transformative in the field of heterogeneous catalysis, enabling
greater reliability in computer-based predictions of better catalyst materials.
This research also provides strong interdisciplinary, research-integrated
education for numerous young students, scientists and engineers, who get hands-
on experience with state-of-the-art measurement instrumentation and its design.
Dr. Campbell is involved in extensive outreach to the broader community, through
his frequent public lectures, numerous editorships and advisory board
memberships, and service to university and external science education
initiatives.

Late transition metal catalysts and electocatalysts are used in the production
of bulk chemicals and fuels, for cleaner fuel combustion and for pollution
cleanup. Improving such catalysts is essential for producing and using chemicals
and fuels with higher energy efficiency and less pollution, as needed for
sustainable living. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Charles T. Campbell of the University of Washington is
measuring the energetics of selected elementary chemical reactions occurring on
late transition metal surfaces, carefully chosen to enable development of new
theoretical methods for more accurately predicting such energies. This, in turn,
improves the basic understanding of catalytic mechanisms, and facilitates the
design of better catalysts. Dr. Campbell's calorimetric measurements, which
cannot be performed with the same precision elsewhere in the world, are
broadening the database of reliable experimental energies of adsorbed catalytic
intermediates that can be used by theoreticians as benchmarks to guide
development of computational methods with improved accuracy for calculating the
energetics of chemical reactions at late transition metal surfaces. While
density functional theory (DFT) has been extremely successful in catalysis
research, prior results proved that the mean absolute errors in the energies of
adsorbed intermediates from DFT exceeds 20 kJ/mol. The experimental database
being developed here greatly facilitates ongoing efforts by the theoretical
community to improve the energy accuracy of such fast computational methods,
while also clarifying the energetic basis for structure-reactivity correlations
in transition metal catalysis. These improvements are transformative for
catalysis research, enabling greater reliability in computational prediction of
reaction rates and mechanisms, and higher success rates in predicting better
catalyst and electrocatalyst materials that are essential for sustainable
living. This research also provides strong interdisciplinary, research-
integrated education for numerous young science and engineering students and
postdoctoral researchers, who get hands-on experience with state-of-the-art
measurement instrumentation and its design. In addition to mentoring these young
people, Dr. Campbell is involved in extensive outreach to the broader community,
through his frequent public lectures, numerous editorships and advisory board
memberships, and service to university and external science education
initiatives.