* 1665179
* Towards Dynamical Control over Gas-Surface Reactivity: Light Alkane and Carbon Dioxide Activation at Catalytic Metal Surfares
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Ian Harrison, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2021
* USD 497,233.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ian Harrison of the University of
Virginia is using sophisticated laser and molecular beam techniques, coupled
with theoretical modeling, to study the reactions of natural gas molecules and
carbon dioxide with metal surfaces. For example, one reaction of interest is
that between carbon dioxide (CO2) and hydrogen atoms (H), which can be
accelerated when CO2 and H first adsorb on a copper surface (in other words, the
metal surface is acting as a catalyst). Prof. Harrison's research aims to reveal
how the initial structures formed when molecules and/or atoms collide with a
metal surface determine the products of the reaction and the rates of the
reaction. Understanding the details of molecule-surface reactions may aid the
design of next generation catalysts and catalytic processes. In this way, the
research may help advance catalytic technologies to more efficiently make
products from natural gas, transformations that currently consume approximately
2% of global energy, and to use carbon dioxide as a chemical feedstock in ways
that would reduce net greenhouse gas emissions. Further broader impacts of this
research stem from the training of graduate and undergraduate students in the
design and construction of advanced experimental instrumentation and complex
computer modeling. Outreach activities include giving lessons and lab
demonstrations at local elementary and middle schools and providing expanded
research opportunities to minority and Federal Work Study undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of activated chemisorption are
probed using a heated effusive molecular beam impinging on a single crystal
metal surface to measure dissociative/associative sticking probabilities, S(Tg,
Ts; angle), as functions of gas &amp; surface temperatures and angle of
incidence. New measurements of product state distributions from pulsed laser
assisted thermal associative/dissociative desorption (LAAD/LADD) reactions at
surfaces will address activated chemisorption beginning from the surface side of
the reaction barrier. Interpreted through the principle of detailed balance, the
LAAD/LADD measurements define translational energy- resolved thermal sticking
probabilities S(Et, T; angle), directly relevant to thermally-driven industrial
catalysis. The laser methods provide unique new opportunities to characterize
extremely low activated sticking probabilities and to even discriminate between
chemically- specific reaction pathways such as C-C or C-H bond cleavage in
ethane dissociative chemisorption. The experimental measurements, coupled with
dynamically-biased microcanonical theoretical modeling, are being used to test
and quantify the control of dynamics over catalytic reactivity, and to relate
this dynamical control to specific transition state properties.