* 1665421
* Electrocatalytic Metal-Mediated Nitrogen Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Electrocatalytic Metal-Mediated Nitrogen Fixation&lt;br/&gt;As the world's
population is expected to increase from 7 billion to nearly 10 billion people
within the next 35 years, there is the need to develop and commercialize new
energy-efficient and environmentally-benign industrial processes that can
provide chemicals that are required to support and advance civilization. In this
regard, the century-old Haber-Bosch (HB) process, which converts nitrogen (N2)
and hydrogen (H2) into over 140 million metric tons of ammonia (NH3) to be used
as fertilizer each year, is critical for our survival, however, as practiced, it
currently consumes up to 5% of the world's energy production and a substantial
amount of chemical waste is generated to provide the required amount of
hydrogen. More importantly, at the molecular level, scientists do not know how
'nitrogen fixation' by the HB process works. In this project, Dr. Sita and his
research group are pursuing a new design for the development of chemistry that
uses electricity as the source of power and water (H20) rather than hydrogen for
achieving the ultimate goal of inexpensive, energy- and chemically-efficient
nitrogen fixation that will not have an enormous future impact on natural
resources and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Sita of the University
of Maryland is seeking to develop an electrochemically-driven catalytic process
for the energy efficient and atom-economical conversion of N2 into NH3. Research
activities include the design and optimization of molecularly-discrete
mononuclear and dinuclear molybdenum (Mo) complexes that can coordinate N2 in a
manner that leads to low temperature N-N bond cleavage, N-atom
functionalization, and release of a nitrogen-containing product in a fashion
that recycles the Mo complex back to the initial starting state. Bulk
electrolysis, using optimized metal electrodes and trialkylsilyl halides, is
being employed to establish a chemical process that is catalytic in the amount
of Mo complex that is required for the production of trialkylsilylated amines
from N2. Acid hydrolysis of the trialkylsilylated amines is providing NH3 and
enabling recycling the trialkylsilyl halide. Validation of the new proposed
paradigm for achieving electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation is providing an
important scientific foundation that can contribute to the further advancement
of chemical technologies that are beneficial to global civilization and the
world economy. This project is also training a diverse new generation of
scientists in interdisciplinary areas of electrochemistry, inorganic and
industrial chemistry, catalysis, and reaction mechanisms. Dr. Sita is engaging
in outreach activities with the general public to promote a better understanding
of chemistry and its critical role in supporting civilization and a better
quality of life. In particular, Dr. Sita is providing STEM education at the K-12
level and especially through involvement with groups of students from
underrepresented groups.