* 1665015
* Metal-Metal Cooperativity Effects in Synthesis and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* David Michaelis, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 351,279.00

Metal-Metal Cooperativity Effects in Synthesis and
Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new catalysts to convert simple and
abundant raw materials into important chemicals and pharmaceuticals is essential
for a sustainable and responsible chemical industry. Efficient and selective
catalytic processes lower both the cost and waste associated with chemical
synthesis. Inspired by natural metal-containing enzymes, Dr. Michaelis is
developing new catalysts that contain two distinct metal centers. The two metals
work cooperatively to achieve much more efficient catalysis than that of a
single metal. Understanding how this process occurs is enabling the application
of this strategy to a broad number of catalytic reactions. Dr. Michaelis is also
actively involved in recruiting and retaining promising high school and
undergraduate students, including women, into science, technology, and
engineering (STEM) majors. These efforts are involving students in research,
service, and outreach opportunities within the STEM field at an early stage of
their career. The activities include summer internships at the high school and
college freshman levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition-metal
catalyzed reactions represent a hallmark of modern organic synthesis and play a
critical role in areas ranging from basic synthetic research to large scale
manufacturing. Traditional ligand design in transition metal catalysis seeks to
control reaction mechanism, reactivity, and catalyst lifetime by varying the
electronic and steric properties of organic supporting ligands. Ligands that
contain a second metal represent a conceptually distinct approach to catalyst
design because metal-metal cooperativity can impact the reactivity, mechanism,
and selectivity of catalysts in unique ways. Despite significant efforts to
synthesize and characterize bimetallic complexes, their application to organic
synthesis remains relatively unexplored. In addition, it remains unclear to what
extent metal-metal interactions can enable mechanistically distinct reaction
pathways. With funding support from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Michaelis is developing strategies to investigate the
impact of M-M interactions on reactivity and mechanism in synthetic
transformations. These goals are being achieved by (1) synthesizing new
titanium-containing ligands, including chiral enantiopure ligands, and
investigating the assembly of electrophilic Ti-M (M = Ni, Pd, Pt)
heterobimetallic catalysts for olefin and C-H activation reactions, and (2)
Synthesizing (NHC)Ni-M2 complexes (NHC = N-heterocyclic carbene) and
investigating the impact of M2 in Ni-catalyzed cross coupling reactions. Dr.
Michaelis is also actively involved in STEM outreach activities, including high
school and undergraduate research internships, and is developing a freshman
mentoring program for chemistry and biochemistry majors. This mentoring program
is ensuring that a diverse group of undergraduate students participate in
undergraduate research, outreach, and service opportunities within the STEM
field.