* 1665090
* Improving Understanding, Utility and Generality of Hyperpolarized, Long-lived Spin States in Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Thomas Theis, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 649,998.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for chemists;
it is useful for determining molecular structure and for monitoring the progress
of chemical reactions. NMR's clinical cousin, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is also a useful tool for producing images of soft tissues in the body. Both
methods usually suffer from relatively low sensitivity - meaning that it cannot
detect small amounts of sample. "Hyperpolarization" methods, which can increase
the signal by a factor of 1000 or more, have been extensively explored over the
last decade, but fewer than 1% of all NMRs and MRIs have access to this
technology. Hyperpolarization is technically challenging and extremely
expensive. With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, and
partial co-funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - A
Program, Professors Warren Warren, Steven Malcolmson, and Thomas Theis and their
groups at Duke University are working to expand the availability and utility of
hyperpolarization (a readily prepared reagent). They are developing new
catalysts to speed sample preparation and an instrument that can be built for
about 1% of the cost of competitive approaches. This research is both expanding
the range of possible molecular targets and increasing the attainable
sensitivity. The project could ultimately enable low-cost, portable MRI
instruments. The team is providing research and training opportunities in these
critical technologies for members of underrepresented groups, and providing
substantial K-12 science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The low sensitivity of
NMR and MRI is often a severe limitation. Hyperpolarization methods (mostly
dynamic nuclear polarization, DNP) can increase the observable signal as much as
10,000 times in virtually any organic molecule, but hyperpolarization decays
back to thermal equilibrium at a rate given by the nuclear spin lifetime T1,
which in solution is commonly seconds. These short relaxation times limit the
processes that can be studied by the method. In addition, the associated
apparatus is complicated and expensive (ca. $2.5M for clinical systems). The
team at Duke has shown that pulse sequences can load and unload long-lived
states in many molecules, effectively lengthening homogeneous relaxation times
to many minutes. Their new approaches to hyperpolarization (SABRE-SHEATH and
LIGHT-SABRE) have increased 15Nitrogen or 13Carbon polarization by up to five
orders of magnitude (relative to thermal populations) using an ultralow-field
apparatus (about 1% of the Earth's field) that can be built by undergraduates.
They are now working to improve polarization rates, total polarization, and the
generality of these methods. The aim of this research project is to reduce the
sensitivity to molecular parameters and increase reliability. The work includes
a mixture of discovery, basic theoretical extensions of the density matrix
understanding of magnetic resonance, detailed quantum mechanical and molecule
dynamics simulations, targeted synthesis, and demonstration of useful
applications. The research is addressing fundamental questions about spin
dynamics. The systems reflect a new class of "reactive intermediates" which go
back to their original state, yet create a useful product (spin polarized
nuclei). Other extensions focus on the complex role of molecular symmetry in
isolating states from their environment, and on developing tools to access ever-
better protected states. Broader impacts arise from the potential to create a
wide variety of Magnetic Resonance-trackable molecular targets, with
applications from organometallic chemistry to clinical imaging.