* 1665383
* Coherent Spectroscopy and Coherent Control of Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2021
* USD 707,544.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Keith Nelson of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology is developing novel techniques that use
short pulses of light in the terahertz (THz) frequency range of the spectrum.
The terahertz range is just above the lower-frequency microwave (or GHz) range
that is used in common devices like cellphones. Magnetic resonance measurements
(similar to those in magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI) can reveal key
information about molecular structure and bonding, but they have hardly ever
been made at THz frequencies because of technological challenges with the
sources of THz light. Professor Nelson overcomes these challenges using short
THz pulses generated in a simple, tabletop-sized, experimental setup to make THz
magnetic resonance measurements in about one minute. Measurements of molecular
and biomolecular complexes with iron or similar elements are being conducted to
understand molecular structures and how they change during chemical processes.
The project has broader impacts in making facile and inexpensive THz measurement
available to scientific communities in chemistry, biology, and materials science
with applications spanning energy harvesting to chemical catalysis to biomedical
measurement. In addition to providing training in cutting-edge spectroscopy
techniques for graduate students and post-doctoral scientists, the Nelson
research group also runs a unique outreach program (the Lambda Project) in which
high school students come to MIT for hands-on experiments to learn about modern
optics and modern materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on recent
demonstrations of THz electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) in both the linear
regime in which free-induction decays (FIDs) are measured and in the nonlinear
regime in which 2-dimensional (2D) electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is
carried out. THz EPR spectra of high-spin transition metal complexes with zero-
field splittings that arise from spin-orbit coupling are measured. The
splittings are highly sensitive to the ligands and their configuration around
the central transition metal ion. The EPR measurement can be preceded by an
optical ("pump") pulse that initiates photochemical changes, with associated
changes in the spin states monitored on picosecond time scales. 2D THz EPR
measurements, demonstrated on the collective spin states of magnetic materials,
are being extended to multinuclear organometallic complexes in order to measure
spin-spin interactions between the transition metal ions, revealing detailed
information about the ground and excited-state electronic structures of the
complexes. In addition to these measurements in which THz magnetic fields
coherently drive electron spins, the combined THz electric and magnetic field
components are being used to drive both electric and magnetic dipole moments of
chiral molecules in experiments that seek new methods for enantiometric
separation. Further impacts in chemistry and biology may be realized if improved
enantiomeric separation can be achieved.