* 1665396
* Sustaining Biological Infrastructure:  Expanding and Enhancing an ESA Training Initiative for Project Directors
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Jill Parsons, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 476,943.00

The Ecological Society of America (ESA) is awarded a grant to expand and enhance
the Sustaining Biological Infrastructure (SBI) training initiative. This
initiative helps scientists gain the business planning, marketing, and
communication skills needed to sustain research infrastructure (e.g. databases,
collections, field stations, and marine labs). Research infrastructure is vital
to scientific discovery and supports innovation in fields such as agriculture,
genetics, environmental science, and human health. These resources also require
informed planning to maintain their long-term financial sustainability and to
meet the research community's constantly changing needs. The SBI Training
Initiative will help create a new community of scientists with enhanced business
and communication skills. These scientists will be better equipped to ensure
that critical resources continue to enable discovery and advance the health,
prosperity, and welfare of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBI
Training Initiative is designed to impart key skills to scientists in a language
they understand, and to provide ample opportunities to: 1) learn from
experienced faculty, 2) practice using key tools that they can implement
immediately at their own project, and 3) network and learn from peers who
possess a deep understanding of the specific challenges that the research
community faces. This award supports the following activities: offering the
keystone 3-day "Strategies for Success" course in two different locations each
year for the next three years; developing and offering a more advanced 2-day
course on "Creating a Successful Business Plan"; and offering two, shorter
workshops annually (one day or less) at professional society or other
organization meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding and enhancing this
training program will lead to the following outcomes. Infrastructure directors
will exchange information useful to project sustainability more frequently and
effectively. Business and financial planning will become a routine part of
managing biological infrastructure projects and programs. Infrastructure
directors will report greater fundraising success, increasingly varied funding
sources, and more effective financial management of their projects.
Infrastructure directors will increasingly develop and regularly update formal
business and strategic plans for their projects. The expansion of the SBI
Training Initiative (www.esa.org/sbi) will promote scientific progress by
ensuring that vital infrastructure continues to support innovation and discovery
in biological research.