* 1665137
* Collaborative Research:  INFEWS N/P/H2O:  Electrochemical Approaches to Sustainable Dinitrogen Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* James Mayer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, scientists from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC),
Yale University, and Rutgers University are collaborating to develop approaches
to sustainable electrochemical fixation of nitrogen (N2). Sustainable nitrogen
fixation is central to the nexus of challenges in food, energy, and water
chemistry. Current global food production is enabled by the use of synthetic
fertilizer that is produced by nitrogen fixation processes that generate ammonia
(NH3) from nitrogen and hydrogen (H2), but leave a dramatic negative impact on
energy and the environment, consuming about 2% of the world?s fossil fuel-
derived energy supply. In this project, Prof. Alexander Miller (UNC), Profs.
James Mayer and Patrick Holland (Yale), and Profs. Alan Goldman and Gal Hochman
(Rutgers) are exploring new, sustainable methods for nitrogen fixation. New
chemistry will be developed that could enable the development of electrochemical
nitrogen fixation processes that do not require consumption of fossil fuels to
produce ammonia and nitrates. Sustainability and policy analysis will assess the
potential for transformative impact on global agriculture and energy sectors
(including consideration of ammonia as a possible liquid transportation fuel).
The project will train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in
interdisciplinary problem-based scientific methods and positively impact
institutional infrastructure. The topic and the results of the research will be
used as a platform to teach non-scientists about the importance of chemical
catalysis in industry, agriculture, and modern society in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research team has strengths in
catalyst design and synthesis, electrocatalysis, mechanistic studies, and
sustainability and policy analysis. The chemical approach to N2 fixation
involves transition-metal-electrocatalyzed reductive splitting of N2 into
nitrido intermediates. These nitrido intermediates can undergo (a) nitride
reduction to NH3 by proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET), or (b) nitride
oxidation toward nitric acid. Middle-to-late transition metal complexes of
robust and tunable pincer ligands will be an experimental focus, with
complementary computational studies to correlate reactivity with molecular
properties and guide catalyst development. The cost of potential electrochemical
N2 fixation processes will be analyzed, to estimate the dependence on a range of
factors such as diversity of electricity sources, intermittency of sustainable
energy, and governmental policy.