* 1665010
* Imparting Nobility to Base-Metal Hydrides for CO2 Hydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Connie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Connie Lu of the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities is
developing molecular catalysts to transform carbon dioxide into useful chemicals
and/or liquid fuels. Sustainable processes for producing commodity chemicals and
for storing energy are increasingly relevant to a secure energy future. Because
of its abundance and ease of handling, carbon dioxide has the potential to serve
as a renewable single-carbon feedstock for the chemical industry. Professor Lu
is using catalysts featuring earth-abundant metals addressing a broader
challenge in catalysis: to replace traditional catalytic metals with cheaper,
available alternatives. Besides building experience in catalysis research,
graduate students are trained to collaborate across traditional disciplinary
boundaries and gain workforce-related training abroad. Outreach activities focus
on teaching catalysis and energy to K-12 students through experiments and/or
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bimetallic catalysts being developed
for carbon dioxide hydrogenation feature base metals (Ni, Co, and Fe) supported
by Lewis acidic Group 13 ions. The premise of the proposed work is that the
Lewis acidic center will be a powerful lever to tune the reactivity at the base
metal. Extensive effort is dedicated to mechanistic investigations using a
combination of synthetic, spectroscopic, and theoretical approaches to evaluate
how catalytic activity depend on the supporting ion. Key intermediates are
isolated and characterized, including novel anionic metal hydrides, whose
negative charges result in high reactivity. Hydride transfer to other substrates
with polar C=O substrates is also investigated. The work builds knowledge about
how to leverage Lewis acid supports, so to endow higher selectivity and/or
efficiency to base-metal active sites. Assessing the impact of the Lewis acid
support on catalytic efficiency and selectivity leads to catalyst descriptions,
both experimental and theoretical in nature, which may be transferrable to other
catalyst systems.