* 1665291
* The interplay between electron and energy transfer in molecular nanosystems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Abraham Nitzan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 435,000.00

Abraham Nitzan of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. They are supported to develop a conceptual framework and
computational methodologies to address energy conversion processes on the nano
scale. Energy conversion - the change from one form of available energy to
another, has always been an important subject for fundamental research as well
as technological applications. Scientists and engineers strive to increase the
efficiency of converting energy to useful forms on one hand, and to limit its
escape as wasted forms on the other. As science and technology enter the nano
age, such problems re-emerge in new forms that require new conceptual frameworks
and new experimental and computational approaches for their description. Nitzan
and his coworkers focus on several central issues within this effort: The
description of heat transfer on the molecular scale and the coupling between
charge and heat transport in molecular systems. They are constructing a quantum
thermodynamics framework to address such processes, their inter-relationships
and their efficiencies. The research impacts a diverse range of applications of
nanoscience -- from dissipation and information loss in quantum computing to the
efficiency of operation of nano-photo-devices as well as biological electron-
transfer processes. The Nitzan group provides research opportunities for
students at all levels: high school, undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project addresses three
major problems: 1) electron transfer across thermal gradients. Although coupling
between electron and energy transfer in metals is known to exist, it is usually
disregarded in models of electron hopping in molecular systems and often
overlooked even in semiconductors. The objective is to study the interplay
between electron and heat transport in such systems, to propose ways for their
experimental observation, and to examine their implications for nanoscale energy
conversion devices. 2) heat transfer on the molecular scale, where the
connection between structural and dynamical properties of molecules and their
ability to conduct, utilize and dissipate heat is being examined. Here the
proposed investigation contacts the growing number of experimental groups
working in this area as well as with other computational investigations. 3)
Finally, this project continues work in the Nitzan group aimed at developing a
general framework for the description of such process within a quantum
generalization of thermodynamics of small systems. This work aims to achieve the
equivalent of what classical thermodynamics does on the macroscopic scale: to
provide concepts, theoretical structure and computational methodologies for
addressing processes underlying energy conversion, dissipation and utilization
that occur on the molecular scale where quantum mechanics is strongly
manifested. The processes studied in the first two parts of the project will be
formulated in this language as special cases of what should become a quantum
thermodynamics theory of nanoscale systems that strongly interact with their
environment.