* 1665191
* Exploratory Synthesis and Reactivity of Volatile Transition Metal Complexes and Use as Molecular Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2020
* USD 480,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division of NSF supports the
project by Professor Gregory S. Girolami of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign to develop new and better molecular precursors for the chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) of thin films. The current work will develop new classes
of transition metal compounds, especially as they relate to the use of such
molecules as precursors for the deposition of metals and metal oxides on
surfaces with deep vertical features. The research will lead to a better
understanding of the chemistry of volatile transition metal compounds and how
they can be used to uniformly fill such deep features with a focus on better
ways to deposit the wires and insulators that are key components of modern-day
computer chips. The work will enhance already existing interactions between
Professor Girolami?s group and leading companies in microelectronics
development. This project will contribute directly to the education and training
of B.S. and Ph.D. students, and the results will be disseminated by
presentations at international conferences, and by publication in reputable
scientific journals. This award will contribute to the education of a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students, and enable Professor Girolami to
write short radio spots highlighting recent scientific advances of interest to
the public.

A vital national scientific need is the development of new and better molecular
precursors for the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of thin films. The current
project is contributing directly to this need by investigating the synthesis of
new volatile compounds (especially of the transition metals), investigations of
their chemical reactivities, and studies of their volatilities and utilities as
thin film precursors. Some of the specific objectives of the current project are
the synthesis of new complexes containing hard-soft chelating ligands, and the
synthesis of high molecular weight but still highly volatile compounds, which
are expected to be useful for the CVD of superconformal thin films. In parallel,
investigations of the use of these new compounds for the CVD of thin films will
be carried out collaboratively with experts in these techniques. The development
of these new molecules will lead to better performing materials and new
fabrication methods that will enable the continued miniaturization of integrated
circuits. In this way, the Girolami group will contribute to achieving one of
the most important "Difficult Challenges" of the International Technology
Roadmap for Semiconductors: the rapid introduction of new materials/processes
for the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of thin films. The project lies at the
interface of inorganic and materials chemistry, and is well suited for the
education of scientists at all levels. Professor Girolami?s group is also well
positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving the production and
broadcast of TinyTech radio spots will also be part of the funded project.