* 1665274
* Glycoproteins via Chemoselective Ligation of Proteins and Glycans
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Philip Garner, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 07/31/2020
* USD 517,009.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports this project
by Professor Philip Garner. Professor Garner is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Washington State University. He is developing new
methodology for the synthesis of glycoproteins, which are found widely in
eukaryotic cells and play important roles cell-cell signaling, immune response,
and neuronal development. The study of glycoproteins has been limited by their
inaccessibility. This project blends chemical and biological approaches to
develop a new suite of tools for the conjugation of glycans to both unprotected
peptides and ultimately proteins. Because of its interdisciplinary nature, it is
well suited for the education of scientists at all levels. Professor Garner's
group is also well positioned to provide the highest level of education and
training for students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving
local community college students are also part of the funded project.  

The project develops methodology for the convergent synthesis of glycoproteins,
specifically focusing on reactions that could be used for the assembly of
glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-conjugated proteins and N-glycoproteins. Both of
these posttranslational protein modifications are found widely in eukaryotic
cells and play important roles in a variety of biological processes. The study
of glycosylated proteins has been limited by the difficulty in obtaining these
substances in homogeneous form. Currently available chemoenzymatic approaches
either do not produce native structures (GPI-conjugated proteins) or are not
general (N-glycoproteins). This project is developing a solution that is based
on the Cu(II)-mediated coupling of protein thioacids and glycan amines. These
Cu(II)-mediated couplings are distinguished from other ligation reactions by
their enhanced rates and chemoselectivities, which appear to be a function of a
unique reaction mechanism. The approach is novel and could, in theory, be
applied to any GPI- and N-glycoprotein. GPI-proteins are expressed on the
surface of neurons, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and many other cell types.
The project trains both graduate and undergraduate students in organic synthesis
and its application to biological molecules. This activity benefits our society
by preparing a new generation of students for careers in either academia or the
pharmaceutical/biotech sectors. The project addresses the currently limited
interaction of students and faculty at local community colleges with scientists
actively engaged in research at the university level through a planned
symposium.