* 1665339
* Enhanced Sampling Methods for Characterizing Solvent Fluctuations in the Solvation Shells of Conformationally Flexible Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Amish Patel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Amish Patel of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Chemistry
Division to develop computational methods for studying the interactions between
flexible molecules and the liquids in which they are dissolved. Flexible
molecules, such as polymers or peptides, play an important role in diverse
materials and biological contexts, ranging from polymer processing to drug
delivery. Depending on whether the interactions between such molecules and the
surrounding solvent are favorable, flexible solutes can adopt two or more
distinct conformations or molecular shapes. For example, in an unfavorable or
poor solvent, polymers adopt a collapsed globular shape to minimize contact
between their atoms and the solvent, whereas in a favorable or good solvent,
polymers become extended. Understanding the interactions between flexible
solutes and their solvent is crucial because the mechanical, optical and other
properties of flexible solutes, their interactions with other molecules, as well
as their ability to function as expected, are strongly influenced by their
shapes. Professor Patel and his coworkers develop specialized simulation methods
for characterizing the strength of interactions between flexible solutes and the
solvent to understand how such interactions depend on the characteristics of the
solute, its solvation environment, and on thermodynamic conditions. Prof. Patel
also creates educational movies to introduce K-12 students and teachers to the
incredible world of flexible
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformationally flexible solutes
dissolved in liquids, such as polymers or peptides in water, play an important
role in diverse materials and biomolecular contexts, wherein the properties of
the solutes, as well as their interactions and assemblies, are strongly
influenced by their molecular conformation. Flexible molecules can exist in a
multitude of conformations, but often display two or more stable basins
separated by free energetic barriers; these basins as well as the transitions
between them are determined, not only by the inherent intra-molecular
interactions of the solute, but also by the many-body solute-solvent
interactions. Through the development of enhanced sampling methods for
characterizing such collective solute-solvent interactions, Professor Patel and
his coworkers seek to establish an understanding of how such interactions depend
on the characteristics of a solute, its solvation environment, and the attendant
thermodynamic conditions. Ultimately, such an understanding of the solvation
free energetic landscape of flexible solutes may pave the way for precisely
controlling solute conformational transitions, with important implications on
the design of responsive materials and drug delivery vectors.