* 1665356
* Advances of Methodology and Design for the Synthesis of Complex Polycyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* David Williams, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 05/31/2020
* USD 465,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor David Williams. Professor Williams is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Indiana University. He is developing new classes of
ring-forming reactions to carry out highly efficient preparations of complex,
polycyclic molecules. The goal of the research is to develop new reactions and
concise strategies that permit the rapid construction of substances that
incorporate multiple rings. Studies are directed to natural products that have
been isolated in extremely small quantities. These substances have important
biological uses for treatment of cancer and hypertension. This research project
seeks to design and develop new reactions that provide efficient synthetic
pathways for the preparation of these bioactive substances. This research
fundamentally advances chemistry as a platform for drug discovery. The Williams
laboratory offers state-of-the-art training and mentoring in the field of
synthetic organic chemistry. A blend of predoctoral students, postdoctoral
fellows, and undergraduate participants, including many women and
underrepresented minorities, make up the Williams' research group. All
individuals receive training and mentoring to enable future opportunities as
next-generation scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
program is to develop new methodologies for the annulation of highly
substituted, five-membered carbocycles in complex molecular arrangements. Direct
applications are sought to devise concise synthetic pathways to bioactive
natural products. Two lines of investigation are being pursued to achieve these
goals: anionic electrocyclization reactions and transition metal catalysis.
Studies are underway to explore effective methods to engage pentadienyl
carbanions in ring-forming processes. Palladium and nickel-catalyzed reactions
are studied to link cross-coupling processes with molecular reorganization via
pi-allyl intermediates. Another aspect of the research investigates new metal-
catalyzed rearrangements of strained cyclopropylidene systems to advance
annulation reactions that are applied to the synthesis of bioactive terpenes.
The project interfaces well with important subtopics in chemical biology and
medicinal chemistry. The research is well suited for the education of scientists
at all levels. Professor Williams' group is well positioned to provide the
highest level of education and training for students underrepresented in
science. A variety of outreach activities are part of the project. The broader
impact of these scientific results benefit society by enabling the discovery of
new pharmaceuticals.