* 1665256
* Nitrogen Centered Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2022
* USD 495,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrzej Rajca of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln investigates stable organic
polyradicals that are relevant to novel magnetic materials and optical
technology. With stable organic polyradicals, lightweight, soft organic magnets,
which have applications in wearable electronics, can be developed. Stable
organic polyradicals can also assist the development of contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging, which is widely used in medical diagnosis. This
interdisciplinary research project is well positioned to provide the highest
level of the training and education of scientists at all levels, including those
currently underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this project are high-spin nitrogen (aminyl) centered di-, tri-
and polyradicals, helically folded high-spin carbon-centered polyradicals,
helical and double helical oligothiophene-based radicals. The high-spin aminyl
radicals derive from a molecular design based upon annelated, cross-conjugated
structures that facilitate delocalization of electron spin density into the
ferromagnetic coupler. These radicals are expected to possess a long half-life
at room temperature that would permit isolation and/or thermal robustness
permitting sublimation under vacuum to prepare thin films. The helical and
double helical oligothiophene-based radicals are intriguing novel molecules with
a combination of chiral pi-systems and paramagnetism. Paramagnetism associated
with helical or double helical pi-system may render unique properties due to the
combination of chirality and delocalized electronic spin, providing an avenue
for development of novel paramagnetic materials with inherently strong chiral
properties that could facilitate discovery of new organic magneto-optic
materials and devices. The proposed radicals are being prepared by modern
organic synthetic methodologies and characterized by electron spin resonance
spectroscopy, superconducting quantum interference device magnetometry, as well
as computations.