* 1665372
* SusChEM: Spectro-electrochemical and theoretical study of carbon dioxide up-conversion mechanisms using clathrate hydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Hannes Jonsson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2020
* USD 485,002.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program (CSDMB) of the
Chemistry Division supports the project by Professor Christoph Rose-Petruck (PI)
and Professor Hannes Jónsson (co-PI). Professors Rose-Petruck and Jónsson are
faculty members in the Department of Chemistry at Brown University. The research
project focuses on the electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) into
useful chemicals. Interest in CO2 conversion has increased significantly in
recent years, in response to the increasing demand for sustainable products that
are not generated from fossil fuels. While much work is being done to advance
these efforts, there are still major hurdles to overcome. One of these is the
electro-chemical generation of hydrogen gas that constantly competes with the
desired CO2 conversion processes. This competing reaction steals the current
(flow of electrons) needed for the CO2 conversion and, in so doing, makes the
processes inefficient and costly. To solve this problem, the investigator are
conducting the electrochemical conversion of CO2 in snow-like water crystals
called clathrate hydrates that can store large amounts of CO2. This "snow" is
mixed with salts and water to form an electrically conducting "snow-slush". The
use of this mixture for the electro-chemical conversion of CO2 dramatically
reduces the competing generation of hydrogen gas, leading to greatly improved
yields and reaction efficiency. This discovery has the potential to be
transformative in terms of how the conversion of CO2 into value added products
is conducted. The use of clathrate hydrates in this fashion is very new, and the
reaction mechanisms that enable the success of the approach are unknown. Hence,
the researchers are seeking a better understanding of how these reactions work
and how they can be manipulated to optimize the yield of a particular desired
product. The research activities include a collaborative partnership with the
Research Instruments Corporation, a Rhode Island based company. This company is
a partner for technology transfer from Brown University into the market place.
Recruitment and mentoring of historically underrepresented groups is enhanced
through the partnership with the Leadership Alliance.

The electrochemical reduction of CO2 into carbonaceous products is carried out
in clathrate hydrate-loaded electrolytes. These reaction conditions strongly
reduce the needed overpotential and change the product spectrum compared to that
obtained with non-clathrate electrolytes. A spectrum of products is produced
with low reduction potentials. The researchers hypothesize that reactions inside
the clathrate hydrate structures are initiated by hydrogen-radical formation
from clathrate water molecules as the clathrate crystals contact the working
electrode. The experiments are combined with calculations of the reaction
mechanisms and rates. These calculations are based on density functional theory
of the electronic structure and minimum energy path calculations to estimate
energy barriers for the various reaction steps and rate estimates based on
harmonic transition state theory. The research investigates CO2 reduction
mechanisms in electrolytes that include clathrate hydrates. The study provides a
detailed insight into a new class of reaction mechanisms that use clathrates as
water-based frameworks for high energy-efficient up-conversion of CO2 and other
molecules. The activities include collaborative partners. The Research
Instruments Corporation contributes strength in entrepreneurship and a partner
for technology transfer from Brown University into the market place. Recruitment
and mentoring of historically underrepresented groups is enhanced through the
partnership with the Leadership Alliance.