* 1665073
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Secret Key Generation Under Resource Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Lifeng Lai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Common shared keys, which can be used for encryption/decryption, authentication
and various other security primitives, plays a fundamental role in securing
modern digital systems. Due to such significant importance, there has been a
tremendous amount of work on the design of key generation/distribution schemes.
Despite of these efforts, significant challenges, such as scalability and
availability, remain to be fully addressed. This project investigates
information theoretic approaches for secret key generation with focuses on
fundamental and challenging issues under more realistic models. The resulting
schemes are anticipated to be more easily applied to the design of practical
wireless networks. The project will leverage collaboration with industries and
will actively involve students with various backgrounds.

In particular, the project will develop key generation schemes under the
framework of key generation via public discussion. The standard scheme under
this framework is a so-called "omniscience" scheme. However, such a scheme
requires all nodes in the network to transmit, assumes the public discussion is
heard noiselessly by all nodes in the network, and does not take the
implementation complexity into consideration. While these assumptions enable the
tractability of the problems and facilitate to obtain crucial insights, in order
for such studies to provide useful and accurate guidance in practice, realistic
constraints must be taken into consideration, which pose three fundamental
directions that this project will explore. In this project, thrust 1 focuses on
key generation with vocality constraints that addresses the following
fundamental question: for a general source network, is it possible to design
schemes that involve only a subset of nodes to talk but still achieve the key
capacity? Thrust 2 focuses on key generation with physical channel constraints.
In particular, motivated by constraints associated with physical channels, the
project will design key generation scheme for scenarios when the public
discussion of each node can only be received by nodes in its transmission range
and the simultaneous transmission of multiple nodes will interfere with each
other. Thrust 3 focuses on key generation with complexity constraints and
investigates how to minimize the complexity in the design of key generation
schemes and how to reduce computational resource consumption required for key
generation schemes.