* 1665348
* SusChEM: C-H Functionalization with Earth Abundant Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Timothy Warren, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

SusChEM: C-H Functionalization with Earth Abundant
Metals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new catalysts for chemical synthesis is a
key challenge that enables the discovery and production of new molecules and
materials required for our economy, especially when the catalysts are sourced
from sustainable, Earth abundant metals. Many organic molecules that appear in
pharmaceuticals or as components of advanced materials possess several carbon-
hydrogen (C-H) bonds. These C-H bonds are very hard to break and to convert into
new and different bonds that allow access to complex chemical structures. In
this project, Dr. Timothy H. Warren of Georgetown University is developing new
ways to modify organic molecules by direct modification of these challenging C-H
bonds. Ongoing academic and industrial collaborations allow access to a broad
range of methods to discover, optimize, and understand these new chemical
transformations. Professor Warren is connecting with high-risk middle school
students from low income families in under-resourced communities through the
organization Higher Achievement. In further support of the broader impacts of
this work, he and his graduate and undergraduate students at Georgetown are
reaching out to underprivileged high school students by hosting high school
interns and providing science programming to rising high school seniors from the
diverse Cristo Rey and KIPP networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Timothy H. Warren
of Georgetown University is designing and developing new catalytic protocols to
construct carbon-nitrogen (C-N), carbon-oxygen (C-O), and carbon-carbon (C-C)
bonds directly from carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds. These C-H functionalization
methodologies enable the exploration of chemical space not easily accessible via
traditional synthetic methods. In particular, innovative approaches to prepare
C-C bonds are under development, guided by detailed mechanistic studies that
outline the chemical reactivity of key copper-containing intermediates
responsible for C-C bond formation. Catalyst design allows for the selective
modification of strong C-H bonds in the presence of weaker ones, allowing
control over C-H functionalization regioselectivity. Ongoing collaborations with
Prof. Tom Cundari (U. North Texas) and Merck (Rahway, NJ) are enabling in depth
computational assessment of reaction mechanisms as well as high throughput
screening for reaction discovery and optimization. Through the organization
Higher Achievement, Professor Warren is connecting with high-risk middle school
students from low income families in under-resourced communities, and is hosting
a fun chemistry show held at Georgetown each summer. Professor Warren and his
team are also reaching out to underprivileged high school students by hosting a
high school intern each summer as well as providing two days of science
programming at Georgetown to rising high school seniors from the diverse Cristo
Rey and KIPP networks.