* 1665408
* EAGER: Biodegradable mulch films in agriculture as a potential source of contaminated plastic pollution
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Marion Brodhagen, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 70,391.00

1665408&lt;br/&gt;Brodhagen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large plastic sheets (mulch
films) are used in agriculture to cover the soil to retain moisture and inhibit
weed growth. A goal of the plastics and agricultural industries is the design of
biodegradable plastic mulch films that can be tilled into the soil, where
degradation is on the order of years. Biodegradable plastics are designed to
disintegrate, with the help of microorganisms, into carbon dioxide, water, and
methane. However, the process inherently requires plastic fragments ranging from
macroscopic to molecular level to be formed en route to mineralization. The goal
of this project is the assessment of effects of these plastic fragments in soil
ecosystems which is largely unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs aims to: 1)
produce and characterize pure polymer films using polymers relevant to those
used in agricultural mulches, describe their degradation products, and optimize
methods for measuring and quantifying degradation products in soil and aqueous
media. 2) use aflatoxin, a common and economically important natural toxin found
in agricultural soils, in a proof-of-principle study to ask whether natural
toxins have potential to adsorb and accumulate on fragments of biodegradable
plastics in soil. The fungus that produces aflatoxin, Aspergillus flavus, is a
frequent and avid colonizer of starch-based biodegradable plastics, and, 3)
query whether the fungus is attracted to the starch polymers or the
biodegradable plastic polymers, or both. The PIs will assess global gene
expression of A. flavus during growth on biodegradable plastics because, besides
aflatoxin, it produces other secondary metabolites that are potentially toxic in
the soil food web. The ability to analyze in situ polymer degradation will allow
realistic modeling of the fate of biodegradable plastic mulch films in soil
ecosystems. This study would represent the most thorough comparison of the
degradation characteristics of commercially-relevant polymers in real soil under
realistic conditions yet reported the literature. Understanding the interaction
of Aspergillus flavus and aflatoxin with biodegradable polymers will aid in
generating biodegradable plastic formulations used in agriculture and food
packaging that are less likely to become contaminated with aflatoxin. Assessing
genes expressed by Aspergillus flavus during growth on biodegradable polymers
will reveal whether, and which of, the many hydrolytic enzymes produced by
Aspergillus flavus are involved in polymer breakdown. In addition, altered
expression of secondary metabolite genes would support further experiments to
assess the potential for aflatoxin and other microbial metabolites to adsorb to
biodegradable plastic mulch film fragments - sequestered from their natural
roles, and concentrated onto particles that may enter the food web. Since the
fall of 2011, ten WWU Biology and seven WWU Engineering undergraduate students
have gained 1-2 years' research experience on the biodegradable plastics
project. Of those, five students were coauthors on peer-reviewed publications.
All of these students have gone on to research jobs in their field of interest,
graduate programs, or medical school. Two undergraduate researchers trained on
this grant would have the advantage to focus full-time on their projects because
they will be paid stipends. They will receive training in interdisciplinary
research methods, attend joint laboratory meetings, and present their data at a
university-level conference (Scholars Week). The results from this work will be
relevant to agroecosystem and human health. The ability to analyze in situ
polymer degradation will allow realistic modeling of the fate of biodegradable
plastic mulch films in soil ecosystems and pave the way for studies of fate and
transport of polymer degradation products in soils.