* 1665172
* EAGER: TDM solar cells: Towards Low Cost Manufacturing of 30% Monolithic Perovskite/CuInSe2 Tandems with Solution Processing and Novel Carbon Nanotube Tunnel Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Robert Collins, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The nontechnical description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
result of progress in science and engineering over the past 5-10 years, solar
panels have become an economically viable means for generating electricity for
homes, industries, and transportation. In fact, the cost of providing clean
power from solar cells has been cut in half in only 6 years, and consequently,
the number of jobs in the industry has skyrocketed. This project focuses on
developing next generation solar cell technologies through new designs and
manufacturing techniques that will reduce costs further while increasing overall
performance. Since solar panel technology has yet to reach maturity, tremendous
benefits for society are possible if recently identified engineering and science
hurdles can be overcome. A key goal is to implement new materials, manufacturing
processes, and characterization tools to enhance the fraction of incident
sunlight that is converted to electrical power. Current commercial solar panel
designs use a single absorbing semiconductor layer in the device that allows a
theoretical maximum of only ~30% conversion of the power in sunlight to
electricity. To date, approximately two-thirds of this maximum has been reached.
Next generation concepts involve the use of two absorbing semiconducting layers
in the so-called "tandem" device structure which will allow a theoretical
maximum of ~45% conversion of the incident sunlight to electrical power.
Although high efficiency tandems have been fabricated from high cost materials
for use in space power, the cost of these cells is too high for large-scale
terrestrial use. This project will use a novel strategy that enables dissimilar
semiconductor materials to work together and promotes low-cost production
technologies of the resulting high efficiency tandem solar cells. Importantly,
the approach we will use ensures that the developed devices will be amenable to
high-volume manufacturing. The project integrates educational opportunities for
students as well as outreach efforts to stakeholders, both designed to increase
diversity in our science and engineering workforce and to broaden the impact of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a new general approach will be
developed for fabricating monolithic tandems from dissimilar materials, based on
the capabilities of novel solution processable single-wall carbon nanotube
tunnel junctions. This approach will create avenues for unlocking the mass
production potential of high efficiency, low cost monolithically integrated
tandem solar cells for terrestrial use. The general research plan is expected to
lead to tandems with a PCE &gt; 30%. The research program leverages existing
high efficiency CuIn1-xGaxSe2 (CIGS) devices produced by vacuum co-evaporation
and capabilities for producing high efficiency CIGS and perovskite devices based
on CH3NH3PbI3 by solution processing in a move toward an all-solution processed
monolithically integrated tandem that can be fabricated in one continuous, low-
cost manufacturing process. As an integral part of the research, analysis will
be performed via spectroscopic ellipsometry and laser beam-induced voltage and
current response measurements that will guide the synthesis work. These tools
will enable in-depth simulations for understanding of tandem cell performance
and will expedite adjustment of the band-gap ratios and layer thicknesses to
insure optimal collection and current matching between cells.