* 1665519
* Acquisition of a Field Spectroradiometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Nancy Glenn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 74,937.00

This grant supports acquisition of a field portable spectroradiometer which can
image sample reflected light wavelengths across a wide spectrum (350-2500 nm)
and with nanometer scale spectral resolution and associated data reduction
software. The spectroradiometer will support faculty and student research and
research training in the Department of Geosciences at Boise State University.
The spectroradiometer and associated data reduction software will be used with a
range of studies addressing NSF's 10 Big Ideas, including Growing Convergent
Research at NSF, Harnessing Data for 21st Century Science and Engineering, and
Understanding the Rules of Life: Predicting Phenotype. The investigators are
actively engaged in a university-wide Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) program and an NSF EPSCoR Undergraduate Research and
Internships program. The researchers will use the spectroradiometer for
experiential learning as part of these outreach and education efforts. This
support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science and
advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare given the societal
relevance of targeted research aimed at understanding the terrestrial water
cycle with implications for improved water resource management and the impact of
the acquisition on training the next generation scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research applications include studies of inorganic and
organic soil carbon and its biogeochemical cycling and post-fire redistribution
of carbon in the Reynolds Creek Experimental Watershed Critical Zone Observatory
site. Question to be addressed include: 1) What are the controls on the
distribution and amounts of organic and inorganic soil carbon? ; and 2) How do
fire severity, vegetation type, and soil texture affect the redistribution of
soil nutrients and soil organic carbon? The field spectroradiometer will be used
in both the field and lab settings by students and faculty associated with
several NSF Division of Earth Sciences (EAR) and related program studies,
including the Reynolds Creek Critical Zone Observatory (RC-CZO). The
investigators and their students will correlate measurements of soil organic and
inorganic carbon from laboratory-based carbon analyses with spectroscopy of
soils in the lab and field settings. The statistical relationships between the
carbon and inorganic carbon measurements and the soil spectra will be applied to
independent soil spectra in the field and laboratory to increase the number of
observations of soil carbon, while reducing cost and time associated with the
assay measurements. The increased number of soil carbon observations will
increase the spatial resolution and confidence of soil carbon maps as well as
the understanding of the controls on soil carbon. Similarly, soil and vegetation
spectra will be collected in the field to be used as endmembers with imaging
spectroscopy to map the vegetation and soils of a post-fire study. This
information will be used to help understand post-fire redistribution of soil
nutrients and organic carbon, and what role vegetation plays in regulating the
delivery of sediment across a dryland ecosystem (in which wind erosion is
dominant). Additional applications include studies of land use change on
vegetation-land surface-atmosphere interactions and hydrologic cycling and
studies of snowpack spectral properties to better model water and energy
balance. These applications are also focused on predicting spring snow melt
timing and magnitude to improve water resource management. The support will also
be used for spectral classification of sagebrush-steppe ecosystem vegetation-
soil-water interactions to improve large scale remote sensing modality image
classification algorithms.