* 1665467
* Two Dimensional TeraHertz Spectroscopy of Molecular Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Geoffrey Blake, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2022
* USD 772,675.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism A
(CSDM-A) and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Programs of the Chemistry
Division, Professors Geoffrey Blake and Tom Miller of the California Institute
of Technology are using new laser techniques to study the properties of pure
molecular liquids and mixtures, especially those containing hydrogen bonds (for
example water and alcohols). Specifically, the new laser tools involve light at
terahertz (THz) frequencies (this frequency range lies between the infrared and
microwave parts of the light spectrum). These THz lasers are also designed to
produce extremely short pulses of light (a few femtoseconds, where a femtosecond
is one quadrillionth of one second). The femtosecond THz laser pulses are then
used to probe the motions of the liquid molecules as they interact with other
reactive molecules dissolved in the liquid. The THz pulses also make it possible
to control the orientation of the molecules in the liquid, and to examine how
energy flows between two reacting molecules or between the molecules and the
liquid. Professors Blake and Miller combine the experimental data with computer
simulations of liquids and clusters of molecules to build better models for
understanding chemical reactions in liquids. The broader impacts of this work
include potential societal benefits from an increased understanding of how
liquids solvate molecules and influence chemical reactivity, as well as
opportunities for the training of graduate students and undergraduates in the
design and construction of advanced experimental instrumentation and complex
computer simulation. The Blake and Miller research groups also engage the local
K-12 community, for example via the Caltech Pre-College Science Initiative
(CAPSI) program (Prof. Blake) and Prof. Miller's Team Research yielding
Integrated Educational Tools (TRIDENT) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on the nonlinear THz spectroscopy of neat liquids and mixtures at
various temperatures. Detailed molecular pictures of the structure and dynamics
of liquids drive our understanding of chemistry and biology. Nonlinear two
dimensional (2D)-infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopies
have revealed many specifics of liquid behavior. Extending such tools into the
THz regime would directly probe liquid dynamics supported by intermolecular
forces. This research project does so by combining two intense THz pulses whose
arrival at the sample can be swept over controlled delays, with the subsequent
anisotropy and Raman spectrum of the liquid probed by a third pulse at 800 nm.
By mapping out the liquid response over the relative delays between the three
pulses, a 2D-THz-THz-Raman (2D-TTR) spectrum is obtained. This method inherently
suppresses the linear response of the system, and so is sensitive to
anharmonicities in the intermolecular liquid potential energy surface and the
electric dipole moment and Raman polarizability surfaces. To determine the
origins of the observed response, the experimental observations are interpreted
with theoretical calculations both of molecular clusters and liquid models. The
cluster work involves high accuracy electronic structure calculations, while the
liquid simulations are based on molecular dynamics approaches.