* 1665109
* Towards Absolute Asymmetric Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Tehshik Yoon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2020
* USD 475,947.00

This award from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division goes to
support research by Professor Tehshik Yoon of the University of Wisconsin-
Madison's Chemistry Department. Professor Yoon is interested in the "chirality",
or "handedness", of small organic molecules. Many important organic molecules,
including drug molecules and biologically important molecules like amino acids
and sugars can exist in either left- or right-handed forms, with only one form
being biologically desirable. The undesirable form can be harmful, so almost all
new drug-candidates or diagnostic probes must be of only one "handedness". Light
can also be produced with either left- or right-handed circular polarizations.
The long-term goal of this project is to use the handedness of circularly
polarized light to dictate the handedness of a small organic molecule. This is
accomplished by designing helically chiral catalysts that can first be
selectively activated by circularly polarized light with only one handedness and
then transferring that handedness to a chemical reaction and its resultant
product. This project requires an interdisciplinary approach that combines
synthetic organic chemistry, organometallic chemistry, photochemistry, and
computational chemistry to achieve its objectives, and in that way it provides
outstanding training for students. Professor Yoon is also a leader in efforts to
increase the diversity of students who undertake careers in science, and the
project includes broader impacts that continue these important efforts.

The chiral photocatalysts studied in this project are octahedral iridium
complexes whose ligands are arranged about the metal with well-defined helical
chirality. This class of compounds constitutes an attractive starting point for
these studies because they possess a robust and well-studied photochemistry,
because they have been recently shown to be quite effective photosensitizers for
a range of organic transformations, and because they can easily be synthesized
in stereochemically pure form. The first phase of this project shows that the
chirality of a single enantiomer of a helically chiral iridium photocatalyst can
be transmitted to a newly formed organic photocycloadduct. The second phase
seeks understanding of the structure-activity relationships necessary for
effective enantioselective photocatalysis. The third and most ambitious phase
attempts to identify orthogonal structural features that enable selective
activation of a racemic mixture of chiral Ir photocatalysts with circularly
polarized light. The broader impacts of this project train a diverse set of
graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral researchers in cutting-edge synthetic
organic chemistry relevant to the construction of potential new drugs,
materials, and fine chemicals.