* 1665113
* A study of vinyl cations as intermediates in bond forming reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Matthias Brewer, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Matthias Brewer of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Vermont is studying the reactivity of vinyl
cations. The goal of this research is to better understand the reactivity of
these high-energy intermediates and to develop new carbon-carbon bond forming
reactions. This work takes advantage of the fact that vinyl cations can react
through unique and poorly understood mechanistic pathways that have not been
fully exploited in synthesis. In addition to providing a better understanding of
the inherent reactivity of vinyl cations, this work provides several useful
complexity-building ring-forming reactions that could enable the synthesis of
structurally complex bicyclic and polycyclic products and more basic molecular
scaffolds that serve as useful synthetic intermediates. The graduate and
undergraduate students and economically disadvantaged high school students (via
the ACS Project SEED program) who work on this project receive excellent
training in organic chemistry and learn to conduct mechanistic studies, reaction
optimization and development studies, and become adept at compound
characterization and structure elucidation. In addition, the PI is looking for
innovative ways to promote undergraduate research opportunities and study abroad
opportunities for undergraduate Chemistry and Biochemistry majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While trisubstituted cations (i.e. carbenium ions) are one
of the best studied and most important classes of intermediates in organic
chemistry, disubstituted cations (i.e. vinyl cations) have not received the same
level of attention from the synthetic community. This proposal seeks to better
understand the intrinsic reactivity of vinyl cations and the mechanisms through
which vinyl cations react. Specifically, this work: 1) Explores the reactivity
of vinyl cations in internal redox reactions that result in C-C bond formation
by remote C-H functionalization; 2) Provides a better understanding of the
insertion process through mechanistic studies; 3) Defines the migratory aptitude
of groups in 1,2-shifts across the alkene of vinyl cations; 4) Studies C-C bond
formation by reaction of vinyl cations with remote pi-systems. These studies
could provide new and unique ways to prepare simple structures that will be
valuable synthetic intermediates, as well as important carbocyclic scaffolds
that would be difficult to prepare by traditional means.