* 1665281
* Quantum-Classical Path Integral Methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Nancy Makri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 475,293.00

Nancy Makri of the University of Illinois is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new, rigorous computational methods to study electron and
proton transfer processes. Many dynamical processes in large chemical or
biological systems can be described successfully and very efficiently through
classical trajectory simulations. However, chemical and biological reactions
frequently involve the transfer of electrons or protons. These light particles
often need to be studied using quantum mechanics. Electron and many proton
transfer reactions exhibit pronounced quantum effects and classical trajectories
are not adequate for modeling such processes. Numerical solution of the quantum
mechanical equations of motion, however is extremely computationally demanding.
The most profitable approach for systems of any size is the combination of
quantum and classical trajectory simulation tools. It is not always easy to
combine classical and quantum mechanics without introducing severe
approximations which may result in inaccurate results. This is because classical
mechanics is localized in space, i.e., at each point in time, each atom has a
definite position and momentum. Quantum mechanics is usually represented in
terms of waves, which are delocalized. Makri addresses this apparent
incompatibility via a novel quantum-classical path integral (QCPI) approach,
which uses a local description of the quantum particles, eliminating the need
for approximations and allowing simulations with unprecedented accuracy. Makri
and her research group teach a hands-on lecture course entitled "Music, light
and the atom" which she developed. It is aimed at high school students,
presenting the basic ideas of quantum mechanics through analogies to
music.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The QCPI formulation treats the interaction between
quantum and classical degrees of freedom in full atomistic detail through a
dynamical phase along each quantum-classical path. However, the number of
quantum paths grows exponentially with propagation time, and each quantum path
specifies a different classical trajectory. By exploiting phase relations that
make distinct contributions to decoherence, Makri has shown that the QCPI
expression can be evaluated with only modest computational effort. The proposed
work introduces new ideas based on quantum interference, zero-point energy and
spontaneous phonon emission that can be used to further accelerate QCPI
calculations by orders of magnitude, leading to a highly accurate methodology
applicable to complex chemical processes with effort comparable to that employed
in typical molecular dynamics simulations.