* 1665389
* Using the Hexadehydro-Diels-Alder (HDDA) Reaction for the Facile Synthesis of Elaborated Polycyclic Aromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Thomas Hoye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 02/28/2022
* USD 492,749.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division of the NSF supports the
project by Professor Thomas R. Hoye. Professor Hoye is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota. He is developing new
chemical reactions that allow for the synthesis of novel molecules known as
polycylic aromatics. These molecules are valuable for a variety of reasons, one
being their potential for use in optoelectronic devices such as the organic
light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic cells that are used in energy
efficient displays, lighting units, and for the conversion of solar energy into
electricity. By developing a fundamental understanding of the new reactions used
to make polycyclic aromatics, Professor Hoye and his coworkers may push the
chemical reactions toward the synthesis of compounds having previously unknown
chemical structures and, in the future, build new materials with improved
properties. A number of significant broader impacts of benefit to a wide group
of stakeholders result from the project. Of particular note are research
opportunities for undergraduate research students, a tutorial on the practical
separation of complex organic mixtures, and new extensions of the Minnesota
State Fair exhibit on "Sustainable Polymers."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Hoye's research group is capitalizing on the tremendous potential for the
hexadehydro-Diels-Alder (HDDA) reaction cascade to provide for the rapid
chemical synthesis of manifold classes of highly conjugated polycyclic
aromatics. Some are of value to the field of organic electronic and photonic
materials research. Collaborations are in place to pursue early phases of such
development. It is the methods and strategies for the syntheses of such
compounds that are the most important 'products' that are emerging from this
project. Preliminary results demonstrate that the synthetic routes are often
remarkably short and efficient. New and fundamentally important mechanistic
knowledge is also emerging. Advances in the benzyne chemistry include new
aspects of cycloaddition reactions, two-directional benzyne trapping, and
controlled oligomer synthesis. A process dubbed the 'domino-HDDA reaction' is
particularly intriguing. Professor Hoye holds major teaching awards that
recognize his career-long commitment to the education of students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Outreach activities supported by this project
benefit chemistry research students at multiple levels and contribute to the
education of the public in the arenas of green chemistry and sustainable
polymers. The scientific advances have the possibility of opening new avenues
for pursuit by materials scientists who use organic electronic and photonic
compounds in the settings of light-emitting diodes, photovoltaics, and solar
cells. These applications have a large potential for societal impact.