* 1665333
* To the limits of the density matrix renormalization group in quantum chemistry, and beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Garnet Chan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Garnet Chan at the California Institute of Technology is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division to develop new computational techniques that will allow
scientists to address the inner workings of the biological systems that help
convert nitrogen in the air into the chemical forms that plants and animals use.
In addition, he is pursuing a fundamental reformulation of quantum mechanics
that potentially will enable the quantum mechanics of any physical system to be
efficiently simulated on computers. The outreach activities focus on the
recruitment of underrepresented undergraduates to pursue summer research with
the view towards addressing the pipeline issue in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the computational techniques
being developed in the first part of the research focus on extending density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG) techniques to confidently treat strongly
correlated electronic structure as found in systems such as the FeMo cofactor
(FeMoCo) of nitrogenase. These techniques include improved DMRG active space
methods; time-dependent perturbation theory techniques; and time-dependent
spectral methods. In the second part of the research he is pursuing an intensive
development program to bring the full generality of tensor network algorithms,
across the threshold of models, to ab initio quantum chemistry. This work
pursues connections between tensor networks and modern machine learning
algorithms.