* 1665277
* SusChEM: Earth Abundant Metal-Organic Frameworks for Heterogeneous Visible-Light Organic Photoredox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Fernando Uribe-Romo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The collaborative research team of Professors Uribe-Romo and Yuan at the
University of Central Florida is designing and creating new catalysts that use
sunlight to synthesize organic chemicals such as pharmaceuticals. These
catalysts also contain earth-abundant elements, are easy to recover and reuse,
and are thus sustainable. As a result, they are potential replacements for
traditional catalysts that rely on rare and expensive metals. These catalysts
combine the three-dimensional structural features characteristic of a class of
materials known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) with molecular groups with
high light absorption ability. MOFs are highly porous structures, and this
combination allows for shape-selective, light-driven catalysis at superior rates
within the MOF pores. The research team is strongly emphasizing undergraduate
participation in research, and is also engaging students from underrepresented
groups in STEM through seminar series and outreach activities such as scientific
public speaking workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of sunlight as the
driving force in the synthesis of organic compounds is the focus of the field of
Photoredox Catalysis. This field offers a promising alternative for synthesis of
complex organic compounds, such as natural products and pharmaceuticals, because
visible sunlight is free, readily available, and can add the energy needed for
reactions to proceed in a sustainable manner. The collaborative research team of
Professors Uribe-Romo and Yuan at the University of Central Florida is designing
and creating new catalysts that use sunlight to synthesize organic chemicals.
These catalysts are crystalline and porous metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)
composed of elements that are abundant, inexpensive and reusable (e.g., titanium
and zirconium) and organic building blocks that are able to harvest light of
specific energies and promote transfer of electrons between the catalysts and
substrates. This work is coupling theory, solid-state synthesis, and organic
chemistry for the preparation and tuning of the MOF catalysts to adjust their
light-absorbing ability, as well as their internal pore structures to achieve
pathways in chemical transformations that are challenging to observe in
solution. This work is also including activities for the active participation in
research and outreach by undergraduate students, and by students from
underrepresented groups in STEM through seminar series and scientific public
speaking workshops.