* 1665343
* RAPID: Monitoring and modeling the transport of contaminated water from sinkhole in Mulberry, Florida
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Steven Duranceau, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,910.00

1665343&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On August 27, 2016, a decline of the
water level in a process water (wastewater) holding pond was observed at a
fertilizer plant in Polk County, Florida. It was determined that the declining
water level was due to a sinkhole formed under the pond, which resulted in the
liner rupturing. The opening of the sinkhole was approximately 45 feet in
diameter and the depth of the sinkhole reached the Upper Floridan aquifer. As a
result of the sinkhole, approximately 980 million liters (260 million gallons)
of contaminated radioactive water was drained into the Floridan aquifer. A
contaminant transport model that incorporates an innovative tracer will be
developed for this karst (calcium carbonate) aquifer system to characterize the
spatial and temporal distribution of the contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to assess: 1) what is the spatial and temporal
distribution of the contaminated, radioactive processed water, that was
discharged into the aquifer, 2) what is the impact to the environment and local
community drinking water supplies, 3) how can the impacts of this hazard be
minimized through optimal measures such as pumping or treatment, and, 4) what
recommendations can be developed for the sinkhole site for purposes of
remediation and repair. To achieve the goals the team will take water samples,
at time intervals, from groundwater wells and surface water. These samples will
be analyzed for constituents and parameters that are indicative of the released
contaminated water. The site will be characterized by, but not limited to,
hydrogeological data, satellite images, and, existing geotechnical data. The
proposed project addresses the potential impact of the release on the public
water supply and environment with a focus on monitoring and modeling contaminant
transport in the karst aquifer systems. Although the process of contaminant
transport in aquifers has been investigated in great detail, little is known
about the effect of a large amount of contaminated water released into the karst
aquifer in a short time period through a sinkhole. Groundwater is essential to
the health and economic welfare of west central Florida, as 90 percent of the
population in central Florida relies on groundwater resources for their drinking
water supply. Pollution of groundwater by direct recharge through sinkholes thus
presents a major threat to west central Florida drinking water supplies,
impacting the environment and local economies. Understanding the fate and
transport of contaminated water through the sinkhole is prerequisite for
quantifying the impacts on water supply and receiving water bodies prior to the
design and implementation of remediation procedures. The project will also
contribute to the education and training of two graduate and two undergraduate
students who will participate in the field work of water sampling and sinkhole
site characterization, lab analyses of water samples, and developing a
groundwater model for simulating the transport of contaminated radioactive
water.