* 1665427
* A hierarchy of composite quantum chemical models for applications in materials chemistry and nanoscience
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Krishnan Raghavachari, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Krishnan Raghavachari from Indiana University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop a set of
hierarchical quantum chemical computational methods for state-of-the-art
applications in materials chemistry and nanoscience. The hierarchical concept
involves the use of highly accurate methods on simple systems to validate more
approximate and cost-effective methods for complex systems. Such computational
methods play a key role in understanding and optimizing the properties of
molecules for a range of scientific and technological applications. However,
most such applications thus far have been carried out only on relatively small
molecules due to the high computational cost associated with accurate methods,
and significant challenges remain for the accurate treatment of complex systems
that are needed in many applications. The new methods that are being proposed
will fill a critical need to treat medium-sized and large molecules accurately,
providing systematic well-tested models to the study of materials and nanoscale
systems. Computational nanoscience, as a rapidly expanding field, will attract a
great deal of student interest, and these projects will provide an excellent
opportunity for training the next generation of researchers. Students at all
levels will be trained in advanced computational techniques in this work,
including undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish the proposed goals,
Raghavachari and coworkers are building on two different research frontiers that
have been previously developed using prior NSF funding. In the first part, the
CBH (connectivity-based hierarchy), an accurate thermochemical method for larger
molecules, is being adapted to provide systematic error corrections in DFT
(density functional theory) to yield accuracy comparable to the state-of-the-art
coupled cluster calculations, and applied to calculate reliable bond energies
relevant for large biofuel molecules. In the second part, their fragment-based
composite model (MIM, Molecules-in-Molecules) is being developed to investigate
reactive potential energy surfaces, and to optimize strategies to make the
method applicable for calculating higher order spectroscopic properties such as
nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shift or Raman optical activity on large
molecules containing thousands of atoms. Each development is initially being
carried out independently and then being merged together for forefront
applications. The combined methods are providing unprecedented accuracy for the
treatment of complex problems involving materials chemistry and nanoscience. The
new computational tools are being developed in a platform-independent manner and
can work with multiple quantum chemical packages, and are being made available
for widespread use by other research groups. The award also supports work at a
summer program at Indiana University with undergraduate students from
historically under-served populations.