* 1665282
* InTrans: TRI-MIT Collaboration on Formal Verification Meets Big Data Intelligence in the Trillion Miles Challenge
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Armando Solar-Lezama, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 232,000.00

The goal of this project is to leverage the Synthesis and automated reasoning
techniques developed as part of the project titled "Expeditions in Computer
Aided Program Engineering (ExCAPE): Harnessing Synthesis for Software Design" in
order to help ensure the safety of self driving vehicles. Self-driving vehicles
involve a combination of perception, planning, control and algorithms that are
too complex to be fully verified to guarantee complete reliability, but the goal
is to show that individual components can be verified to work correctly under
many important scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key innovations in
this project is to show that synthesis technology has a role to play in this
challenging task. Synthesis generally aims at generating a piece of code whose
behavior satisfies some constraints, but the ExCAPE project demonstrated an
important application of synthesis: generating models of complex systems that
are amenable to program analysis. In the context of self-driving cars, the key
idea is to leverage synthesis to generate models of particular scenarios, such
as making a right turn or passing a car in a freeway, that capture a large space
of possible situations, but are narrow enough for verification of individual
components against those scenarios to be tractable. In addition to the
technology development, the work provides the opportunity for students and
postdocs who were involved in the ExCAPE effort to collaborate closely with our
industrial partners at Toyota and apply these ideas in an industrial setting.