* 1665532
* Femtosecond Studies of the Influence of Solvent on Chemical Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Stephen Bradforth, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 818,025.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CDSM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen Bradforth of the University
of Southern California is using photo-electron spectroscopy (PES) and other
laser-based techniques to study the structure of liquid ammonia. PES is a
technique that uses light to remove electrons from an atom or molecule. By
measuring the energy of these electrons, information can be obtained about the
structure of the molecule as well as its interactions with other nearby
molecules. The Bradforth group is also studying what happens to the interactions
between ammonia molecules when extra electrons are dissolved in the liquid.
Liquid ammonia was chosen because it can dissolve higher concentrations of
electrons, is similar to water in its structure, and because ammonia is relevant
to a number of important industrial processes. Since the PES technique involves
removal of electrons from molecules caused by light, the research may also
provide insights into similar processes such as the damage to living cells
caused by light (for example, during cancer radiation therapy). Students and
postdocs involved in the project receive training in building instrumentation
for new instruments and benefit from training in international labs. As part of
the broader impact of this project, Professor Bradforth is continuing an
outreach project that provides hands-on summer internships for students from
Cerritos College, a minority-serving community
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores the electronic
structure of the hydrogen-bonding liquid ammonia, and the relationship of this
structure to that of water. A central focus of the project is to establish how
the electronic density of states can be manipulated by solute dopants. The
specific objectives of the project are: (i) to determine the liquid valence band
orbital delocalization from experimental photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) and
photoelectron angular distribution (PAD) measurements; (ii) to identify isolated
solvated electrons, spin-paired dielectrons, and the metal-insulator transition
at high excess electron concentration using pump-probe PES measurements of
liquid ammonia containing solvated electrons (supplied by alkali metals), and
(iii) to characterize low-lying conduction band states and their coupling to
localized molecular doorway states using continuous two-photon absorption
spectroscopy. The transient absorption and photoelectron spectroscopy work is
being done in Professor Bradforth's laboratory at USC. The angle-resolved
tunable X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (PAD) studies are being conducted at
the Hamburg and Berlin synchrotron light sources.