* 1665207
* New Tools and New Approaches for Spectroscopy, Kinetics and Dynamics in Uniform Supersonic Flows
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Arthur Suits, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Arthur Suits of the University of
Missouri, Columbia, is developing new laser and microwave spectroscopy
techniques to study the detailed interactions and properties a range of reactive
molecules (for example, organic molecules that contain multiple bonds, like
butadiene, allene and propyne) and molecular clusters (for example water). These
new methods provide insight into the structures of these molecules, and how
these molecules react to form different product molecules when they absorb
energy. In addition to new insights about the structure and reactivity of the
molecules considered in this project, the research is also continuing the
development of laser and spectroscopy techniques from which other research
groups can benefit. In particular, the Suits group is continuing to develop and
improve a data analysis software package (Finite Slice Analysis, or "FinA"). The
group makes the software available to other researchers free of charge. In
addition to the training received in cutting-edge laser and spectroscopic
techniques, the students involved in this project also gain experience in ab
initio electronic structure calculations so they have a solid foundation and
some practical experience with these methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
studies take advantage of two new instruments being developed to probe the
reaction dynamics, spectroscopy, and low temperature kinetics of polyatomic
molecules. Particular attention is directed to radical species important in
atmospheric chemistry and astrochemistry. The first of these instruments
combines Chirped-pulse Fourier-transform microwave technique with intense low-
temperature pulsed uniform supersonic flows, allowing broadband rotational
spectroscopy to be used as a nearly universal tool in the study of
photodissociation, product branching, spectroscopy and low temperature kinetics.
The second instrument combines the same uniform supersonic flows with high-
resolution ultra-sensitive continuous-wave cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS),
providing capabilities complementary to those of the microwave-based system.
Both of these instruments are the first of their kind. These studies are applied
1) to probe detailed product branching in photodissociation reactions; 2) to
develop microwave-infrared double resonance methods for application to
vibrational spectroscopy of radicals and reaction intermediates; 3) to probe
reaction kinetics at low temperature with new detail including vibrational
dependence and isomer- and conformer-specificity, and for transient radical
species in low abundance; 4) to characterize the thermochemistry of water
clusters such as the water hexamer and other non-covalently bound systems; and
5) to adapt sensitive CRDS methods to detect and characterize important
atmospheric and astrochemical radicals and reaction intermediates kinetically
trapped in local energy minima at low temperature in the flow.