* 1665104
* Conformational dynamics, reaction coordinates, and time scale separation in biomolecular systems from the perspective of energy flows
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ao Ma, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 485,999.00

Ao Ma of the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational methods for
understanding the mechanisms by which the shape of a protein morphs over time,
as it moves and interacts with other molecules in the cell. Conformational
changes are key to protein function, and understanding complex protein dynamics
is essential to developing design strategies for new drugs and mitigating the
impact of genomic defects on human health. Standard molecular dynamical
simulations provide fine-grained information on protein conformational changes
at the atomic level, but systematic methods for deducing overall mechanisms from
this detailed information are currently lacking. In this project, new methods
are being developed to rigorously extract mechanisms of protein conformational
change from simulation data, by examining the flow of energy in the system over
time. These methods are being applied and tested in a series of increasingly
complex systems ranging from small peptides, to proteins interacting with a
small molecule (ligand), and proteins in solution. Computer programs developed
for this project are being made available for public download. Professor Ma is
providing research experiences for high school students through the Illinois
Mathematics and Science Academy (IMSA) Student Inquiry and Research (SIR)
program, to stimulate enthusiasm and interest in science and research. In
addition to mentoring and educating students at UIC, a Hispanic-Serving
institution, Professor Ma provides an annual summer research experience to local
high school science teachers, through an ongoing UIC educational
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to develop novel
theoretical and computational methods for advancing understanding of
functionally-important protein dynamics. Reaction coordinates and time scale
separation are fundamental concepts crucial to understanding mechanisms of
protein conformational dynamics. Important organizing principles that have
emerged in recent years from studies of protein dynamics include collective
variables, ligand-induced conformational change, and solvent slaving. This
project is formalizing and unifying these concepts from the perspective of
energy flows. The central hypothesis is that, among strongly coupled
coordinates, energy flows from fast coordinates into slow ones during a protein
conformational change. Thus, reaction coordinates correspond to preferred
channels, each exhibiting a high degree of energy flow. There are three specific
aims: 1) Understand the mechanism of how a collective variable as reaction
coordinate emerges in an activated process; 2) identify the mechanistic factors
that determine relative time scales of the motions of a ligand and its
surrounding protein matrix; and 3) clarify the mechanistic factors that
determine relative time scales of solute coordinates and collective solvent
modes. These aims are being investigated through a succession of increasingly
complex biochemical problems: deca-alanine in solution, conformational changes
in solvated HIV-1 protease in the presence of an inhibitor, ligand interactions
with rhodopsin and myoglobin, and the effect of amino acid point mutations on
myoglobin kinetics. Code developed for this project is being made available for
public download. Professor Ma is providing research experiences and project
mentoring for local high school students, to stimulate enthusiasm and interest
in science and research, and an annual summer research experience in his
laboratory for high school science teachers, supported by an ongoing UIC
educational program. The insights developed in this project are being integrated
into graduate courses taught by Professor Ma as part of the PhD program in
Bioinformatics at UIC, one of just a few such programs in the U.S.