* 1665284
* Elucidating the Unique Self-Assembly Behavior of Macroions in Solution From Molecular Level Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,999.00

Self-assembly is the process by which specific forces between individual
molecular building blocks leads to the spontaneous formation of ordered
structures. Molecular self-assembly is ubiquitous in nature from the
crystallization of snowflakes to ribosomes and viruses. Molecular self-assembly
has emerged as a new approach in chemical synthesis, providing routes to a range
of materials that are both scientifically interesting and technologically
important. With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mesfin Tsige of the
University of Akron is using computer simulation to investigate the self-
assembly behavior of very large molecules with multiple charges (called
macroions) in solution. The computer simulation tracks the motion of tens of
thousands to hundreds of thousands of beads, each representing a few atoms, as
they spontaneously form large complex structures. From these simulations,
Professor Tsige and his group are developing a fundamental understanding of the
self-assembly of macroions that are almost completely uncharted by theory and
simulation. The project involves graduate students and postdoctoral associates
at the University of Akron, as well as undergraduate students through the NSF-
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the College of Polymer
Science and Polymer Engineering, and high school students from the local St.
Vincent-St. Mary School.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project complements existing
experimental studies by providing information that is difficult or sometimes
impossible to get from laboratory measurements. Central to the project is the
development of a versatile coarse-grained computer simulation model that is
designed for large-scale molecular dynamic simulation. A typical simulation
tracks the self-assembly of 25-50 macroions surrounded by 100,000-200,000
solvent molecules into large 'blackberry-like' structures over the course of
over 50 million time steps. Together, Professor Tsige and his students are using
the computer model to elucidate the mechanism of assembly formation and
understand the effects of charge density, charge distribution, macroion size,
and solvent polarity on self-assembly behavior. This modeling methodology may
advance our understanding of self-assembly in a broad range of macroion
solutions, which cover a variety of fields in Chemistry, Material Science, and
Biology.