* 1665464
* Isomer selective interrogation of combustion and atmospheric intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Balint Sztaray, University of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,707.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor B치lint Szt치ray of the
University of the Pacific is using a combination of mass spectrometry and
photoelectron spectroscopy to study the chemical reactions of unstable and
elusive molecules that are relevant to atmospheric chemistry. Mass spectrometry
is a technique that separates molecules or atoms according to their mass and
electrical charge. Photoelectron spectroscopy is a technique that uses light
(typically from a laser) to eject electrons from atoms or molecules. The energy
of the ejected electrons gives information about how strongly the electron was
bound to the molecule. Professor Szt치ray combines these two techniques to form
photoelectron-photo-ion coincidence spectroscopy or "PEPICO", which provides a
much more detailed molecular fingerprint, and enables the analysis of gaseous
mixtures of many components. With a prototype instrument in Switzerland and with
a new Sandia National Lab apparatus at the Advanced Light Source in Berkeley,
reactions of unstable intermediate species, relevant in combustion, atmospheric,
or interstellar environments are studied. The students involved in this project
are receiving training in a cutting-edge experimental, highly collaborative
environment. As the research in the Szt치ray laboratory involves custom-built
instruments, graduate student researchers learn unique design and fabrication
skills which are highly valued in the high-tech sector. Graduate and
undergraduate researchers also have opportunities to work with collaborators at
US National Laboratories (Sandia and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories) as
well as international facilities (Swiss Light Source).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
PEPICO coincidence detection, each photoelectron is "labeled" with the mass-to-
charge ratio (m/z) of the photoion it corresponds to, essentially combining the
advantages of mass spectrometry and photoelectron spectroscopy. Using a side-
sampled, pulsed-laser photolysis flow-tube reactor, the project focuses on the
spectroscopy and thermochemistry of elusive intermediates, such as alkylperoxy
and hydroperoxyalkyl radicals, ketohydroperoxides and Criegee intermediates.
Utilizing the isomer selectivity of PEPICO detection, a systematic study is
conducted on the reactions of small carbon-containing radicals with small
hydrocarbons. Recombination reactions of propargyl, allyl, and benzyl radicals
play a crucial role in molecular weight growth processes that ultimately lead to
soot formation. Here, PEPICO detection offers a step forward in understanding
these reactive pathways and providing isomer selective branching ratios and
reaction rates. Ultimately, by identifying key intermediates, their reaction
mechanisms, and rates, more complete combustion models can be constructed,
leading to better predictions of combustion products, including gaseous and
aerosol pollutants. These predictions can then aid in the development of low-
emission engine technologies.