* 1665452
* Understanding Solute Diffusion and Friction in Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Maroncelli, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This project, led by Professor Mark Maroncelli at Penn State and funded by the
Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division, seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of molecular motion in an
emerging class of liquid media known as room temperature ionic liquids (also
called ionic liquids), which hold considerable promise in a number of areas of
technological importance, for example as lubricants, electrolytes in batteries,
and solvents for synthesis of high-value chemicals. Whereas liquids in common
use today consist of neutral molecules, ionic liquids are comprised of only
charged species, ions like Na+ and Cl-, the constituents of common table salt.
Although the strong attraction between such small ions renders NaCl, solid
except at very high temperatures, by increasing the sizes of the component ions
and doing other things to inhibit solidification, one can create purely ionic
materials that remain liquid at room temperature. Insufficient understanding of
how to predict the basic aspects of ionic liquids important in these
applications, such as how quickly a solute molecule moves through a given ionic
liquid, hampers their applications. Professor Maroncelli and his group use a
combination of experimental and theoretical tools to address this challenge by
studying how the structure and dynamics of ionic liquids determine the friction
experienced in molecular movements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State
research team is using computer simulations, supplemented by some NMR
experiments, to construct a predictive understanding of molecular transport and
re-orientional dynamics in ionic liquids, in particular how these dynamics
depend upon the structure of a given liquid and the chemical makeup of its ions.
The first project entails molecular dynamics simulations coupled to statistical
analysis of experimental data on solute diffusion in order to develop models
that can be used to predict the behavior new solute - ionic liquid combinations
of potential technological interest. The second project uses a combination of
simulation and theory to interpret apparently anomalous results obtained when
the technique positron annihilation spectroscopy (PALS) was recently applied to
ionic liquids. PALS is a well-known method for measuring voids in polymeric
materials, but its recent use in ionic liquids provided seemingly unrealistic
results. Because void structure is central to theories of molecular transport,
this project seeks to learn how to correctly interpret PALS data in ionic
liquids. The final project involves simulations and NMR experiments of solute
rotations in order to explore how voids change over time and how these void
dynamics may influence chemical reactions.