* 1665342
* Excited state intramolecular proton transfer-based photoassisted methodologies to access complex molecular architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrei Kutateladze, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2020
* USD 371,385.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program, Professor Andrei
Kutateladze of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at University of
Denver develops new methods for the synthesis of complex organic heterocycles.
These are substances which contain nitrogen in a ring, a common feature of
natural products and pharmaceuticals. New synthetic routes are primarily based
on novel cycloaddition reactions initiated by ultraviolet light. Complex multi-
ring heterocyclic molecular architectures are accessed and alkaloid mimics are
synthesized. Fundamental new science includes the development of cascade
photoreactions to form multiple chemical bonds in one experimentally simple
step. In addition, this award supports research experiences for undergraduate
and graduate students, especially those from historically underrepresented
groups in science.

This research expands the excited state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT)
based synthetic photochemistry tool box with new photoassisted cascade
methodology. New reactions provide access to complex polyheterocyclic compounds
in a controlled atom- and step-economical fashion. The mechanism of these
cascade processes, including quantum mechanical tunneling at the hydrogen
transfer step, is elucidated to better modulate stereochemical and regiochemical
outcomes. Such control is needed to develop the capability of systematically
screening the chemical space in search of novel polyheterocyclic molecular
architectures with the requisite scaffold diversity. To further grow scaffold
complexity and diversity and to decorate the core scaffolds with additional
functional groups and heterocyclic pendants, experimentally simple
postphotochemical steps are deployed after the light-induced transformation.
This experimental work is accompanied by the development of computational
methods for fast and accurate predictions of NMR spectra, which is critical for
success of this project, but also has broader implications for structure
elucidation of complex synthetic and natural organic molecules. Additionally,
this research provides hands-on laboratory training for graduate and
undergraduate students, especially those from historically underrepresented
groups in science.