* 1665433
* The Surface Diels-Alder Reaction of Tetracene and Pentacene Crystals; Blurring the Lines Between Solid State, Surface, and Synthetic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jacob Ciszek, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jacob W. Ciszek of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Loyola University Chicago studies the surface
chemistry of the prototypical organic semiconductors: tetracene and pentacene.
Because these materials bear little resemblance to classical surfaces, the rules
governing their reactivity require entirely new reaction mechanisms which are
examined herein. The results from these experiments allow us to improve the
performance of these materials in next generation devices including the light
emitting diodes and transistors found in small displays (e.g. smartphone
screens). This grant also supports their Emerging Scientists Workshop, which
immerses high school students in experiments found in host laboratories. This
heavily subscribed program is also evaluated as part of the grant, and is
expanded as a pilot at DePaul University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specific to
the science, this project looks at three areas, which highlight differences
between chemistry at traditional inorganic substrates and the surfaces of
molecular crystals. The first two center on the fact that geometric
considerations (based off molecular orientation in the crystal) appears to be
the primary determinant of reactivity. In part one, the idea of a surface
cavity, where surrounding molecules envelop the reactive loci, is developed to
explain the reactivity differences between the faces of tetracene and pentacene
crystals. Coverage is assessed over time via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.
Part two examines how the reaction cavity is also responsible for inhibition of
the most reactive bonds in the semiconductor. This manifests itself in different
regioisomers formed on the various surfaces of tetracene and pentacene crystals.
Both substrate and adsorbate parameters (electronic, steric, and phase) are
examined for their impact on regioisomer formation. The final portion of the
project examines how adsorbate behavior is impacted by the very low energy
surface of the crystal. With surface energies less than a tenth of metallic
surfaces, the coverage and residence time of the adsorbates are expected to be
much lower on pentacene and tetracene. Quartz crystal microbalance studies in
conjunction with infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy allow reaction
kinetics to be corroborated with adsorbate coverage for further mechanistic
refinement.