* 1665086
* EAGER:  TDM solar cells: Bifacial III-V nanowire array on silicon tandem solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Seth Hubbard, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 10/31/2020
* USD 299,808.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Conventional state-of-the-art
tandem junction photovoltaic solar cells, composed of multiple sub-cells of
III-V compound semiconductors, are capable of converting incident radiation from
the Sun to electricity with greater efficiency than all other types of solar
cells. The high performance of these devices is enabled in part due to the use
of high quality monocrystalline III-V materials and in part due to the coupling
of multiple sub-cells that collectively allow for absorption of a broadband
solar spectral range. However, the materials and manufacturing costs required
for the development of III-V tandem junction devices is prohibitively high for
use in wide-scale terrestrial consumer applications. As a consequence, the
world's highest performance solar cells are limited to use in niche markets such
as terrestrial high concentration and space power applications. A high-risk,
high-payoff exploratory research path is proposed here that aims to provide an
unconventional, yet potentially transformative nanotechnology-enabled solution
to the above consumer market penetration challenges faced by state-of-the-art
tandem junction solar cells. The project aims to dramatically reduce
manufacturing costs by monolithically integrating III-V sub-cell composed of
vertical nanowire arrays to a central silicon sub-cell, thereby simultaneously
eliminating the primary III-V substrate cost-driver while cutting III-V crystal
growth volumes by up to 95% compared to conventional technologies. The broader
significance of this EAGER project lies in the potential realization of a low-
cost and high-efficiency renewable energy innovation that provides greater
national energy independence and clean power. This research also impacts and
advances fundamental knowledge in science and engineering in the fields of
physics, nanomaterials growth and characterization, nanoelectronics, and
optoelectronics. Immediate anticipated societal impacts include outreach
activities that promote science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
concepts to the general public, training new members of a highly-skilled
workforce, and direct inclusion of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students from under-represented communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach of this EAGER project
relies on selective-area heteroepitaxy of a GaAsP (1.75 eV) nanowire array on
the top surface of a thinned Si (1.1 eV) sub-cell by metal-organic chemical
vapor deposition. A bifacial, three dissimilar materials, tandem junction device
is formed via monolithic integration of a back-side InGaAs (0.5 eV) nanowire
array. The vertical nanowires comprising the top- and back-surface arrays will
contain radially-segmented p-i-n junctions and will be serially connected to the
central Si sub-cell via epitaxial tunnel junctions. This design enables
absorption of broadband incident solar energy as well as albedo radiation.
Standard lattice-matching constraints are overcome via strain relaxation along
nanowire free surfaces. Therefore, ideal spectral matching is realized without a
need for graded buffer layers or dislocation mediation strategies. Use of
vertical nanowire arrays with coaxial p-i-n junction geometries permits key
advantages, including near-unity absorption of solar irradiance at normal and
tilted incidence without the use of anti-reflection coatings, decoupling of
photon absorption and carrier collection directions, and dramatic reduction of
95% in epitaxial volumes. Rigorous modeling of device parameters will be
iteratively coupled with extensive materials characterization and property
correlation experiments for optimization of III-V sub-cell structure on the
single nanowire and ensemble array levels. The ultimate target of this work is
demonstration of a functional bifacial, three dissimilar materials, nanowire-
based tandem junction solar cell with one Sun power conversion efficiency of 30%
or better.