* 0900324
* Risk-Based Design of Seismic Isolation for Critical Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Henri Gavin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 236,759.00

Lightly-damped rolling isolation systems are being used to protect mission-
critical equipment from shock and vibration hazards. This project will develop
experimentally-validated models and seismic qualification guidelines for rolling
isolation systems incorporating passive and controllable damping treatments. The
passive damping treatments will use elastomeric composites and will be modeled
and designed using a combination of experimental and semi-analytic methods. The
controllable friction damping will feature magnetically-controlled friction
damping incorporating novel magnetically-permeable polymers with high friction
coefficients and will be assessed using methods of nonlinear optimal control.
The seismic qualification guidelines will be based on methods of probabilistic
seismic hazard analysis and will feature detailed statistical models of uniform-
hazard earthquake ground motions. This project will resolve persistent issues
regarding displacement capacity, damping levels, damping mechanisms, and
response-control pertaining to the protection of equipment from earthquake
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will enable engineers to design and
qualify rolling isolation systems to achieve a desired level of hazard
mitigation for specific geographic regions and general installation
environments. Ultimately, this research will contribute to the mitigation of
seismic hazards for facilities that must operate during and after major
earthquakes and will thereby improve response and recovery operations.
Technology developed in this project will transfer to practice through the
development of an industrial consortium and the training of current and future
professionals. Graduate students involved in this research will learn and apply
advanced methods in dynamics and risk analysis. Undergraduates and high school
students will work together to learn methods of experimental dynamics and model
validation. The project will undertake the creation of substantial web-based
laboratories through which students of any level may investigate the behavior of
rolling isolation systems on-line, through physical and numerical simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;