* 0900880
* Experimental Particle Astrophysics with the Pierre Auger Observatory and TOTEM
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Cyrus Taylor, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 550,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). It will provide support for the research activities of this
group with the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO) in pursuit of the origins of the
highest energy cosmic rays. The PAO is the world's largest experiment to measure
the energy and arrival direction of energy cosmic rays with energies above
10**20 eV. The origin of cosmic rays remains a profound and compelling mystery
in particle astrophysics. PAO is a hybrid detector consisting of two detector
systems: (1) an array of 1,600 water-Cherenkov Surface Detector stations spread
over 3,000 square kilometers for detecting air shower particles on the ground;
and (2) a set of four Fluorescence Detector telescopes which provide
calorimetric measurements of the development of cosmic ray showers as they
propagate through the atmosphere. Located near Malargue, Argentina, PAO is now
complete and collecting data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past two years,
the first major scientific results from Auger have been published. These results
include an energy spectrum and the detection of anisotropy in the arrival
directions of the highest energy cosmic rays which appear correlated with the
distribution of large scale matter in the relatively nearby galactic
neighborhood. The Case Western group is pushing a new analysis effort to
consider what might be possible in the context of "cosmic ray astronomy" as the
number of events collected from Auger increases. They also continue to lead the
effort on GPS event timing and calibration, working closely with their
colleagues at the Colorado School of Mines to develop and deploy a new laser
calibration facility located at the center of the Auger array.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has a broader impact on several areas outside of
particle astrophysics. The PI is active in a variety of education and outreach
programs, including a program for physical science instruction for high school
teachers. Methods developed by the group for precise few-nanosecond timing using
GPS receivers and non-imaging optical concentrators also have a broader impact
in other technical fields.