* 0900920
* Solar Wind Energy Transfer to Geospace during Periods with Large Transverse Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ramon Lopez, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 06/30/2013
* USD 402,976.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major factor in the solar wind that
controls magnetospheric activity is the direction and magnitude of the
interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). When the IMF is relatively small, and the
mach number of the solar wind flow is large, the magnetosphere responds linearly
to changes in the solar wind driver. In particular, the ionospheric potential
across the polar cap (which regulates ionospheric and magnetospheric plasma
convection) is linearly related to the solar wind electric field for southward
IMF. However, when the IMF is large, the magnetospheric response is non-linear,
and the polar cap potential saturates with respect to the solar wind electric
field. This project will investigate this non-linear response of the
magnetosphere through the use of global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of
the solar wind interacting with the magnetosphere. Simulations results will be
verified using data sets from various spacecraft missions and ground-based
observations. The aim of the research is to answer the question "What is the
fundamental physics that produces a nonlinear magnetospheric response to large
values of the Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF) and how does this manifest
itself for various orientations of the IMF?" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary
work suggests that a crucial aspect of the underlying physics is the closure of
the large current produced at the bow shock and the dominance of magnetic forces
over plasma pressure gradients in determining the solar wind flow around the
magnetosphere and the interaction of the solar wind with the magnetosphere
during periods of low magnetosonic Mach number flow. The closure of the dynamo
bow shock current through the ionospheric load may provide a means of directly
transferring solar wind mechanical energy extracted from the flow at the bow
shock to the ionosphere on open field lines. Such a mechanism is physically
distinct from both magnetic reconnection and the viscous interaction, and
represents a third, fundamental mode of transferring solar wind energy to the
geospace system. This projects suggests a new and potentially transformative
paradigm for solar wind energy transfer to the geospace system that not only
would be able to explain a range of nonlinear magnetospheric responses to large
IMF values, but also would provide a framework for the reinterpretation of
known, but not well understood phenomena such as lobe cell convection and
interhemispheric asymmetries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes support
and training for a graduate student through the Ph.D. In addition, several
undergraduate students will be involved, including minority students. All
students will give presentations at meetings and be involved in publication of
the results. Results of the research will be presented to the general public
through visualizations at the University of Texas, Arlington Planetarium.