* 0900233
* Heisenberg and Weil representations in noncommutative geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Pavel Etingof, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 07/31/2012
* USD 142,791.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project aims to define and apply non-commutative analogues of the
Heisenberg and Weil representations of the symplectic group acting on integrable
complex-valued functions on finite-dimensional real vector spaces. The
noncommutative analogues should replace the commutative algebra of complex-
valued functions on n-dimensional real space by a free algebra on n generators,
or more generally by path algebras of quivers. This should extend a construction
of a Lie algebra action found earlier by the co-PI and Ginzburg. These
representations should be useful in studying Calabi-Yau potentials for completed
group algebras of fundamental groups of compact aspherical three-manifolds. More
generally, this project aims to understand "non-commutative quantization" in the
sense of replacing an associative algebra whose variety of n-dimensional
representations is Poisson by some structure which maps under a generalization
of the representation functor to a quantization of the original Poisson variety.
This construction would include the non-commutative differential operators on
the associative algebra, which are used in the definition of the Heisenberg
representation. Finally, the project aims to continue studying potentials for
Calabi-Yau algebras in three and higher dimensions, such as Sklyanin algebras,
and apply this to their deformation theory and the deformation theory of
singular Poisson varieties, generalizing works of the co-PI, as well as of
Ginzburg, Etingof, and others. Various aspects of the problem will be approached
using computational algebra and are suitable as projects for undergraduate
students.

In less technical language, the project aims to connect quantization theory
(e.g., quantum mechanics and symmetries) with representation theory (the study
of ways that algebras can act on vector spaces), by studying objects whose
representations are themselves quantizations. This should have applications to
understanding the structure of three-dimensional spaces as well as deformations
of various well-known classical and quantum systems. An important part involves
the study of algebras related to string theory which are defined by certain
graphs and their relations, and particularly those spaces related to Calabi-Yau
geometry. A central example is the Weil representation, which incorporates the
Fourier transform between position and momentum coordinates, or time and
frequency coordinates, as well as all in-between coordinates.