* 0900962
* Prenylcysteine Metabolism and Phytohormone Signaling in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2008,03/31/2012
* Dring Crowell, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2012
* USD 330,443.00

In plant and animal cells, proteins must be delivered to appropriate sites of
action and often must interact with other proteins for normal function. Protein
prenylation, the attachment of an isoprenoid lipid to a protein, is one
mechanism by which proteins are targeted to appropriate sites and/or modified
for interaction with other proteins. While this process has been studied in
detail, the degradation of prenylated proteins and the fate of the isoprenoid
lipid have not been described in plants. The degradation of prenylated proteins
results in the release of a prenylcysteine (i.e., either farnesylcysteine or
geranylgeranylcysteine) with the isoprenoid attached to the amino acid cysteine
via thioether linkage. Prenylcysteine metabolism in plants is important, at
least in part, because prenylcysteine compounds cause an enhanced response to
the plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA). This project will examine the
farnesylcysteine lyase enzyme that metabolizes farnesylcysteine to farnesal and
cysteine in the cruciferous plant Arabidopsis thaliana. A gene on chromosome 5
of the Arabidopsis genome encodes this enzyme and mutations in this gene cause
an enhanced response to ABA, presumably because of farnesylcysteine
accumulation. This project will also examine the metabolism of
geranylgeranylcysteine, which proceeds by a different mechanism. Thus, plants
possess at least two distinct mechanisms for prenylcysteine metabolism, one for
farnesylcysteine and one for geranylgeranylcysteine, and these processes are
required for normal ABA responsiveness. To test the hypothesis that the enzymes
involved in prenylcysteine metabolism are important for isoprenoid salvage and
detoxification and to describe in detail the role of prenylcysteine metabolism
in ABA signaling, biochemical analyses on Arabidopsis prenylcysteine metabolic
enzymes will be performed and the corresponding genes identified. In addition,
the subcellular locations of Arabidopsis prenylcysteine metabolic enzymes and
the phenotypes of Arabidopsis plants deficient in prenylcysteine metabolic
enzymes will be analyzed. Finally, the regulation of genes encoding
prenylcysteine metabolic enzymes in Arabidopsis will be examined. This work will
significantly contribute to a better understanding of the metabolism of
prenylated proteins and the role of prenylcysteine salvage/detoxification in
plant growth and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide an excellent training environment for undergraduate and
graduate students. IUPUI students will be recruited to work on this project from
the Diversity Scholars Research Program, which is designed to encourage
undergraduate women and minorities interested in graduate school to pursue
undergraduate research opportunities, and the McNair Scholars Program, a
federally funded program to increase the number of low-income, first-generation,
underrepresented students in Ph.D. degree programs. Given the central location
and urban environment of the IUPUI campus, it is expected that more young
scientists, including women and minorities, will receive professional training
through participation in this project.