* 0900325
* Engineering Bio-based Composites for In-Service and Out-of-Service Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Curtis Frank, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 335,749.00

Design methods for natural fiber-reinforced biopolymer composites will be
developed to produce fully recyclable construction materials. The polymers used
in the composites are produced by bacteria and referred to as PHBs. When placed
in an anaerobic landfill after their useful service life, the composites will
degrade to methane. The methane may be captured and sold as a fuel or be used as
a feedstock for bacteria to produce more PHB polymer for new composites. The
objective of this research is to engineer the PHB-natural fiber composites to be
durable construction materials in-service yet also rapidly and thoroughly
biodegrade anaerobically when no longer needed ("out-of-service"). Novel PHB-
based fiber treatments will be developed and evaluated in terms of polymer,
fiber and single-ply composite properties. Results will be used to design and
evaluate multi-ply composite performance for construction applications. A feed-
forward and feed-back communication process between the chemical, structural and
environmental engineering researchers will be followed. &lt;br/&gt;The societal
benefits of this research include: (1) a construction material that is fully
recyclable and producible globally; (2) strong incentives for methane capture
from landfills to provide a biofuel source and/or feedstock for biopolymers; and
(3) improved safety for the built and natural environment by reducing ?fugitive?
methane emissions from landfills, and reducing the transport of toxic substances
worldwide and harm to marine species that is common with petroleum-based
polymeric materials. An exhibit on bio-based construction materials and hands-on
activities for science classes will be developed in collaboration with a local
children's museum.&lt;br/&gt;