* 0900743
* Noninvasive Optical Sensing of Micro-Retroreflectors in Turbid Media and Tissue
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2013
* USD 370,001.00

The ability to detect biologically modulated signals from beneath tissue will
allow for the development of implantable biological sensors that overcome the
need for frequent blood sample collection. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in developing a fundamental understanding of noninvasive
depth-resolved detection and monitoring of micro-retroreflectors in turbid
media, and of imaging contrast mechanisms for reflectivity modulation by
biologically-mediated self-assembly of nanoparticles on the retroreflector
surfaces. This work is expected to create a sensor platform that can be non-
invasively detected below tissue and which also has applications to improved
immunoassays, cell sorting, microarray applications, and in vivo monitoring of
bioagents. The broader impact of this work lies in the education, outreach, and
recruitment of students (including underrepresented minorities) to Engineering
through 1) Integration of research results in Engineering courses and lectures;
(2) Student summer research opportunities, (3) High school teacher/student
outreach, (4) Middle/High school student demonstrations during UH Preview Days,
and (5) International education conferences. The broader technical impact of
this project extends from non-invasive physiological and biomedical monitoring,
to cell sorting, immunoassay and nucleic acids assays.