* 0900595
* Development Of A Nanopunching Lithography Method For Generating Sidewall Templates And Polymer-Based Nanodevices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Cheng Luo, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2013
* USD 311,999.00

This project will develop a nanopunching lithography (NPL) method for creating
nanostructures and sidewall templates of sizes down to 30nm using a combination
of theoretical, numerical and experimental investigations. A significant
challenge in nanotechnology is to develop straightforward methods for organizing
sub-100nm structures into functional architectures. Current micro/nanosystems
mainly have a planar form. Therefore, sidewall templates are uniquely useful in
guiding horizontal assembly of nanobuilding blocks, such as nanoparticles and
molecules. Consequently, these nanobuilding blocks can be directly integrated
into planar micro/nanosystems to serve as active components in these devices.
The generation of sidewall templates calls for new lithographic approaches due
to the limitations of existing lithographic approaches. Thus, under stimulation
of a macropunching method commonly used in the industry to pattern sheet metals,
an innovative lithographic approach (i.e., the NPL) is proposed to circumvent
these two challenges. It will be uniquely suited to fabricating the sidewall
templates, as well as polymer-based nanostructures. The capability of generating
both architectures will lead to the production of polymer-based nanosystems of
high functionality, as will be shown in generating transistors, contacts, and
nanochannels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on an effort to help
K-12, undergraduate and graduate students visualize micro/nanotechnology
concepts, including establishment of a website which will have a database of
rich visualization materials. In addition, the PI is committed to furthering the
involvement of undergraduate students and minorities in scientific research. He
has track records in these activities, and will keep bringing these efforts to a
much higher and broader level.&lt;br/&gt;