* 0900015
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Mechanism of Internal Frost-Induced Damage of Concrete from Microstructure Aspects
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Zhanping You, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2013
* USD 190,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and
education to advance the state of knowledge of the mechanism of frost-induced
damage in Portland cement concrete under freeze-thaw cycles. The primary
objective of this research project is to combine expertise in microstructure-
based computational modeling and innovative sensor technologies to study the
fundamental mechanisms of frost damage in concrete. Research will include the
experimental characterization of concrete microstructure across different length
scales, the development of an innovative Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR) sensor
to accurately determine the freeze-thaw status, and the formulation and
validation of a frost-induced damage model. This research is expected to result
in a model that can clearly and concisely describe the damage that frost can
inflict in concrete. This model will provide a valuable tool to assess the
potential success of various frost damage prevention strategies and products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help develop durable concrete and
benefit the industries involved with concrete design and construction in cold
regions. The durability of concrete plays a central role in the sustainability
of the whole infrastructure system on which such regions depend for their
development. In this project, research and educational activities will be
integrated to promote teaching, training, and learning for the K-12 students and
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students in engineering and science, and
professional engineers. Additionally, the methodology developed in this project
for understanding the frost damage mechanisms of concrete will be applicable for
solving other durability issues such as salt scaling and chemical
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;