* 0900912
* From Topology to Combinatorics and Back
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Edward Swartz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Swartz, Edward B. Proposal Number: DMS - 0900912
Institution: Cornell University Title: From Topology to Combinatorics and Back

The primary research aim of this project is to study the interplay between
topology, geometry and combinatorics. Four areas will receive special emphasis:
triangulations of compact manifolds and closely related spaces, Cohen-Macaulay
complexes, finite linear quotients of spheres, and matroids. In the last century
a tremendous amount of research has been directed toward unlocking the topology
and geometry of manifolds. However, questions of a combinatorial character have
remained largely unanswered. What is the minimum number of facets required to
triangulate a given manifold? What methods are there to construct manifolds with
particular combinatorial properties? Given limits on the combinatorics of a
triangulation, what does that imply about the possible geometries on the
manifold? Similar questions, where even less is known, apply to spaces with
singularities which include algebraic varieties, quotients of group actions, or
limits of Riemannian manifolds. Cohen-Macaulay complexes and posets are one of
the fundamental structures of algebraic combinatorics with applications ranging
from partitions to network reliability. Their enumerative properties were worked
out in the 1970's by the ground breaking work of Hochster, Reisner and Stanley.
What happens if further constraints are put on these spaces? As previously shown
by the PI, complexes with more structure, such as finite buildings, geometric
lattices and matroid complexes, have strong restrictions on their f-vectors. How
common are these additional structures and constraints? Finite linear quotients
of spheres lie at the intersection of representation theory, topology, geometry
and combinatorics. How are the topology and geometry of the quotient space
related to the combinatorics and algebra of the representation theoretic data?

How does one study complicated spaces and structures? One approach is to
approximate them with simpler objects. For instance, an n-dimensional space
might be represented as a collection of n-simplices - the higher dimensional
analogues of triangles and tetrahedrons. How complicated are these
representations? How many of the smaller pieces are needed? How is this
reflected in the shape and geometry of the original object? Are there
computationally practical ways of producing these models? These are types of
questions addressed in this research.

