* 0900588
* Engineering Soils with Thermally Controlled Wettability on Command
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sibel Pamukcu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 125,732.00

This research addresses the topic of functionalized soils whose wettability
behavior is switchable and fully reversible, controlled by thermal energy to
extend the mono-functionality of natural soils. The thermo-responsive polymer
serves as a coating material to impose the tunable wettability on the soil
surface. The surface wettability of natural soils and granular media strongly
influences the contaminant flow in subsurface, the fate and transport of organic
matters in pore space, and the separation technology. The investigation of
remediation technologies and natural manifestations require the fundamental
understanding of interfacial interaction between particles and participating
fluids.

The research focuses on the discovery of the innovative engineering implications
relevant to tunable engineered soils. The primary emphasis of the research is to
investigate the particle-level mechanism that induces the macro-scale response,
followed by the synthesis of thermo-responsive polymer coated soils using a
state-of-the-art polymerization method. The nano-structure of coated surface
will be characterized using the spectroscopic and microscopic observation. The
interfacial behavior of particle-fluid interaction in turn will elucidate the
selective affinity of tunable soil particles to fluids triggered by temperature
change via optical inspection. The measurement of contact angle and wettability
correlates the interfacial behavior with quantitative values. The mechanical and
physical characterization of functionalized soils responding to the temperature
variation will be evaluated using controlled experiments. Then, the immiscible
fluids will be separated to validate the performance of the tunable soils. The
potential impact and extendibility of this geo-material include the intelligent
hydrologic barrier and the granular filter to separate the immiscible fluids and
to control the microorganisms in soils.

The educational activities directly tie to the research, and are intended to
benefit K-12 and undergraduate students. The PI will actively participate to the
university wide efforts of outreach programs and involve an undergraduate
student in support of the research activities. The development of a short course
nodule based on the outcome from the research will be adapted to the
undergraduate and graduate courses currently offered in the department.

Intellectual Merit: This research extends the use of intelligent materials to
improve the functionality of natural soils by cross-disciplinary approaches. The
surface modification of soil surface at nano-scale will be up-scaled to the
macro-scale manifestation via particle-level interpretation. The novel concept
and approach in the research enables us to evaluate the multi-scale symptom, to
unveil the emergent phenomena prevailing in geo-engineering, and to organically
integrate knowledge about surface and material science and geo-engineering. The
Lehigh University has a well-renowned surface chemistry programs geared with the
top-rated facilities and knowledgeable faculty. This research brings them to
produce a synergetic impact in the field of engineering soils.

Broader Impact: The development of functionalized soils offers an alternative
way to produce environmentally sustainable geo-materials beneficial to society.
The participating undergraduate will be extensively exposed to the advanced
experiments and analyses tool to be a prospective engineer. To promote education
related to this research, a short course module will be developed and the
produced samples will be distributed to local high schools to stimulate the
creativity of K-12 students. The research team will disseminate the research and
educational results regionally, nationally, and internationally through
conferences and journal publications.