* 0900468
* From a Single Micropatterned Elastic Membrane to a Library of Complex Patterns of Nanostructures: an Efficient Nanomanufacturing Route via Harnessing of Elastic Instability
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Randall Kamien, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2013
* USD 410,128.00

This proposal seeks to develop a novel nanofabrication route that exploits an
elastic instability effect, which is often seen from the phyllotactic growth of
plants, animal stripes, and fingerprints, to create a library of complex
patterns at the nanoscale with a very high level of structural perfection and
variable lattice symmetry. By comparing the theoretical prediction and
experimental observations, robust and generic rules will be developed, which
will allow programming the evolution of complex structures while maintaining the
integrity and top-down nature of the proposed nanofabrication technique. The PIs
plan to: 1) prepare a library of poly(dimethylsiloxane) membranes with
microscopic hole arrays of arbitrary feature size and geometry for pattern
transformation, 2) investigate the factors that control the instability in a
swollen network and explore feature size reduction to the sub-10 nm regime, 3)
and capitalize on the unique topography of the imprinted nanoparticle assemblies
for fabrication of nanostructures.

This proposed research is transformative in that it seeks to turn a perceived
weakness of soft materials, i.e. their mechanical instability, into a strength,
allowing the design of new tools and procedures in micro- and nano-scale
manufacturing, creating dynamically tunable structures with anisotropic
magnetic, photonic, phononic, and plasmonic properties of benefit to a range of
science and technologies. The proposed activity ranges in scope from materials
engineering to soft matter physics and introduces a new paradigm for the solid
mechanics of flexible matter. This intersection creates a significant
opportunity to recruit and train students, and excite the general public about
nanotechnology.