* 0900713
* Real-Time Distribution System Network Modeling and Fault Diagnosis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Uber, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 313,701.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Drinking water distribution systems are a complex, integrated system of pipes
and hydraulic devices that serve as the last step in delivering treated drinking
to the consumer. Distribution system operations need to satisfy multiple
objectives that range from basic hydraulic goals (e.g., maintaining adequate
pressure; ensuring sufficient storage for fire flow) to more complex water
quality issues (e.g., maintaining disinfectant residuals to limit microbial
regrowth; minimizing potentially carcinogenic disinfectant by-products). These
basic objectives sometimes conflict and have become more challenging to satisfy
as utilities face the prospects of protecting public health from intrusion
events. Additionally, most analysis and decision making tools have been
developed assuming that the consumptive demands - the water usage that drives
the underlying hydraulics - are either static or averaged, which limits the
utility of the various analysis tools due to the actual daily and seasonal
variations in demands. This project will develop a computational framework
capable of estimating the consumptive demands in real-time by: 1) using time-
series approaches to represent the daily and seasonal variations in demands, and
2) incorporating the resulting demand model into a framework that adaptively
updates the consumptive demands based on observed hydraulic and water quality
data using an extended Kalman filter. In addition to estimating the demands in
real-time, a model-based fault diagnosis algorithm will be developed that will
incorporate the changes in demands and operational conditions within the network
model, and compare the observed and model-predicted water quality data to
evaluate if an abnormal event has occurred (e.g., (un)intentional intrusion of a
harmful compound). The resulting framework (demand estimation and fault
diagnosis) will be tested using both simulated and real hydraulic and water
quality data on both small and realistically sized distribution system network
models to evaluate the ability of this framework to adequately estimate demands
and detect anomalous water quality behavior. The outcome of this research will
be a real-time demand estimation and fault diagnosis modeling framework that can
be implemented using the types of hydraulic and water quality data typically
collected by utilities.

The potential impacts of a real-time demand estimation framework are far
reaching given the foundation that will be provided to the industry for
developing and evaluating real-time analysis and decision making tools that can
be used across a range of applications. These applications are broad ranging and
include items such as: a) protecting the public from intrusion events (e.g.,
cross contamination); b) maintaining adequate water quality to the consumers
tap; c) assessing public health risks from potential disease outbreaks; and d)
reducing energy consumption and costs by improving operational decisions.
Therefore, this research will integrate the real-time demand estimation tool
(and fault diagnosis tool) with the available software and hardware equipment
developed for interfacing with utility databases and provide the flexibility to
interact with other analysis tools as they are developed. In addition to the
technical aspects, the research will be utilized to train undergraduates in
advanced modeling and analysis technologies and provide them with research
experience to assist them in future endeavors, and train and mentor the
participating graduate students such that the experiences and lessons learned go
beyond the research and include aspects of teaching and mentoring, which are
tools that will be used regardless of the students' future career objectives.