* 0900401
* GOALI: An Innovative Real Time Bridge Scour Sensor for Bridge Risk Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Frank Rausche, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2016
* USD 484,646.00

This GOALI proposal is focused on developing an innovative bridge scour
monitoring system in real time during the critical floods events. Bridge scour,
which refers to the erosion of soil adjacent to bridge piers or abutments, is
the number one cause of bridge failures. An automatic bridge scour sensor that
is self-powered through integration of micropower impulse technology (MIR) and
energy harvesting will be developed and fabricated. The sensor performance will
be validated on a prototype bridge structure in simulated laboratory experiments
and on field testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make unique contributions to
support scientific study and practice design by providing innovative bridge
scour sensoring for safety surveillance of bridges in flood conditions. The
monitoring data can also help calibrate and improve the existing scour
prediction theory and risk estimation. This will ensure the deployment of scour
countermeasures that are safe and economic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will built upon a strong partnership
that allows for the academia and private industry to join force and address
critical national needs. Additionally, the education plan will combine the
research effort with aggressive outreach activities to involve students in K-12
schools in civil infrastructure research.&lt;br/&gt;