* 0900914
* RUI: Theoretical Investigation of CP Violation in Extensions of the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ken Kiers, Taylor University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2012
* USD 90,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the strongest emphases in
particle physics today is on searching for signals of "new physics", that is,
physics beyond the Standard Model (SM). The next few years could witness
important discoveries as the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experimentalists map
out physics at the TeV scale. Complementary searches for new physics (NP) are
also underway at low energies, using indirect probes. Results from neutrino
physics have already provided exciting hints regarding the structure of physics
beyond the SM. Future neutrino experiments will continue to map out the masses,
mixings and CP properties of neutrinos and to probe their essential nature
(i.e., Majorana or Dirac). On another front, LHCb is expected to build on the
precision B meson measurements made at Babar and Belle; a possible Super Flavor
Factory could extend this reach, and would also make important contributions to
tau and charm studies. Several of the low- and high-energy experiments are
expected to employ CP-odd observables in the search for NP, since many
extensions of the SM contain novel sources of CP violation. CP-odd observables
can be useful discriminators between NP and SM effects; furthermore, such
observables could help discern the structure of NP.&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator will assess phenomenological effects of several extensions of the
SM, concentrating on observables that are odd under CP. A complementary focus of
the proposed work is expected to be the constraint, modification or
generalization of various extensions of the SM. The proposed work will include
emphases on both low- and high-energy processes. In the former case, the effects
of new particles will be sought. In the latter, studies will be performed
assuming that new particles could be produced on-shell in a collider
environment. Specific projects include the calculation of rate asymmetries in
chargino, stau and sbottom decays within supersymmetry, as well as
investigations of top quark decays and certain B decays to vector-vector final
states. Some of the broader impacts are that the proposed work will be useful to
experimentalists as they begin to sift through large amounts of data searching
for signals of NP.&lt;br/&gt;The direct involvement of several undergraduate
students in the research will enhance the educational experiences of those
students and will better prepare them for entrance into top graduate schools.
The increased level of undergraduate research will also help the institution
attract highly qualified undergraduate students to the physics program and will
be particularly helpful in attracting more female and minority students, who are
currently underrepresented in the physics program at Taylor.