* 0900952
* Workshop on the Science of Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* David Evans, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 05/31/2011
* USD 72,748.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0900952&lt;br/&gt;PI: David
Evans&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Virginia Main
Campus&lt;br/&gt;Lead&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop
on the Science of Security&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our Nation increasingly
depends on computers and networks for national defense and for running its
critical infrastructures, such as the Power Grid and the financial networks,
adversaries have become interested in attacking our systems in order to achieve
financial gain, to cause major disruption to services or to extract sensitive
information. To cope with these serious threats, there has been much activity to
improve the security or our Nation?s systems, much of it initiated in the
research community but motivated by real and current security
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the pressing need for solutions to
immediate threats, the security research community has not focused enough on
evolving security into a science. As a result, many of the solutions are ad hoc,
address only particular threats, and, most important, are not amenable to
evaluation. The comment complaint is that there is no theory (or experimental
methodology or infrastructure) that supports the security evaluation of systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop is to explore approaches to
create a science of security that will address the lack of principles that can
help engineer secure systems and can lead to their evaluation. Such principles
can relate to models of attacks and of attackers, the ability to reason about
the resilience of a system, the ability to compare the security of systems, the
ability to compose systems with known security characteristics to produce a
system also with known security characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
workshop to engage the research community towards a science of security is
proposed. A two-day workshop is planned, to be organized by an ad hoc committee
composed of security experts from academia, experts from other fields where
there is an established science in the expectation that the security community
can learn from such successes, experts from research institutions, important
industry leaders, and Government PMs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;