* 0900291
* Applications of  Boundary Harnack Inequalities for p Harmonic Functions to Problems in Harmonic Analysis, PDE, and Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* John Lewis, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 174,299.00

The p Laplacian for most values of p is a nonlinear divergence form degenerate
elliptic PDE. Solutions to this PDE (called p harmonic functions) are relatively
nice in that they are invariant under rotations, translations, dilations, and
also remain solutions under multiplication by constants. Still the nonlinearity
of this PDE makes even basic questions difficult to answer. Recently the
principal investigator and coauthor Nystrom have proved a boundary Harnack
inequality (including Holder continuity) for the ratio of two positive p
harmonic functions vanishing on a portion of a Lipschitz domain. This project
proposal is concerned with applications of this boundary Harnack inequality to
problems concerning the p Martin boundary, the dimension of p harmonic measure,
and to certain two phase free boundary problems. Most physical models involve
linear PDE (in their principal part). Laplace`s equation is one of the best
known linear PDE and is often used in mathematical models, as well as to
describe physical phenomena. This proposal is concerned with extending some
classical results for Laplace's equation to its cousin the nonlinear p Laplace
equation. Recent technology developed by the proposer and coauthors make this
extension now possible. It is hoped that our work will eventually lead to
greater use of the p Laplace equation in mathematical modeling and in general in
the sciences.