* 0900476
* GOALI: Processing and Optimization of Multilayered Pharmaceutical Tablets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Antonios Zavaliangos, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 338,692.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project is a collaboration between Drexel University
and Merck Inc & Co and addresses the processing and optimization of multilayered
tablets. Multilayer tablets are becoming a key drug delivery method for
coexisting medical conditions and multidrug therapies. These tablets tend to
split during production and storage. A science-based optimization of their
design and processing is needed to ensure quality by design. To this end, the
goals of this project include: (a) experimental probing of the propensity of
multilayer tablets to splitting (b) study of their nonlinear mechanical
behavior, (c) continuum and mesoscale modeling of the stresses near the
interface, (d) validation of model prediction, and (e) generation of processing
maps that link process parameters and properties of multilayered tablets.

The combination of two medications in one tablet is a major step forward in the
development of novel therapies of coexisting conditions or combination drug
treatments. The results of this work will promote industrial innovation and
productivity with direct effects on consumers? health and potential cost
benefits. This project will provide a communication conduit between industry and
academia. Co-op opportunities for undergraduate and graduate internships will be
set-up at Merck. Further involvement of undergraduates in this project will be
implemented through the NSF-REU Site DREAM at Drexel. Merck researchers will
take industrial sabbaticals at Drexel University. Annual user group meetings
will include scientists from pharmaceutical companies in the PA-NJ-DE area.