* 0900105
* Laboratory, Field and In-Situ Soil Characterization Through Image Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Roman Hryciw, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 390,139.00

&lt;br/&gt;Soil classification is the first and foremost task of geotechnical,
geoenvironmental and geotechnical earthquake engineering site characterization.
Assessment of grain size distribution is essential to the classification.
Despite significant shortcomings, grain size analysis is ubiquitously performed
by sieve and hydrometer tests. A research program is therefore being undertaken
to develop the hardware, analytical tools and software for characterization of
soils from images of grain assemblies collected in the laboratory; above ground
in the field; and from below the ground surface. The effort may result in
cleaner, quicker, more efficient, less costly and more accurate grain size
determination and stratigraphic delineation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Earlier
image processing efforts were successful at determining the dominant grain size
when particles are relatively uniform in size, or if the particles can be
quickly segregated by size prior to image capture. The assessment of grain size
distribution from images becomes orders of magnitude more complex when a soil
contains a range of grain sizes. Previous techniques using image textural
features and wavelet mathematics have paved the way for new methods including
edge pixel density (EPD), edge segment size (ESS) and mathematical morphology
that will yield more complex grain size distributions. The newer techniques may
necessitate image capture at a range of magnifications.&lt;br/&gt;For the
laboratory, a system is being developed for rapidly segregating a soil specimen
by size using a sedimentation column. This permits piecewise image collection
and assemblage of a traditional grain size distribution curve. The hardware and
image collection system is being designed to facilitate size recognition down to
0.005 mm diameter, the commonly cited size threshold between ?silt? and ?clay?.
The hardware development will be performed as part of an interdisciplinary
undergraduate design project with students from several disciplines including
civil/geotechnical engineering, mechanical design, image processing and
mathematical statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For field applications, the
research will develop a rapid response system to determine the grain size
distribution of soils at the ground surface using two different approaches:
mathematical morphology and edge detection to determine edge pixel density (EPD)
and edge segment size (ESS). Preliminary evidence suggests these methods applied
to images taken at multiple scales may provide the grain size distribution of
even well-graded soils without the need for particle segregation. The research
will also develop a rapidly deployable field portable computer and camera
system. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For subsurface grain size assessment, the vision
cone penetrometer (VisCPT) will be used for image collection. Earlier studies
have shown that textural indices can only detect changes in stratigraphy, but
grain size determination has been too complex a problem. With the newly proposed
image processing methods, in-situ grain size determination becomes tractable.
VisCPT data will be collected at an exceptionally well characterized sand and
gravel quarry in southwestern Indiana. Existing available date data includes
continuous soil sampling and grain size distributions to a depth of 20 meters.
The glacial outwash site includes a large assortment of soil gradations ranging
from sandy gravels to clayey silts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The imaging methods
developed herein for soil grain size characterization have direct application to
other disciplines and industries where the sizing of manufactured components at
various scales, ingredients in preparations, naturally occurring biologic or
geologic matter, and interpretation of remotely sensed objects through image
processing are essential to quality control, inspection, diagnosis, state
assessment, and prediction of future behavior. Such industries include
pharmaceuticals, food processing, materials science, powder metallurgy,
microbiology and others.&lt;br/&gt;