* 0900327
* Nanostructures Integrated Laser Shock Peening (nLSP) Processes and Their Mechanisms for Enhanced Fatigue Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 12/31/2014
* USD 349,995.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate an innovative hybrid
process combining laser shock peening with creation of nanostructures to
minimize the relaxation of compressive residual stresses and work hardening.
This project will discover the fundamental process mechanisms of the
nanoparticle integrated laser shock peening process, and understand how this
process produces the unique micro/nanostructures, which results in stabilized
residual stresses and work hardening. Experiments and simulations will be
conducted to investigate the effects of the type, size and distribution of the
nanoparticles on the resulting microstructure and residual stress distribution.
The stability of residual stress and dislocation structure under different
temperatures and cyclic loadings will be studied using transmission electron
microscopy and X-ray diffraction. Dislocation-pinning mechanisms will be
investigated to explain the stabilizing effects. In order to study the mechanism
of fatigue life enhancement, we will build a fatigue life model to predict the
improved fatigue life considering the time variant residual stresses and
hardness under real service conditions. Fatigue testing experiments will be
designed to validate this model.

The successful completion of this work will make an improvement to laser shock
peening that produces compressive residual stress and a work hardening layer.
This work can ensure the benefit of integrating a pre-stressing concept into
component design with minimum risk for improved fatigue life, increased
reliability and reduced weight. The impact can be transferred to the majority of
load-carrying and structural components. This project will meet the challenges
of education in materials science, engineering and manufacturing by (a)
enhancing interdisciplinary and nontraditional manufacturing for research and
education in Purdue University, (b) providing a multidisciplinary research
opportunity for students to advance discovery and understanding of cutting edge
manufacturing processes and (c) outreach to undergraduate and graduate students
to retain them in science and engineering, especially underrepresented and
minority students.