* 0900253
* Reliability-Based Analysis and Design Loads For Slender Long-Span Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John van de Lindt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 248,361.00

Under wind and traffic loading, slender long-span bridges can experience large
responses which are typically caused by the dynamic interaction of the loads
with the bridge structure. These large responses can cause fatigue accumulation,
deterioration, and, at times, related safety issues for the bridge system. In
the United States, more than 800 long-span bridges contained in the national
bridge inventory are classified as fracture-critical. This project will study
these dynamic interactions and their potential to cause damage in long span
bridge structures. The project will focus on understanding the dynamic behavior
of bridge structures and develop an integrated dynamic model to assess the
lifetime performance of long-span bridges under combined wind and traffic loads.
A reliability-based analytical approach which utilizes improved traffic flow
simulations combined with wind tunnel test data will be formulated to define
equivalent wheel loads and the resulting factored design loads to ensure a
targeted reliability level at several levels of expected performance.

This research will help engineers to reliably predict the response, performance,
and remaining life of slender long-span bridge systems. It will help to identify
potential sources and risk of damage to current bridges with the ultimate
objective of designing retrofit measures to improve performance and prolong the
lives of the long span bridge structures. The reliability-based analysis and
design methodology will be helpful in load calibration and in achieving a
consistent level of risk for all bridge structures, which is the fundamental
intent of any design specification. Such a consistent level of risk is not
necessarily guaranteed now due to the lack of design specifications for long-
span bridges. The research results will be widely disseminated to other
researchers and practitioners through conventional mechanisms and committee
work. The project will provide advanced training to graduate students. Outreach
educational activities are also planned to provide an opportunity to pre-college
students to participate in cutting edge research with hands-on experience with
wind tunnel experimentation, thus helping to foster interest in the next
generation of engineers.

