* 0900147
* Advancing Genome-Enabled Tools: Guiding Inoculum Design for Sulfate-Reducing Mine Drainage Treatment Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,10/31/2011
* Amy Pruden, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 10/31/2011
* USD 286,948.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBET 0651947&lt;br/&gt;Amy J. Pruden
and Kenneth F. Reardon&lt;br/&gt;Colorado State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing Genome-Enabled Tools:
Guiding Inoculum Design&lt;br/&gt;for Sulfate-Reducing Mine-Drainage Treatment
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to demonstrate that genome-enabled tools can provide valuable guidance for the
design of inocula in order to improve the performance and reliability of
biological treatment systems. The focus of this study will be on sulfate-
reducing permeable reactive zones employed for mine drainage treatment, but the
approach is expected to be broadly applicable to any biological treatment
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this study
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1- compare communities resulting from different
inocula with respect to sulfate-reducing activity and response to
stress&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2- compare communities resulting from inocula that
have been designed based on information from above with respect to sulfate-
reducing activity and response to stress, and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3- develop
statistical models in order to identify critical parameters for controlling and
predicting performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Columns inoculated with various
combinations of environmental sources and pure cultures will be used to
accomplish these aims. A suite of genome-enabled tools will be strategically
applied, including capillary electrophoresis single strand conformation
polymorphism of 16S rRNA and 16S rRNA genes, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction targeting 16S rRNA genes and functional genes of key groups, and
cloning and sequencing of specific functional genes. An emphasis will be on
determining the relative utility of tools targeting community structural versus
functional variables.&lt;br/&gt;