* 0900162
* Multifunctional Hierarchical Structures Via Holographic Lithography and Block Copolymer Self Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2012
* USD 352,508.00

Top-down and bottom-up are two nanomanufacturing approaches which allow one to
achieve nanometer scale structures. Top-down method is approaching its theoretic
limits on the feature size that it can offer. In contrast, starting from
tailored molecules, bottom-up method such as self assembly can easily reach
nanometer feature sizes. One drawback of self assembly, however, is the
difficulty to achieve large scale, defect-free structures. Combining the top-
down and bottom-up methods in one system can lead to novel hierarchical
nanostructures with small feature size and less defects. The PI aims to
fabricate hierarchically ordered nanostructures (from a few nanometers to micron
scale) by combining holographic lithography (top-down technique) and block
copolymer self assembly (bottom-up method). The specific aims of the proposed
research are: (1) Fabricating hierarchical nanostructures by combining
holography lithography and block copolymer self-assembly, and (2) Using both
homopolymer and block copolymers as the vehicle to introduce a variety of
functional groups into the hierarchical nanostructure and fabricating
multifunctional nanostructures for thermal sensitive optical switches, high
density data storage, and porous membrane applications.

The proposed project, if successful, could lead to a new method to achieve
hierarchical nanostructures for a variety of technological applications. The
educational component of the proposal includes: (1) Developing a ?Polymeric
Materials Enabled Nanomanufacturing? module that will be used in the
?Nanostructured Polymeric Materials? course. (2) Involving high school students
and teachers, particularly under-represented populations, in the proposed
research activities.