* 0900143
* Building Green: Development and Evaluation of an  Environmentally Friendly Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jerry Stephens, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2012
* USD 311,876.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop an environmentally friendly
(i.e., green) concrete to reduce the significant environmental impacts
associated with the use of traditional concrete. Typical concrete consists of
sand/gravel bound together by Portland cement. In the concretes studied in this
project, the sand/gravel will be replaced with recycled glass, and all of the
Portland cement will be replaced with fly ash, which is a fine ash produced when
coal is burned to generate electricity. This project will identify fly ashes
from sources around the country that can be used in this new concrete. Concrete
elements made with these ashes and recycled glass will then be tested to
determine their engineering properties and durability. The project will conclude
with a large-scale demonstration project. &lt;br/&gt;The benefits to society as
a result of this research are at least twofold. The environmental impacts of
using traditional concrete as a construction material are significant.
Production of Portland cement is an energy intensive process, and is reportedly
responsible for up to 7% of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. Additionally,
both the production of Portland cement and sand/gravel disturb virgin land.
Conversely, the fly ash and recycled glass to be used in the proposed concrete
represent two common waste streams. Thus, this new concrete minimizes energy use
and environmental disturbance, while reusing waste materials. Additionally, the
project will encourage interest and diversity in science and engineering by
supporting students throughout its duration, including a Native American
internship.&lt;br/&gt;