* 0900372
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: Exploring Diverse and Shifting Subsistence Choices During the Formative Period at Chiquiuitan
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* William Fowler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 9,375.00

The Early and Middle Formative site of Chiquiuitan is located on the Pacific
coast of Guatemala and is distinguished as the earliest known site in the
southeastern coastal region, dating to 1450-600 B.C. Yet, the site has received
little consideration in the scholarship of this crucial time in Mesoamerican
prehistory, when important transitions were taking place in sedentism,
subsistence, trade, and social organization. These transitions laid the
groundwork for subsequent high cultural systems such as the Olmec, Maya, and
Aztec, and thus are central to understanding the foundations of Mesoamerican
cultural systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. William R.
Fowler, Jr., Molly Morgan will evaluate subsistence transitions by studying
plant and animal remains and obtaining radiocarbon dates from previously
recovered deposits at Chiquiuitan. Morgan's 2006 and 2007 excavations focused on
household contexts, providing ample evidence for domestic choices made by the
inhabitants of this village, including those related to food procurement. The
result of the new research will be a detailed reconstruction of subsistence
diversity and change during and immediately following Chiquiuitan's initial
settlement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the important contribution that will be made to the archaeology of a crucial
period in early Mesoamerican prehistory. Through gathering multiple types of
subsistence-related evidence, this research will clarify resource exploitation
choices at Chiquiuitan by examining variable components of the diet and how they
changed through time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ three
materials analyses: (1) paleobotanical research aimed at identifying plant
species, (2) analysis of archaeofauna to identify animal remains, and (3) AMS
radiocarbon dating to enhance the chronological reconstruction of deposits from
Chiquiuitan. These studies will be conducted by experienced specialists in the
field, namely Dr. Andrew Wyatt at the University of Illinois at Chicago for
paleoethnobotany, and Dr. Kitty Emery at the Florida Museum of Natural History
for archaeofauna. Determining the extent of food production and if a subsistence
economy was adapted before the Middle Formative (950-600 BC) will be primary
goals. In summary, the approach taken by this project combines zoological and
botanical perspectives of human-environment interactions with the dynamic
perception gained through absolute dating methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from this research will be threefold: this project
will assist in graduate student training, foster a greater exchange of
information between U.S. and Latin American scholars, and contribute to the
wider study of how human groups procure food. By bolstering the data collected
from the site of Chiquiuitan, this work will significantly enhance the
interpretations made regarding early social transitions proposed in Morgan"s
dissertation. The information gained will contribute to the general
understanding among New World scholars of the transition to complex society by
providing a detailed model for the adoption of agriculture to which other areas
may be compared. Lastly, in an age of slow food revolutions, the call for a
return to natural and organic food production methods, and a heightened concern
for where our food is coming from, this study will explain how an ancient group
dealt with issues of subsistence in their time, offering ideas for how we might
explore our own challenges in food procurement.