* 0900138
* GOALI:  Hybrid Control of Continuous Casting for Whale and Crack Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Bentsman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

The research effort supported by this award is aimed at preventing two major
problems in continuous thin-slab steel casting: internal and surface cracks and
whales ? bulges of the solidifying steel shell. A model-based spray cooling
control system will be created to track, under disturbances and process model
uncertainty, temperature profiles designed to satisfy quality constraints.
Control of moving solidification front position will be addressed by developing
theory of hybrid state estimation and control for systems with moving
boundaries, applicable to a number of processes. The research approach
progresses from the development of a controller/state estimator system for an
idealized configuration to the real caster which has constrained spray-nozzle
actuation, unmodelled process dynamics, and unreliable pyrometer measurements.
Deliverables include fundamental control-theoretic results, controller and state
estimator synthesis and analysis tools, software/hardware demonstration and
validation on an industrial caster at Nucor Steel, an offline educational
process control and visualization tool, documentation of research results in
publications, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
completed, the results of this research will offer widely applicable, cost-
effective control systems capable of accomplishing sophisticated spray cooling
control tasks in continuous thin slab steel casting. This research will have
broad impact across the entire industry due to quality improvement, (through
fewer defects), energy savings (through yield improvement and lower reheating
costs), better safety (from improved steel quality, and fewer breakouts and
whale-defects), and competitiveness (by enabling the casting of new steel
products). Improving spray cooling control to achieve even a one percent
reduction in yield loss would save about $100 million per year (based on the
roughly 100 million tons of steel produced each year in the U.S. and $100 per
ton net cost of scrapping). Development of novel observation and control tools -
sensor fusion with unreliable sensors and control of systems with moving
boundaries - will address problems encountered in many other manufacturing
processes. The research and educational infrastructure will be significantly
enhanced through student involvement, industry and international collaborations,
and broad dissemination of new knowledge.