* 0900486
* Modeling of Natural Plant Materials to Enable Performance Evaluation of Environmentally Friendly Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Jelena Srebric, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 318,236.00

Research has shown that building green roofs have the potential to reduce energy
demand on space conditioning, reduce storm water runoff, expand the lifetime of
roofing membranes, improve air quality, and reduce the urban heat island effect
in cities. Predictive methods to quantify the benefits of green roofs?
capabilities to reduce energy consumption and water runoff are needed. The long-
term goal of the proposed research is to develop and verify the methods and
tools that can be used to calculate heat/mass transfer through a building
envelope covered with natural plant material for a given location in the United
States. The goal of the present study is to provide tools and calculation
methods to quantify summer cooling effects of a green roof, which presently is
the most popular natural plant material for buildings.

The performance of green roofs is climate dependent and having a reliable
estimate on potential energy savings is vital in evaluating the investment in
this technology. The laboratory experimental methodology to be refined in this
project can be applied to other natural plant materials to be incorporated into
building envelopes in the future. Furthermore, the impact of the GREEN
educational component will not be limited to the two participating schools, but
rather an entire community of teachers and students interested in exploring
environmental issues. In the future, research results of the present study will
be transferable to other diverse natural materials to be integrated not only on
building roofs, but also on building vertical walls.