* 0900780
* A New Passive-Active Isolator
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Faramarz Gordaninejad, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 206,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is to study the feasibility of a new variable
stiffness isolator and to understand its behavior. The proposed system can
function in passive and active modes, is fail-safe, and is very similar to the
conventional passive elastomeric bearings. The power requirement is very low,
and the system can be battery operated. The new system offers both passive and
controllable components. The objective of this research is to understand the
performance of the proposed variable stiffness isolation bearing. Prototypes of
this system will be designed, fabricated and tested. For the proof-of-concept of
its effectiveness under seismic motions, the proposed isolator will be examined
on a scaled model building. Theoretical analysis will be carried out to model
and predict the performance of the proposed system. Materials development will
be focused on elevated working temperature, moisture resistance, and enhanced
durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed project will
contribute to the advancement of passive-active protective systems for the
control of large structures. Research in hazard mitigation of large structures
is of high importance because it can significantly contribute to saving lives
and resources. In recent years, considerable attention has been paid to
enhancing the protection of civil infrastructure elements by taking advantage of
new materials, high-tech devices, and advanced control methods. The activity
will also provide advanced training in testing and analysis to the graduate
student working on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;