* 0900277
* Quantitative Design of Experiments to Predictably Alter Intracellular Signaling Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Marietta Harrison, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,216,337.00

The objective of this project is to establish nonlinear dynamics and control
theory techniques that facilitate the design of experimental strategies to
predictably manipulate the intracellular signaling pathway dynamics. The
development of this type of dynamical analysis and control theory-inspired
experiment design has been hindered by the lack of adequately accurate
mathematical models and incomplete knowledge of the intracellular signaling
pathways. Recent developments and preliminary experiments using nonlinear model
predictive controller design with sparse grid-based optimization have set the
stage for the development of effective control strategies despite these
uncertainties. The refinement of computationally efficient sparse grid-based
techniques to rapidly screen model structures and parameters for compatibility
with the available experimental data will elucidate data-consistent signaling
dynamics, facilitate experiment design to discern between data-compatible
mechanisms, and support robust controller design. The extension of current
robust controller design techniques to select controller parameters that
minimize the effects from uncertainties in the model parameters and structure
and small perturbations in the controller parameter values will maximize the
likelihood that the resulting controller actions, when realized in the
laboratory, will achieve their desired objectives. The robust controller design
techniques developed to minimize the effects of large degrees of uncertainty in
the model parameters and structure will be immediately applicable to control a
number of highly uncertain systems. Intracellular signaling pathways transmit
and coordinate signals within the cell to direct fundamental cellular processes
such as proliferation, differentiation, migration and apoptosis. The ability to
predict signaling network dynamics will ultimately provide us with ways to alter
cellular responses in a controlled manner. This ability will find application in
medicine and pharmacy, agriculture, and biotechnology. The intracellular
signaling pathways involve numerous chemical species that participate in a
complex sequence of events orchestrated by interactions, crosstalk and feedback.
The complexity of these networks hinders the ability of unaided intuition to
efficiently design experiments to manipulate the signaling events in a desired
manner. This interdisciplinary research combines and extends expertise and
techniques from control theory, computational mathematics, and cell biology to
derive approaches to quantitatively design experiments. Undergraduates and
graduate students will participate in the research and primary dissemination of
the research results will be through peer-reviewed journal publications,
conference presentations, a technical workshop, course material, and the Web.