* 0900255
* Linguistics-Based Preference Information Modeling for Design Decision-Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Maria Yang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 319,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this research award is to model the
preference information embedded in natural language engineering design texts in
order to identify linguistic forms of preference that will form the basis for a
decision-making model that supports comparison of computed decisions to actual
decisions. One view of the product design process is that it is driven by
designers who have preferences for alternatives within a set of possible design
choices. Such preference information is implicit within engineering design
texts, but can be difficult to extract from unstructured information. The
challenge is in linguistically modeling these preferences and mapping them into
a mathematical model suitable for supporting design decision-making. Work will
identify linguistic forms of preference, produce a comprehensive 'preference
lexicon', develop formal mathematical models of preferences, and generate a
decision-making model so that computed decisions can be compared with actual
decisions to verify their validity.

If successful, this work will have impact across many industries, including
product development, automotive, aerospace, and the military, due to the
fundamental role of decision-making in the engineering design process. This
research is intended to advance fundamental understanding of the language of
design, in particular how preferences are expressed. In turn, this will further
basic knowledge of the subjective aspects of decision-making and move towards
the development of usable, effective decision support methods. The result will
be an approach for imputing preference information as well as decision
information from unstructured design texts that draws on both design language
models and probabilistic extraction. Graduate students will learn about this
work through an interdisciplinary, project-based class on decision-making in
engineering design. A diverse group of undergraduates will have hands-on
research experience with this work the Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program.