* 0900338
* Development of Functionally Graded Protective Systems for Attenuation of Blast Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Gary Dargush, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 05/31/2013
* USD 299,999.00

Abstract:

This award is funded under the American recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) The aim of this project is to develop new structural
architectures for resisting and mitigating the effects of impulsive loadings,
such as blast and high velocity impacts, using functionally graded protective
systems. The research approach combines theoretical concepts from wave
propagation and nonlinear dynamics with a heuristic optimization methodology,
based on genetic algorithms, to develop protective systems that have spatially
varying stiffness, density and damping. In particular, this research will
investigate functionally graded material systems, along with strategically
allocated voids and solid or fluid inclusions for the objective of attenuating
stress waves imparted on a structural system by blast and high velocity impacts.
The first phase of the research will feature the use of numerical simulations,
within a parallel grid computing environment, to develop novel functionally
graded protective system concepts. A rigorous experimental investigation will
then validate the effectiveness of the proposed functionally graded protective
systems for mitigating impulsive loads and provide feedback for further
enhancements of these protective systems. The impact of the project will occur
at several levels. The research will lead to the generation of new knowledge
associated with functionally graded materials and systems, along with the
development of robust optimization tools that rely on coupling genetic algorithm
methodology with finite element analysis to tailor material architectures for
mitigating blast and high velocity impact loading. The validated functionally
graded protective systems will enable engineers to apply these new design
concepts in structural systems vulnerable to blast and high velocity impact
environment. Finally, this has the potential to transform the present design
philosophy for structural design under blast and high velocity impacts from one
that emphasizes hardening to one focused on energy and momentum management. The
project involves the education and mentoring of at least one doctoral student,
the research findings will be incorporated into several graduate level courses,
including one specifically on blast engineering and a web-based repository will
be established to enable broad dissemination of the research results.