* 0900289
* Collaborative Research:  Stability, Identification, and Stochastic Resonance in  Stochastic Delayed Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Eric Butcher, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 248,987.00

This project will develop complementary techniques to analyze the stability
behavior of stochastic delay systems. In addition, we will examine phenomena
caused by the combination of noise and time delays. These investigations will be
tailored towards the specific applications of real time dynamic substructuring
and machining experiments. We will also investigate two alternatives for
parameter identification in nonlinear systems that contain delays and stochastic
parameters. In summary, the proposed research will provide new tools that could
potentially impact a broad scope of applications in engineering, physics,
biology, and signal processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above research
objectives consider timely and relevant studies to advance the frontiers in two
important application areas. Educational efforts will include outreach
activities in teaching Jr./Sr. high school students about vibrations through
demonstrations. Graduate student experiences will include cross-training at both
universities, industry interactions, and research interactions with
international collaborators. The PIs will work with the Society of Hispanic
Engineers, Alliance for Minority Participation, and the Society of Women
Engineers to identify under-represented students with compatible
interest.&lt;br/&gt;