* 0900890
* 2009 Summer Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Noshir Langrana, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 12/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

0900890&lt;br/&gt;N. Langrana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the
2009 ASME Summer Bioengineering Conference which will be held in Lake Tahoe, CA
during June 17-21, 2009. The Summer Bioengineering Conference is a high quality,
multidisciplinary annual biomedical engineering event sponsored by the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers-Bioengineering Division (ASME-BED). This year's
Conference is also cosponsored by several other well-recognized societies such
as the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES), the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (IEEE EMBS),
the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE), and the American Society
of Biomechanics (ASB). This conference brings together all of the different
bioengineering communities including topics such as cell and molecular
engineering, tissue engineering, functional tissue engineering, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year, there will be the "Mow Symposium", which will
honor Dr. Van Mow and his contributions to the fields of orthopaedic
biomechanics, tissue mechanics, cartilage mechanics, constitutive modeling and
tissue engineering. The workshops will be on Obtaining the Ideal Faculty
Appointment, Predicting In-Vivo Knee Loads, Fluid-Solid Interactions, Course
Development in Bioengineering, and Teaching Undergraduate Biomechanics. The
plenary speakers and their talks are: (1) Martin Yarmush, MD, PhD will lecture
on "A Challenging Biomedical Science and Research Environment: The Need for
Cooperation, Mentorship and Research Translation." and (2) Kathy Pearson, PhD,
will speak about "Developing Peripheral Vision."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hallmark
of this meeting is the interaction and true integration of rigorous engineering
principles and biologic concepts. The conference format will be 6 parallel
sessions of oral presentations. Approximately 1/3rd to half of the accepted
papers will be presented in poster format. All technical presentations will be
two-page extended abstracts and compiled in a CD format, distributed to all
registrants. Copies of this CD will also be provided to all co-sponsoring
societies. The CD will serve as the only technical proceedings of the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the direct impact this conference will have
on the mainstream bioengineering community, this meeting will serve an important
cross-fertilization role. Bioengineers, engineers from other disciplines, cell
and molecular biologists, biochemists, biophysicists, and other scientists are
expected to participate in the meeting. More than 40% of the attendees will be
students. This will provide a broad impact for the current times as well as for
the future as these students will benefit by participation in the meeting and
through the material presented by the plenary speakers and workshops.
Furthermore, through the CD containing technical proceedings and conference web
site, information presented at the meeting will be available to multiple
societies and to the public at large. The NSF support will be used to aid in
reducing student registration fees, partial funding for the student travel and
to cover in part the publication costs of the program booklet and CD.