* 0900909
* Questions on Diffusive Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Maria Schonbek, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 221,527.00

This project considers several fundamental models arising in fluid dynamics and
one from chemotaxis. These models are: the Navier-Stokes and Euler equations,
which describe hydrodynamics phenomena; polymeric equations, which model
noninteracting polymer chains; the two-dimensional quasi-geostrophic (2DQG)
equations, which describe meteorological phenomena; and, finally, the damped
Boussinesq system, which models the propagation of water waves in shallow water.
Part of the project relates to the central questions for nonlinear partial
differential equations, namely, regularity, formation of turbulence, and the
possible construction of explicit solutions. Specifically, the principal
investigator is concerned with the construction of special solutions to the
Euler and Platak-Keller-Segel equations (the latter is a well-known model for
chemotaxis phenomena) or, in the other direction, with establishing that such
solutions cannot exist. It is clear that such constructions are physically
meaningful. A central part of the proposal is concerned with the stability of
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations. The work proposed in connection with
the other three fluid models: the Polymeric, the 2DQG, and the Boussinesq
equations is expected to yield new information on the long-time behavior of the
solutions.

All of the models considered in this project have the potential for interesting
applications. The principal investigator's interest in these models stems from
the possibility of working on a more applied side of the subject than she has in
the past, in particular, to be able to have an interdisciplinary interaction
with other scientists. In what follows the discussion focuses on two of the main
models mentioned above: the Navier-Stoke equations and the polymeric equations.
The main attraction with respect to the Navier-Stokes equations is that, as a
model for viscous flows, it is used to study, among many other things, blood
flow. The hope is that a broad theoretical understanding of the equation will
lead eventually to the ability to test for the behavior of the real flow, and
perhaps predict its long-time behavior. The polymer equations in its original
form is obtained by coupling the Navier-Stokes equations with an equation that
describes the time evolution of the probability density function of the position
of a particle. A polymer is a substance composed of a large molecular mass
consisting of repeated structural units (monomers) connected by covalent
chemical bonds, which exist due to the sharing of electrons between atoms. The
attraction-repulsion stability that is caused by the common electron is what
characterizes the covalent bonding. The idea of covalent bonding between long
chains of atoms was introduced in a ground-breaking and controversial paper by
Hermann Staudinger in 1920 (Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 1953). The simplest
model to account for noninteracting polymer chains is the so-called dumbbell
model. A dumbbell consists of two beads connected by an elastic spring. One can
imagine that in this model the beads represent the atoms, while the elastic
spring plays the role of the covalent bond. This simple model is what the
project will seek to understand first. Here again the stress is on the long-time
behavior of the motion that the dumbells undergo. All the problems considered in
this proposal can be used as basis for work with undergraduate students and for
Ph.D. projects.