* 0900286
* GOALI: Nanoscale Hysteresis Modeling and Control in Precision Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jeffrey Vipperman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Heightened performance requirements have driven improvements in precision motion
equipment that now boast accuracies in the nanometer range. However, such
accuracies require expensive noncontacting bearings, while roller bearings
provide the best performance/cost benefit. Despite past research in this area,
adequate friction mitigation remains the limiting factor for precision
mechanical motion stages. This research will investigate techniques for
improving precision motion control using knowledge of friction. Hysteresis
models will be used to identify, evaluate and predict friction experimentally,
and to design improved motion control systems that mitigate friction's effects.
This research will also investigate the ability to reject disturbances caused by
roller bearings on precision motion stages by sensing the ball bearing position
and relate that to fluctuations in velocity. Finally, control approaches for
minimizing the effects of bearing disturbances and bearing friction on the
ultra-slow motion of stages will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will increase the accuracy and speed of response of
precision motion systems by pushing the accuracy of roller bearing stages to the
nanoscale. While noncontact bearings provide the lowest friction and highest
precision, manufacturing them to ever tighter tolerances drives up cost.
Improved manufacturing techniques for roller bearings have improved their
performance, and now stages using roller bearings can realize nanometer
performance. Still, the hysteretic characteristics of roller bearings limits
their performance. This research will enable precision stages to be operated at
lower cost with higher precision and accuracy. This provides considerable impact
for end users of precision motion stages, who will be able to achieve improved
manufacturing and metrology processes as a result of improved motion control
systems. Finally, this research will provide an alignment of university research
with industrial needs and the opportunity for students to conduct research in an
industrial setting, working on research problems with immediate technological
application.&lt;br/&gt;