* 0900184
* Customized Load-Bearing Scaffolds Using Multiscale Porosity and Multi-Material Domains
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Wheeler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 437,576.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The research objective of this award is to develop manufacturing technology
enabling the fabrication of multi-material, near net-shape tissue engineering
scaffolds for bone defect repair. This will enable a new class of functionally
graded scaffolds and will result in advances in the current state of the art for
both rapid prototype manufacturing and bone tissue engineering research. The
technology will make use of Iterative Learning Control to learn trajectories for
robotic manufacturing tasks using a vision-based system. Learned functions will
be stored as a library and used for constructing any arbitrary scaffold by
sequencing combinations of the individual functions. The technology will enable
the fabrication of novel scaffolds with 6-12 twelve combinations of macropore
and micropore size and fraction in a single scaffold, which will allow for
unprecedented progress in determining pore combinations that result in the
fastest, most complete bone healing. The approach will require a fraction of the
number of costly in vivo experiments and will obtain significantly more
information in the process.

If successful, the research will address a basic and growing health need in our
society, namely the need for more effective options for bone defect repair. The
research will also contribute to manufacture of engineered scaffolds as well as
to the fundamental understanding of the role of macro and microporosities on
bone ingrowth. Aspects of manufacturing and biological materials will be
incorporated into the existing curriculum with the goal of making every
mechanical engineering student familiar with tissue scaffolds as a design and
manufacturing challenge and every bioengineering student familiar with
manufacturing as an important aspect of tissue engineering. The lessons learned
will be packaged for dissemination through educational channels like courses,
summer camps, and undergraduate research projects, as well as through
Engineering Open House, which draws thousands of visitors to campus annually.