* 0900970
* Collaborative Research:     Secure Information Sharing in Internet-based Collaborative Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2008,05/31/2009
* Gail-Joon Ahn, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2009
* USD 61,746.00

The Internet revolution has led organizations worldwide to rely heavily on
information sharing over the Internet to conduct their daily business.
Information sharing on the Internet usually occurs in broad, highly dynamic
network-based environments, and formally accessing the resources in a secure
manner poses a difficult challenge. Our focus is on the problems of secure
information exchange and secure information access in Internet-based
collaborative environments. The research objectives are as follows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secure group communication. In collaborative work and
research environments, group members must be able to set up a reliable, secure
information sharing and communication medium among them. Techniques will be
developed for setting up secure group communication and providing a set of
accesses to group members for a variety of digital data in highly dynamic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security services. Digital information in
database systems generally represents sensitive and confidential information
that organizations must protect and allow only authorized personnel to access
and manipulate them. The research will address the issue of how to advocate
selective information sharing in role-based systems while minimizing the risks
of unauthorized access proposing a delegation framework. The objective is to
demonstrate the feasibility of our framework through policy specification,
enforcement, and a proof-of-concept implementation.&lt;br/&gt;