* 0900187
* Advanced High Strength Multiphase Steels through a Combined Alloy-Microstructural Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

In the next few years, the Federal government will implement the most
comprehensive overhaul of the U. S. vehicle fleet?s emission and fuel economy
standards to date. One of most attractive approaches to improved fuel economy is
vehicle?s weight reduction for which near-term and cost-effective solutions can
be found through the use of Advanced High Strength Steels (AHSS). Thus, the
research objective of this award is to design and fabricate low-alloy, low-cost
multiphase steels with a composite microstructure consisting of an ultrafine-
grained (UFG) ferrite matrix with dispersions of bainite and stabilized
austenite. Such microstructure should assure high strength for weight reduction,
high ductility to allow easy formability, and high fracture toughness. These
goals will be achieved through the synergistic combination of alloy and
microstructural design via both computational and experimental approaches
including design of alloy compositions and heat treatment schedules for optimal
volume fractions of the constitutive phases, and refinement of the grain size to
submicron to nano range using thermomechanical processing techniques including
severe strain path changes and severe simple shear deformation with the help of
a novel microstructure based modeling for process optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
an opportunity for revolutionizing the field, by moving away from current
expensive or low ductility and poor formability HSSs, to AHSSs possessing high
strength-high ductility-good formability-low cost combination; and by the
creation of an entirely new family of ?nano-steels?, which will have significant
impact on future advanced transportation vehicles, power generation equipment,
and weapons systems. Ultimately, the methodologies for alloying and
microstructural design developed in this work will significantly contribute to
the overall effort to increase the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing.
Graduate and undergraduate students including several minority students will
benefit through new course developments, classroom instruction and direct
involvement in the research. K-12 students and high school teachers will be
engaged in the computational/experimental research activities to increase the
awareness of science and engineering among them and provide them firsthand
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;