* 0900888
* SGER: Storm Surge Deposition in Coastal Wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Robert Turner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2009
* USD 29,648.00

This project will quantify the amount of sediments introduced to the Louisiana
wetlands inundated by hurricanes Gustav and Ike during the late summer of 2008.
These recently-deposited inorganic sediments will be easy to recognize in the
wetland sediments for the next two to four months. The objective is to sample
100 to 150 locations within these coastal wetlands to obtain a statistically-
significant estimate of sediment deposition. The goal of the proposed activity
is to understand how and why the deposition rate varies across the coastal
environment, and to compare these results to the 2005 analysis of sediments
accumulating during hurricanes Katrina and Rita. An opportunity exists, as a
result of these storms, to examine how vegetative structure affects sediment
deposition. Large storm surges may overwhelm the ability of the vegetation to
trap sediments, and this sampling effort will directly address this
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount of sediment moved into coastal areas by
hurricane storm surges is huge, and the means by which it gets trapped or
deposited is of great importance to coastal communities. This research will
document how and where the sediments from two major hurricanes has been
deposited, and the effects that this has had on shaping the coastline. This
project will benefit the process of planning for future hurricane landfalls
along the Gulf Coast.