* 0900833
* Investigation of Cellular Compliance Sensing and Response Using Single-Cell-Pico-Force-Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 06/30/2012
* USD 355,233.00

This work will advance our understanding of how cells process of mechanical
signals. The effort is based upon Single-Cell-Pico-Force-Microscopy (SCPFM), a
new instrument poised to become widely applicable to many studies in cell
biology. SCPFM integrates near-single-molecule force measurement capabilities of
Nano Electro Mechanical Systems (NEMS) with integrated microfluidics enabling
precision fluid control, and thereby precision pharmacological stimulation, of
individual cells. Understanding cellular force generation and regulation is
critical to understanding many basic aspects of cell function; among these are:
cell motility, cell division, and cell organization; many aspects of organism
function: wound healing, inflammation, and embryogenesis; and numerous diseases,
including many cancers and cardiovascular disease. Specifically, this work will
investigate the compliance sensing and force response of the Extra-Cellular-
Matrix (ECM) as a model system for studying the role of mechanics in cell
regulation. SCPFM enables, for example, detailed and systematic study of the
molecular-mechanical responses of individual lamellipodia to pharmacological and
mechanical stimulation. Force-time records of compliance sensing and response
events will be acquired in this work, and these will be used to assemble a
library of molecular-mechanical force signatures with which to analyze the
force-time records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCPFM combines
device physics, nano-fabrication, and electrical engineering with surface
chemistry, cell biology and biochemistry in a complex, interconnected system.
This presents an extraordinary opportunity for graduate students and post-docs
to become interdisciplinary scientists capable of leading and successfully
integrating interdisciplinary teams and projects. Undergraduate and minority
students will have the opportunity to be involved through Caltech?s SURF and
MURF programs (Summer/Minority Undergraduate Research Fellowship). The impact of
this research will be carried into the local community by the graduate students
and post-docs involved in cooperation with Caltech?s Classroom Connection, which
partners researchers with local high school science classes where they serve as
role models for pre-college students.&lt;br/&gt;