* 0900127
* High-Authority Two-Way Surface Form Memory
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yang-Tse Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 279,948.00

A new surface engineering technique has been found that will extend the reach of
shape memory alloys to new application areas not previously contemplated for
these remarkable materials. We have discovered a technique whereby a metallic
surface can be made to undergo a thermally-driven transition between an optical
flat (when cool), to a highly non-planar surface on warming. This project will
demonstrate that Surface Form Memory (SFM) can operate with the high energy
density normally associated with shape-memory (>106 J-m-3). If so, such ?high-
authority? SFM would enable a variety of novel applications, from variable
friction surfaces, to MEMS devices and nano-scale assembly tools. The method we
use to obtain SFM involves spherical or cylindrical indentation followed by
surface planarization. This indent-planarization technique relies on the
discovery that a spherical indent made in martensitic NiTi induces a pronounced
shape-memory training effect, leading to two-way shape memory (TWSME). This
causes shape-strains to occur cyclically on both heating and cooling. This
cyclic depth change is converted to a much more radical change in surface form
by the planarization step, in which the surface is carefully ground just enough
to render the initial indent invisible. What had been a simple change in indent
depth is thereby converted to a transition from a flat surface to one exhibiting
a pronounced protrusion. We will explore low-cost methods for producing wide-
area surface treatments, and evaluate ideas for the fabrication of tribodynamic
surfaces and other components using indentation-planarization methods. In
particular, we propose a proof-of-concept demonstration of surfaces capable of
very large thermally driven changes in friction coefficient.