* 0900177
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Chaotic Transport in Volume-Preserving Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dmitri Vainchtein, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 08/31/2012
* USD 139,844.00

0900177/0900018&lt;br/&gt;Vainchtein/Grigoriev &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this collaborative research program is to construct a general quantitative
theory of long-time resonance-driven chaotic transport and mixing in near-
integrable autonomous and non-autonomous volume-preserving flows. Specific
examples of microscale flows will be used to illustrate the general approach and
develop specific tools that can be naturally generalized to a wide class of
volume-preserving and Hamiltonian systems. The deterministic theory of resonance
processes will be combined with the theory of random walks and theory of
stability islands to develop a statistical long-term description of the
Lagrangian transport in systems with separatrices and/or resonances. A unique
feature of the planned approach is that it will apply both when chaotic
advection is the only transport mechanism as well as when chaotic advection
competes with thermal or molecular diffusion. This work includes integration of
often disconnected methods and techniques used to describe resonant interactions
and regular transport into a general transport theory for near-integrable
systems, and development of a novel technique to quantify mixing rate,
thoroughness, and uniformity for incompressible fluid flows. The PIs' research
has direct applications to a wide range of problems in science and engineering,
such as the transport of comets and asteroids through the solar system, energy
exchange between excitation modes in condensed matter, and motion of charged
particles in electromagnetic fields with applications to atmospheric science and
magnetic confinement fusion devices. The key application is in the field of
microfluidics which promises major advances in drug discovery, medical
diagnostics, and national security through its impact on chemical processing and
sensor technology. The research program will be tightly integrated with teaching
and learning at the undergraduate and graduate levels and will include
activities aimed at increased participation of underrepresented groups in
research and integration of research advances into the curriculum. The PIs will
also seek to extend and establish microfluidics collaborations with the plasma
physics community.