* 0900930
* Spectrum Management in Cognitive Radio Ad Hoc Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop a spectrum management framework for
cognitive radio ad hoc networks. The project investigates the challenges posed
by the distributed multi-hop architecture, the dynamic network topology, and the
frequently changing spectrum seen in these networks. Up to now, the research in
this area has mainly focused on infrastructure-based networks. This research
aims to highlight the major challenges in the distributed operation and provide
protocol-level solutions for each of them.

With respect to intellectual merit, this research has the potential to lead to a
cooperation strategy that improves the sensing accuracy at an acceptable
communication cost. To enable this interaction between nodes, an on-demand
reliable common control channel is devised. For determining the best spectrum
for transmission, a joint spectrum and route selection method is developed.
Moreover, a cognitive radio medium access control protocol is proposed, with
goals of providing interference avoidance as well as efficient spectrum
utilization. Finally, a spectrum-aware route recovery framework is proposed for
efficient operation when the cognitive radio nodes switch between frequency
bands.

With respect to broader impact, research results will lead to selected topics
for a Cognitive Radio Networks taught by the principal investigator at Georgia
Tech. Moreover, a cognitive radio simulator is implemented as part of this
project and will be used in the class as an educational tool. Collaboration with
industry and academic institutions is pursued to disseminate the current state-
of-the-art.