* 0900978
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Electron Injection-Induced Effects in ZnO-based Materials and Device Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jianlin Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 244,893.00

ECCS 0900971/0900978&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Studies of Electron
Injection-Induced Effects &lt;br/&gt;in ZnO-based Materials and Device
Structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With recent advances in ZnO epitaxial growth
and processing, it is very likely that efficient minority carrier devices, such
as light emitting diodes, laser diodes and transparent p-n junctions, can be
achieved in the near future. &lt;br/&gt; Because the minority carrier diffusion
length - one of the critical parameters in defining p-n junction performance -
is usually less than 1 micron in ZnO-based semiconductors, it is imperative to
find ways of its improvement. The principal investigators¡¦ recent findings
indicate that the minority carrier diffusion length can be elongated in p-type
ZnO due to electron injection. While the observed novel effect was attributed to
electron trapping on impurity-related levels, the role of extended and point
defects as well as of surface states was not completely excluded. &lt;br/&gt;
The intellectual merit of this research is in exploration of electron
injection¡¦s impact on minority carrier transport and recombination in ZnO and
related compounds. A wide range of epitaxial antimony-doped p-type ZnO and
p-type Zn1-xMgxO (x ?T 0.15) layers will be studied. In addition, the minority
carrier transport in p-ZnO doped with other impurities such as phosphorus, or
nitrogen, as well as in p-type Zn1-xCdxO (x ?T 0.15) and Zn(Mg/Cd)O/ZnO
superlattices, will be investigated. Magnesium (Cadmium) incorporation into the
ZnO lattice and barrier and well presence in the superlattices create electron
injection conditions different from that in ZnO.&lt;br/&gt; To fully understand
the effects of electron injection in Zn(Mg/Cd)O and to find conditions under
which they can be employed, systematic electrical and optical studies will be
carried out in the representative range of device structures: p-n junction and
Schottky diodes. Electrical testing, combined with Electron Beam-Induced Current
measurements, will be performed in-situ in a Scanning Electron Microscope. These
measurements will be complemented with in-situ cathodoluminescence as well as
spectral photoresponse and transient photocurrent measurements.&lt;br/&gt;The
effects of electron injection to be investigated are likely related to
concentration of dopants, epitaxial layer quality and composition. Therefore,
the study of materials with variations in these properties is necessary. The
growth of these materials and the fabrication and characterization of their
device structures are assured through the interactive collaboration between the
groups at the University of Central Florida and the University of California,
Riverside. &lt;br/&gt; The practical significance of the proposed research is in
performance control of p-n junction charge collection semiconductor devices,
such as photodetectors, in which the minority carrier diffusion length plays a
critical role. A several-fold increase in the photodetector¡¦s quantum
efficiency is anticipated relative to the current state-of-the-art of ~
15-20%.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this collaborative project is in better
understanding the fundamentals of point and extended defects in ZnO-based
semiconductors, creating a partnership between two universities, and integrating
research and education at the graduate, undergraduate and K-12 levels, as
expressed in participation of underrepresented Ph.D. students, several
undergraduates and local high school students in the proposed research. These
students will build skills in collaborating on a long-term, long-distance
academic project, as they participate in the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;