* 0900564
* Collaborative Research:  Laser Manufacturing of Three-Dimensional Lightwave Circuits and Nano-Optical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Kevin Peng Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 389,320.00

The research objective of this collaborative award is to develop flexible and
cross-platform methods to fabricate three-dimensional (3D) lightwave circuits
and photonic crystal structures in transparent media. A laser direct writing
technique using high-repetition-rate femtosecond laser will be explored to
produce compact 3D lightwave circuits. The approach takes advantages of multi-
photon process induced by ultrashort laser pulses to initialize a universal
photosensitivity response to change refractive indices in a wide array of
optical materials. Bulk heating effects from high-repetition laser pulses will
be utilized to mitigate laser-induced material damages to minimize optical loss
and to achieve desired device performance of lightwave circuits. To fabricate 3D
periodic photonic structures, multi-layer near-field diffractive optical
elements will be developed to produce 3D interference patterns. Periodic
photonic structures such as diamond-like photonic crystals will be fabricated
using this one-optical-element and one-laser-exposure holographic fabrication
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
yield a cross-platform laser manufacturing technique to fabricate high-quality
lightwave circuits in a wide array of optical substrates. The fabrication
technique will enable new 3D photonic circuit architectures that allows
lightwave circuits to be routed vertically and continuously in- and out- of a
plane. This will drastically increase the density, functionality, and complexity
of the optical circuitry. The success of this research will also enable the
fabrication of mid-IR fiber lasers and sensor devices for applications in
chemical sensing and structural health monitoring in harsh environments. The
holographic laser fabrication developed from this award can be conveniently
built into the existing multiple mask fabrication flow for integrated
optoelectronic circuit manufacturing. This enables the monolithic integration of
photonic crystal structures with other on-chip optical components for widespread
applications. This award will also support an interdisciplinary training program
for undergraduate students on the integrated laser manufacturing and product
innovation. Through undergraduate extracurricular activities on robotics and
minority outreach activities, the proposed education programs will attract
female and under-represented minority students to study engineering and science
at both undergraduate and graduate levels.