* 0900692
* Perfecting Monolayer Graphene by Defect Removal Using Novel Thermo-Mechanical Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 07/31/2012
* USD 286,970.00

Recent experiments have demonstrated that graphene, a monolayer of carbon atoms,
exhibits surprisingly high room-temperature electron mobility. Such a remarkable
electronic behavior may well enable ground-breaking advances in nanoelectronics
when silicon-based technologies reach their natural limits imposed by
fundamental physics. However, the control over the quality of graphene remains a
major challenge because even a few atomic defects may markedly degrade the
performance of a graphene device. The research team seeks to develop a novel
thermo-mechanical method for perfecting graphene sheets by effectively removing
defects through an integrated experimental and modeling effort. In particular,
time-accelerated modeling methods will be developed to determine defect
migration barriers and pathways and defect-defect reaction mechanisms under
thermal and mechanical loadings. In parallel, experimental measurements of Raman
topography, electrical transport, and low-temperature magnetotransport of
suspended monolayer graphene devices will be performed before and after thermo-
mechanical treatments, aiming at validating the modeling approaches and
evaluating the effectiveness of the methods.

The novel thermo-mechanical methods developed for perfecting graphene sheets are
expected to lead to major breakthroughs toward realization of the graphene-based
next-generation electronics. The project will also help foster transformative
progress for the analysis and manipulation of defects in graphene as well as
other nano-materials in general. When combined with continuum mechanics
theories, the research results will establish new constitutive equations
relating thermo-mechanical loading with defect mobility, which will be valuable
for improving existing graphene manufacturing processes and for designing future
materials systems beyond graphene. On the educational front, the proposed
research will generate many opportunities at both the college and K-12 levels.
Graduate and undergraduate students at Penn State will benefit greatly from the
multidisciplinary research experience in innovative, integrated experimental
manipulation and computational nano-mechanics. The PIs will actively work with
several organizations at Penn State to involve underrepresented groups including
women and minority students in carrying out proposed research program.