* 0900054
* Low Cost, High Bandwidth, and Non-Intrusive Machining Force Measurement System
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kent Chamberlin, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 05/31/2013
* USD 528,395.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is
to non-intrusively measure cutting forces during milling at sufficient bandwidth
to enable closed-loop control. The research approach consists of extending
finite difference time domain methods to accurately model the strain-induced
changes in resonant response of small inductor-capacitor loop structures to be
mounted directly on the tool. This method will be used to identify the most
strain sensitive structures followed by experimental verification that these
structures can accurately measure cutting forces. When this is accomplished, the
lateral and torsional forces will be dynamically measured during cutting to
monitor cutting efficiency and quality as well as detect tool degradation and/or
failure. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are extending
finite difference time domain methods so that they are applicable to the small
structures present in all high frequency electronics and that it will transform
the process of milling by providing a sensor system for closed-loop control of
machining where none having these capabilities currently exists. Having closed-
loop control will enable the development of smart machine tool architectures
which will have a dramatic impact on the productivity of the milling process
while simultaneously improving the quality of the finished parts. The ultimate
goal is to make this system a standard component in high end machining systems,
thereby transforming the metal removal process in milling.