* 0900058
* Mechano-Chemical Coupling in the Adhesion of Thin Shell Structures: Transitions Between Weakly- and Well- Bonded States
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* John Bassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 12/31/2012
* USD 358,000.00

Mechano-chemical Coupling in the Adhesion of Thin Shell Structures: Transitions
between Weakly- and Well- Bonded States (CMMI ? 0900058) PI: John L. Bassani
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics University of
Pennsylvania, PA 19104

Bonding of thin films and adhesion of biological cells are important topics with
certain common mechanical, chemical, and thermodynamic characteristics that
motivate the proposed research. The overall objective is to understand how the
adhered state between a thin film or shell and a substrate is controlled by
intrinsic physical and chemical properties. For non-conforming bodies, these
states are constrained by kinematical compatibility, force equilibrium, and
chemical equilibrium. Molecular information, for example, the effects of stress
on the kinetics of the bond, will be incorporated into macroscopic models.

Transitions between weakly and strongly adhered states, what are referred to in
the proposal as a snap-in/snap-out phenomena, have broad implications. The
control of snap-in and snap-out adhesive transitions, with and without the
influence of various dissipative mechanisms including the effects of diffusion
and of stress on bonding, offer potential in applications ranging from micro-
electro-mecahnical systems (MEMS), medical treatments, and even data storage.
Snap debonding of wafers due to fabrication defects or due to moisture is a
problem for MEMS technologies. Snap transitions also may be key to the
attachment-detachment mechanism that are present in the natural cycles of white
blood cells. Another exciting application is tissue engineering in which cells
can be aligned by adhering to patterned substrates. One additional example:
there have been many clinical trials for cancer treatment that attempt to
breakdown the adhesion of tumor cells, and perhaps a better understanding of the
mechano-chemistry of adhesion can point the way to other therapeutic advances.