* 0900339
* Drug Safety Risk-Benefit Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* James Benneyan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 362,001.00

Drug Safety Risk-Benefit Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James C.
Benneyan&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical and Industrial Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern
University&lt;br/&gt;Boston,
MA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
provides funding to develop new analytic drug safety models to help evaluate
risk-benefit tradeoffs of pharmaceutical drugs, a large and growing public and
regulatory concern. Three mathematical approaches will be developed and
integrated for evaluating drug safety and risk-benefit tradeoffs, based on
therapeutic ratio fractional programming models, probabilistic and mean-variance
models using moments and distributions of utility-based measures, and
probabilistic frontier models to identify stochastically preferential drugs or
those maximizing mean net benefits with minimal risk uncertainty. An important
and unique focus of this research is that while conventional methods essentially
are population expected-utility based, the developed algorithms will provide
more comprehensive patient-centered information accounting for risk uncertainty.
Each modeling approach will develop solutions to several technical and
mathematical issues prevalent in these types of applications and will be
developed working with clinical and pharmacovigilence colleagues who will
provide project guidance, pilot data, and content area expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
contribute improved methods for evaluating the relative risks versus benefits of
pharmaceutical drugs while, both under development and undergoing regulatory
approval processes. The developed models will be tested on anti-infectives,
anticoagulants, prescription analgesics, and other applications identified
during this work. These models could be used separately or together to help
assess risk-benefit tradeoffs, understand limitations of non-optimal products,
and make approval or development decisions. More broadly, while motivated here
by drug safety problems, the envisioned results potentially also will offer
fundamentally new approaches for evaluating risk-benefit tradeoffs in a wide
range of healthcare and non-medical applications. The proposed work also will
make important methodological contributions to utility theory, data envelopment,
and stochastic frontier analysis
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;