* 0900853
* Collaborative Research: PoW-TER:  Problems of the Week as Teacher Education Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2011
* Chrystal Dean, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2011
* USD 16,241.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) This project is creating a flexible set of
instructional modules for use as supplementary resources in mathematics content
or pedagogy courses taken by future mathematics teachers. The content of the
modules is based on the Math Forum's Problems of the Week (PoW) service that
consists of open-ended, engaging, and relevant problems to which students submit
solutions and explanations over the Internet. This existing collection of
problems, the associated student solutions, and the supplementary resources
represent a rich collection of genuine student work and teacher commentary that
can support faculty in their interactions with pre-service mathematics teachers.
The intellectual merit of this work builds on companion research from the Math
Forums "Online Mentoring Project," which bears out the need for greater
development of teachers' mathematical and pedagogical knowledge for teaching.
The project's broader impacts lie in the flexibility of the materials that are
designed for use in multiple ways within an existing curriculum and courses,
including as in-class activities, as homework assignments, or as stand-alone
online modules that operate in parallel to the other course activities and
assignments. In addition, the extensive use of the Math Forum is well documented
and provides a natural dissemination vehicle for the materials that assists in
the field-testing of the modules. Finally, the project is researching how a
focus on i) the analysis of student thinking and ii) instruction that places
student understanding and problem solving at the core of instructional decision
making, can affect the beliefs and practices of university faculty, and their
school math instructor colleagues.