* 0900979
* Henon Renormalization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Marco Martens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,232.00

The Palis Conjecture describes the behavior of smooth dynamical systems. It
asserts that the chaos observed in typical systems can be successfully described
with probabilistic methods. Only for one-dimensional systems has this conjecture
been proved. The long-term goal of this project is to prove the conjecture for
the Henon family, which consists of two-dimensional systems. The essential part
of a system is concentrated in its attractor. In particular, the probabilistic
behavior of a system is closely related to the microscopic geometric properties
of the attractor. Renormalization is a method to study this microscopic
geometry. A central theme in dynamics is the exploration of renormalization
beyond the theory of one-dimensional systems, where it has been instrumental in
making progress. This project concentrates on the development of a
renormalization theory for Henon maps. Renormalization has already been
successful in improving the understanding of Henon maps that are at transition
to chaos, dissipative maps at the accumulation of period-doubling-type. The
immediate goals of the proposed research are the following: first, to extend the
period-doubling renormalization theory to more general combinatorial types in
the Henon family; second, to refine the theory for the dynamics of Henon maps at
the accumulation of period doubling; and finally, to use the renormalization
results to establish the Palis Conjecture at the accumulation of period
doubling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics is the study of processes. This can mean
processes generated by mechanical systems (e.g., the solar system), but also
chemical, biological, or even sociological processes. An underlying idea is that
the chaos observed in such systems can be understood qualitatively with the aid
of a limited number of mechanisms. One goal of dynamics is to help engineers and
scientists by explaining the mechanisms that are at play in their chaotic
systems. Indeed, dynamics has led to many industrial applications. The processes
dynamics studies are deterministic. Thus, if the positions and speeds of all the
planets in the solar system were known now, dynamical theory could predict with
great precision what those quantities will be next month. The future is, in
principle, determined. Unfortunately, when a system is chaotic it becomes
practically impossible to predict its future precisely. During the last fifty
years it has become clear that, in order to describe deterministic chaos,
science needs probabilistic methods. It has also become clear that chaos is in a
quite real sense "very well organized." This organization is reflected in its
probabilistic behavior. We all have seen the "bell curve" being used in many
applications. It is always the same bell curve, an aspect of the organization
within chaos. The relevant probabilistic laws are the phenomena observed in
chaos. The explanation of these laws is intrinsically related to the microscopic
properties of what scientists know as "attractors," which contain the essential
aspects of the observed behavior of systems. Renormalization is a method to
study this microscopic geometry. The organization of chaos becomes clearly
visible exactly at this microscopic scale. Dynamics is very far from a complete
understanding of chaos, but renormalization has been instrumental in the most
sophisticated theories available at the present time. This project will explore
further applications of renormalization. In particular, it will concentrate on
systems that are related to the creation of chaos, the so-called Henon systems.