* 0900607
* Experimental Study and Theoretical Modeling of High Performance Recycled Aggregate Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Yunping Xi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 05/31/2013
* USD 249,998.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Recycling concrete aggregates from demolished infrastructure is becoming an
important research topic for sustainable development of the construction
industry in the U.S. and the world. To addresses this issue, the objective of
the present research is to identify and design an optimal interface between
recycled aggregate and cement paste that will lead to high-performance recycled
concrete. To achieve this goal, the method will consist of three components. The
first component will identify a surface treatment method for processing recycled
aggregates to match the properties of the resulting recycled concrete with
regular concrete. The second stage will combine theoretical and experimental
studies to quantify the behavior and fracture of the aggregates/cement paste
interfacial zone. Thirdly, these results will be incorporated into a multiscale
computational model in order to relate the microstructure of recycled concrete
to its structural performance and fracture resistance.

In terms of societal benefits, this research will address the increasing problem
of the cost and environmental impact of waste disposal and transportation of
demolished concrete. The ability to use on-site crushed concrete particles as
aggregates will provide a sustainable solution for the construction of low cost,
high performance and ecologically friendly infrastructures. Moreover, this
project provides a unique opportunity for graduate students to study
experimental, analytical and numerical methods for developing high performance
recycled concrete. The students will have an opportunity to apply theoretical
modeling tools in a very important practical engineering problem and have some
insight on the sustainable development of our nation?s infrastructure system.