* 0900368
* High-Strength High-Strain Structures Using Ceramic Cellular Contact-Aided Compliant Mechanisms (C3M)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* James Adair, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 04/30/2013
* USD 628,554.00

High-Strength High-Strain Structures Using Ceramic Cellular Contact-Aided
Compliant Mechanisms (C3M)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular Contact-Aided Compliant
Mechanisms (C3M) are made up of arrays of cells that come into contact with
themselves as the structure deforms. This self-contact provides stress relief.
That is, the structure can be deformed to a greater extent before failure than a
similar cellular structure without contact. In this research project methods for
design and fabrication of high-strength high-strain ceramic C3M will be
developed. Ceramic materials are of interest because of their high strength and
potential high temperature capability. Ceramic C3M are capable of ultimate
strains that are at least an order of magnitude higher than the ultimate strain
of the bulk ceramic material. The fabrication method that will be developed is
based on a novel ceramic fabrication method known as lost mold, rapid
infiltration forming (LM-RIF). This process uses ceramic material comprised of
nanoparticles which provide high strength and excellent feature size resolution.
In addition to the design and fabrication efforts, prototype ceramic C3M devices
will be tested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will benefit society by
creating new and innovative science leading to applications ranging from
morphing aircraft to damage tolerant composite armor. The research and education
will be integrated through outreach to prospective students, particularly those
from underrepresented groups. The results of the research project will be used
to help recruit students from underrepresented groups into engineering by
supporting the activities of the Penn State Women in Engineering Program (WEP).
Specifically, an interactive module for Meet the Machine, the Penn State WEP
summer camp for high school girls, will be developed. This effort is expected to
spark their interest in Engineering, and help to build the pipeline of future
engineers.