* 0900119
* Combining Naturalistic and Mathematical Decision Aids to Support Product Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2014
* Caroline Hayes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2014
* USD 328,330.00

The research objective of this award is to explore new paradigms for aiding
product designers in decision making by combining naturalistic and mathematical
decision approaches. The products and systems on which we depend are becoming
increasingly complex; this is true for everything from telephones and
implantable medical devices to transportation systems. However, the way in which
decision making is typically carried out when designing complex products is
still as much an art as it is a science. Consequently, the resulting products
may not perform as well as they could. Many mathematically based decision
approaches exist which could help to systematize design decision making, such as
multi-criteria weighted sums and statistical methods, for example. However,
designers use such methods less often in daily design work than one might hope,
reporting that they are 'too busy' for such methods. Preliminary studies suggest
that this is because most mathematical decision methods require entry of
information which designers view as irrelevant or impractical to obtain.
Statistical distributions describing likely performance of novel, untested and
incompletely specified devices are an example. Further, they do not meet the
designer's need for flexibility, which is essential for creative exploration of
innovative solutions. This work will explore ways of better aligning
mathematical decision methods with the ways in which designers naturally
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead
to a better understanding of designers' natural approaches to decision making in
product design, and creation of decision aids that combine the benefits of
mathematical decision approaches with the flexible and creative approaches
currently followed by designers. This work will help product designers to be
more effective in designing complex systems, companies to be more responsive to
market demand, and the next generation of designers to be trained in new and
more effective ways of thinking.