* 0900950
* Workshop on Genomic Analysis of Species Extinctions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Webb Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 07/31/2011
* USD 36,000.00

Workshop on Genomic Analysis of Species Extinctions Webb Miller Pennsylvania
State University A workshop at the Pennsylvania State University in early 2009
will assemble 30 experts from a variety of disciplines to plan for using
advanced genome-analysis techniques to understand the genomic changes associated
with species extinctions. The plan will also suggest how genomic methods may be
used to save endangered species. Previously, it took millions of dollars, large
consortia of scientist, and years of effort to sequence and analyze a vertebrate
genome, and the only adequate rationale for such a large expense was a clear
benefit to human health. However, with the current revolution in sequencing
technology, the project to sequence a single human genome has led to sequencing
1000 human genomes, on the way to the promised $1000 genome. These same advances
can be brought to bear on other problems of importance to society, and in
particular, to ameliorate the current wholesale extinction of entire species of
mammals and other vertebrates. A current paper (in the journal Nature, November
2008) reports the genome of the woolly mammoth, which was sequenced and analyzed
by a small group on a low budget. That project shows the feasibility using so-
called next-generation sequencing methods to determine the complete (nuclear)
genome of extinct animals and to chart changes in population diversity that can
accompany decline of a species. A current project is using whole-genome
sequencing of several Tasmanian Devils (a species under extreme threat from a
form of cancer), together with advanced genotyping technology, to help design a
captive breeding program that can maintain a population diversity emphasizing
genomic traits associated with resistance to tumors. The workshop will bring
together (1) museum personnel, (2) conservation and wildlife managers, (3)
experts in genome sequencing, analysis, and genotyping and (4) representative of
public and private funding agencies. The workshop will be preceded by a day of
talks, open to the public, by the workshop attendees; funds have been obtained
from private sources to finance those talks. The next day and a half will be
devoted to a closed workshop, where general discussions and break-out groups
will yield a written plan detailing how advanced and soon-forthcoming genomic
methods can be recruited to help understand, and perhaps even prevent, the
processes behind extinction of species.