* 0900542
* Energy-Efficient, Optoelectronic Smart Window Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Kanti Jain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Current window technologies suffer from various limitations, including:
inability to efficiently reject or accept solar heat when desired, blocking
daylight when only heat blocking is desired, high cost, and nonprogrammability.
This proposal describes a smart window technology that overcomes these
limitations. The new technology is a programmable, pixelated optoelectronic
window system based on polymer blazed diffraction gratings fabricated by
microelectronic processes, providing cost-effective, dynamic windows with high
energy efficiency and recycling capability. In the proposed plan, key
technological elements of the new concept will be developed, a fully functioning
smart window prototype will be demonstrated, and a commercialization plan will
be developed to implement the technology in major applications.

The energy costs for lighting, heating and cooling in commercial and residential
buildings are estimated by the Department of Energy for 2005 at $416 billion, a
figure that is certainly much higher now. Further, annual energy costs
attributable to inefficient windows exceed $50 billion, and those to interior
lighting, $70 billion. Therefore, a smart window technology that can reduce
losses, increase efficiency, and enable recycling of energy resources will make
a major contribution in an enormous commercial market of national importance.
This program will also benefit the educational objectives in science and
engineering at the university level. With its multidisciplinary breadth, the
program will expand opportunities for faculty to collaborate across departments
and with other universities and government laboratories. It will also provide
opportunities for high school students and teachers, such as summer research
jobs, class projects, and short-term research modules.