* 0900004
* GOALI: Control of Cyclic Systems - Theory, Applications, and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Pierre Kabamba, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,998.00

The research objective of this award is the development of a control theory for
cyclic systems and its application and experimental verification. Cyclic systems
contain mechanical devices that rotate, along with actuators and sensors that
are fixed in inertial space. The combination of rotating motion and inertially-
fixed inputs and outputs leads to one-per-revolution (or stroboscopic) actuation
and sensing. The research will result in methods that are applicable to
xerographic processes, drilling and milling machines, and turbomachinery. The
approach of the research is based on so-called circulant matrices, which
describe cyclic systems. Each row of a circulant matrix is a circular
permutation of the previous row. Fundamental properties of circulant matrices
constitute the foundation of the theoretical part of the research; the
experimental part is based on the xerographic process. Deliverables include: (1)
Methods for mathematical modeling of cyclic systems; (2) Methods for
stabilizability, controllability, and observability of cyclic systems; (3)
Methods for designing reference tracking and disturbance rejection controllers
for cyclic systems; (4) Application of the results obtained to the photoreceptor
charging system in xerography to reduce color variation; (5) Experimental
verification of the techniques developed; (6) Documentation of the research
results; (7) Engineering student education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide a methodology for
improving performance of rotating devices using feedback control. Indeed, in
many instances, high performance of rotating devices is achieved using expensive
high quality hardware. Based on the methods to be developed, high performance
will be achieved using inexpensive low quality hardware but with stroboscopic
feedback control. The results of this research will be disseminated to
industrial audiences through short courses. Graduate students involved in this
GOALI project will be exposed to industrial environment at Xerox Research
Center. Efforts will be made to involve under-represented minorities and women
to this project as well as high school students.&lt;br/&gt;