* 0900111
* Probabilistic Fatigue Life Prediction and Risk Assessment of Aging Bridges in Cold Regions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Yongming Liu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 10/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop an innovative life prediction
and risk assessment methodology for aging bridges in cold regions. The detailed
fatigue mechanism modeling, corrosive environmental effects due to deicing
salts, and advanced probabilistic methods will be systematically integrated into
a general framework. Fatigue damage accumulation behavior under general
multiaxial random loading will be considered in this project to represent the
realistic service conditions of bridges. Coupled corrosion damage growth and
fatigue crack growth analysis will be used to investigate the damage interaction
of steel bridges in cold regions. A rigorous uncertainty quantification and
propagation analysis will be performed using random process theory and Bayesian
methodology. Efficient probabilistic methods will be employed to solve the time-
dependent reliability problem of bridges considering mechanical and corrosive
damage accumulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
result in a detailed understanding of multi-physics damage coupling of aging
bridges in cold regions. The developed methodology is general enough and will
not only benefit the bridge analysis, but also benefit other types of
structures, such as automobiles, aircrafts, etc. for their long term durability
evaluation. A systematic multi-level educational plan is proposed to improve the
undergraduate education, graduate research, and student extracurricular
activities. The research methodology, tools, and results will be documented and
used to enhance both undergraduate and graduate curriculum. It is expected that
the success of the proposed study will significantly enhance the design,
analysis and evaluation of steel bridges in cold regions. Students trained in
the proposed project will play important roles in the risk management of aging
bridges as many of them will be civil engineers and government employees in cold
regions after their graduation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;