* 0900179
* Spatial Variability Effects on the Seismic Response of RC Highway Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Aspasia Zerva, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 250,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) The earthquake induced ground motions are not the same at any
two points on the earth?s surface. This occurs because the seismic waves travel
from the earthquake source through different paths with different velocities,
and reach the ground surface through different local site conditions. Often this
spatial variability is ignored in the design of structures. However, for large
spatially distributed structures, this ground motion variability can increase or
decrease the dynamic response, depending on the structural system
characteristics. This study will conduct a comprehensive investigation to
determine what system parameters affect the seismic response of reinforced
concrete bridge structures. The investigation will consist of the following
steps: a careful selection of recorded seismic ground motions pertinent for the
Eastern, Central and Western United States; the generation of spatially variable
accelerations, velocities and displacements at uniform and variable site
conditions based on the recorded data and rigorous models for the spatial
variation of the motions; and the use of the generated input excitations for the
evaluation of the nonlinear response of several representative reinforced
concrete highway bridges. Typical bridge configurations of various lengths from
across the country will be utilized and analyzed using multiple
computer/numerical models and tools so as to reduce the uncertainty in the
numerical modeling of the structures. The project will provide the methodology
and framework for the evaluation of the effect of spatially variable ground
motions on the response of bridges. Based on the research results,
recommendations for incorporating the effect of spatial variability of seismic
motion in the design and retrofit of the bridge structures will be made. The
research will lead to a better understanding of the effects of the spatial
variability of seismic ground motions on the structural response. It will
identify important structural and ground motion parameters for which the spatial
variability in the motion will have strong influence on the structural response.
The bridge design professionals will be better equipped to evaluate the spatial
variability effects and to incorporate them in bridge designs. This will
eventually enhance the safety of the nation?s vital infrastructure. For wider
dissemination of the research results to enhance the broader impacts, the
generated spatially variable seismic ground motions and the numerical models of
the structures developed in this project will be posted on a web site for use by
both other researchers and practicing engineers. The outcomes of the effort will
be directly disseminated to the profession through technical publications and
presentations. The research will also provide advanced training to graduate and
undergraduate students and incorporate active participation by K-12 science
teachers. Underrepresented groups will be recruited in the project using well
established institutional partnerships.