* 0900377
* Fluorescent-Magnetic Nanomanipulators for Cytoskeletal Mechanical Investigations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Jessica Winter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 05/31/2012
* USD 313,433.00

Fluorescent-Magnetic Nanomanipulators for Cytoskeletal Mechanical Investigations

Abstract

The research objective of this award is to develop a new methodology to examine
the role of mechanical force in cell migration. The approach consists of
fluorescent-magnetic nanomanipulators that impart force to the cell?s internal
scaffolding (i.e., the cytoskeleton) through stimulation by custom-designed
magnetic instrumentation. Cell response is observed via the nanomanipulators?
fluorescence property. This research will focus on examining migration of cells
crucial to the wound healing process (i.e., fibroblasts). Fluorescent-magnetic
nanomanipulators will be characterized and optimized to interact with magnetic
instrumentation; proof of concept of nanomanipulator delivery to the cell
interior and manipulation potential will be demonstrated; and the effect of
force applied by nanomanipulators on cell migration will be evaluated in
fibroblasts. Deliverables include optimized nanomanipulators and magnetic
instrumentation, validation of the intracellular force application method,
documentation of research results in the fibroblast model, engineering student
education at the graduate and undergraduate level, and a module based on this
research for public school outreach disseminated by COSI, a local science
museum.

If successful, this research will provide new tools to explore the influence of
mechanical force on protein expression and cellular processes, in particular
those that underlie cell migration. Cell migration is a critical component of
several biological events including wound healing, fetal development, and cancer
metastasis. This research would provide methods to apply force to subcellular
components with the smallest manipulators yet studied (~ 10-50 nm), sizes that
are similar to many of the components of interest (e.g., protein receptor,
cytoskeletal element). Research results will be disseminated through journal
publications, conference presentations, and also, to the general public, through
interactions with an area science museum. Graduate and undergraduate students
will participate in the research, and results will be disseminated through
classroom materials as well.

