* 0900597
* Direct Digital Design and Manufacturing (D3M) from Massive Point-Cloud Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Xiaoping Qian, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 02/28/2015
* USD 181,834.00

The research objective of this award is to develop mathematical foundations,
algorithmic infrastructure, and prototype software that can process massive
point-cloud data directly, accurately and efficiently into suitable geometric
form for product development use. The new approach is based on a moving least-
squares (MLS) formulation that defines a continuous surface directly from a set
of points. The MLS surface has many unique properties, such as projection
procedure, simple implicit form, Cn continuity, and local computing. This
research would lead to a paradigm shift in geometric processing techniques, from
laborious intermediate surface reconstruction with human intervention to
enabling D3M from massive point-cloud data. These new techniques are based on
the MLS surface and include: a) analytical formulae for differential geometric
analysis; b) Morse theory based methods for uncovering its topological
structures; and c) fundamental algorithms enabling point based geometric
computing with guaranteed geometric accuracy and topological robustness.

If successful, this research will result in computational tools enabling D3M
from massive point-cloud data. Specifically, direct, accurate and adaptive
processing would lead to dramatic time reduction in shape modeling in product
design, improved product dimensional accuracy, and shortened product development
cycle. Through industrial collaboration with both sensor vendors and point data
users, this research can unleash the full potential of 3D scanning for a host of
manufacturing industries such as aerospace, automobile, die and mold, mass
customization and biomedical applications. Through its integrated research,
education and outreach activities, this project will provide advanced knowledge
in geometric processing and D3M for students from high schools to graduate
schools and will increase domestic students? interest in science and engineering
and therefore strengthen our competitiveness in the global workforce.