* 0900643
* Development of a Practical Model for Wind- and Rain-Wind-Induced Stay Cable Vibrations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Delong Zuo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,529.00

The objective of this project is to develop a model for wind- and rain-wind-
induced vibrations of stay cables on cable-stayed bridges. The problematic
vibrations under study were first observed thirty years ago and today still
elude full understanding. This research program will conduct wind-tunnel tests
of circular cylinders as sectional models of stay cables. The data so-obtained
will be used to carefully supplement existing field observations of stay cable
vibrations obtained through long-term full-scale measurement. The experimental
results will facilitate identification of the mechanisms that induce the
vibrations and quantification of the core parameters that describe the
phenomenon, on the basis of which a practical model for the vibration will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;When completed, this research will contribute to improving
the safety and performance of transportation infrastructure by enabling
engineers to efficiently design stay cables that are less susceptible to
oscillatory problems as well as to develop effective mitigation devices for
existing cable-stayed bridges. The outcome will also advance the fundamental
understanding of interaction between a flowing fluid and circular cylinders and
therefore impact other structures and systems that use such cylinders as
structural members or components. The project will also provide advanced
educational training to graduate and undergraduate students though their
involvement at various stages of this research.&lt;br/&gt;