* 0900524
* Microlocal analysis in nonlinear PDE and PDE on manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Gigliola Staffilani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 10/31/2010
* USD 156,537.00

This project will explore several related areas of research into the qualitative
properties of solutions to partial differential equations (PDE). The water-wave
problem with surface tension concerns the time evolution of the interface
between two different fluids, which is naturally posed as an initial value PDE.
By formulating the problem in the right fashion, the evolution of the interface
is governed by a quasi-linear dispersive equation weakly coupled to a nonlinear
transport equation. The water-wave projects outlined in this proposal focus on
properties of solutions to this system that follow from the dispersion relation.
Specifically, solutions to the nonlinear water-wave problem with surface tension
are, on average in time, smoother than the initial data. In addition, it will be
interesting to study mixed space-time dispersive properties (Strichartz
estimates), higher-order smoothing properties, and the long-time well-posedness
of the initial value problem. In addition to the water-wave problem, this
project is concerned with spectral properties of the Laplacian on smooth
manifolds: eigenfunction scarring in the compact case, and local smoothing for
solutions to the Schroedinger equation in the noncompact case. The common thread
running through all of these projects is the extensive use of microlocal
analysis, the rough idea of which is to localize solutions of equations in space
and in frequency (to the extent allowed by the uncertainty principle), after
which these solutions are simpler to understand.

Dispersive equations and equations on curved spaces (manifolds) provide a rich
area of interaction between various branches of mathematics as well as between
different sciences. The work on the water-wave problem, a problem coming from
mathematical hydrodynamics, represents a cross-disciplinary collaboration
between pure math, applied math, and physics. The major goal of the project is
to provide mathematical statements of physically intuitive ideas, such as
"surface tension is a regularizing effect." The study of equations on curved
spaces is of interest to geometers, analysts, and number theorists in
mathematics, as well as to theoretical physicists working in quantum chaos and
general relativity.