* 0900070
* Collaborative Research:  Stochastic Multi-scale Optimization for Energy Resource Planning
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Suvrajeet Sen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 245,997.00

The optimal design and control of energy resource portfolios requires solving a
multiperiod stochastic optimization problem that covers both fine-grained and
coarse-grained types of uncertainty over thousands of time periods, extending
decades into the future. We need to plan investments into energy resources such
as wind, solar, natural gas, biomass and nuclear to meet specific energy goals,
capturing both hourly variations in intermittent energy and demand, in addition
to changes in technology, policy and climate. This problem produces a very high-
dimensional stochastic optimization problem with hundreds of thousands of time
periods. We will combine the strengths of approximate dynamic programming (ADP)
and machine learning to handle the fine-grained sources of uncertainty (wind,
solar, demand) with generalized stochastic decomposition (GSD) to handle coarse-
grained uncertainties (changes in technology, policy and climate). Developments
using GSD will make it possible to handle complex intertemporal dependencies in
the evolution of technology and policy. We are investigating new Dirichlet
mixture models and learning rates to enhance the speed and robustness of ADP
algorithms to handle more complex problems.

This research will make it possible to evaluate new energy generation and
storage technologies with far more realism than older models by properly
accounting for uncertainties and producing a more accurate estimate of the
marginal value of different technologies. We will gain a better understanding of
the most important parameters such as responsiveness, storage capacity and
losses. This research will also enhance our ability to develop robust policies
to meet goals such as 20 percent renewable by 2030. A broader methodological
benefit will be the integration of the fields of stochastic programming and
approximate dynamic programming, which have evolved along parallel but separate
paths with distinctly different vocabularies, oriented toward different problem
classes.