* 0900322
* Drop-on-Demand Deposition of Complex Fluids for 3-D Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 06/30/2013
* USD 371,545.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that scaling laws
can describe the physical phenomena governing droplet generation from ultrasonic
actuation of complex fluids. The primary application of ultrasonic droplet
generation and deposition in this project is for the development of a scalable
additive manufacturing technology that allows three-dimensional structures to be
printed from complex fluids, that is, fluids with non-Newtonian behavior or
which have viscosities one to two orders of magnitude higher than that of
typical printable fluids. Materials of interest include polyurethanes,
conductive polymers, and ceramic pastes. As a result of this proposed work, the
acoustics and droplet formation physical phenomena will be identified at
multiple length and time scales. Computational fluid dynamics models will be
developed that capture microscopic details of the ejection process. This
knowledge will be used to create design guidelines for the new ultrasonic
droplet deposition manufacturing technology. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research could benefit society by enabling manufacturing technologies that can
print a wide range of materials for applications ranging from complex, multi-
material thermoplastic parts to photovoltaics, fuel injectors and vaccine
delivery systems. Overcoming the limitations of current printing technologies
will have a transformational effect on the additive manufacturing and
potentially the ink-jet printing industries, since a much wider range of
materials will be printable. Graduate and undergraduate students from under-
represented groups will be recruited for this project. The proposed work will
enhance the infrastructure for research and education by developing and
maintaining facilities for atomization experiments and for part fabrication.
Broad dissemination will be achieved through courses enhanced with research
results, undergraduate research opportunities, active industry involvement,
papers and presentations in engineering forums, and a web-site to report results
and provide access to the developed additive manufacturing system. &lt;br/&gt;