* 0900663
* Collaborative Research: Fiber-Optic Strain Monitoring of Rock Masses in Large Underground Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 145,332.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 8000-ft deep
Homestake Mine in Lead, SD is the proposed site for a Deep Underground Science
and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL). It is being operated today as the Sanford
Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (SUSEL) while it is being
converted to readiness for construction. Although water flooded the mine up to
the 4520-ft depth level, pumps have brought the water level below 4850-ft depth
with plans to continue dewatering down to 8000 feet. In addition, it is
anticipated that large, 50-to-60-meter span chambers will be excavated to house
neutrino detectors. These activities present near-term and long-term
opportunities to address long-standing geoscience and geoengineering questions
about the mechanical and hydrologic response of rock masses at spatial scales
ranging from centimeters to hundreds of meters and temporal scales ranging from
milliseconds to decades. The objectives of this research are to (1) Advance the
understanding of rock deformation over multiple scales of length and time and
(2) Advance the technology of characterizing rock deformation. In addition, we
see this project contributing to testing the hypothesis that critically-stressed
fractures are hydraulically conducting over the range of scales of fractures
found within the former mine. The work will also show how deformation relates to
rock-mass characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Our research effort is a
collaborative partnership among three U.S. universities, the University of
Tokyo, the Japan Atomic Energy Agency, and private companies. The U.S. team will
deploy current state-of-the-art deformation monitoring technologies based on
Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) and Distributed Strain and Temperature (DST) fiber-
optic sensors at SUSEL. The FBG and DST sensors will be installed at the 4100-ft
and 4850-ft levels in rooms and drifts adjacent to planned physics laboratories.
The sensors will provide measurements at the meter scale over a region spanning
several hundred meters. An array of tiltmeters will also be deployed at the
2000-ft, 4100-ft, and 4850-ft depth levels to provide deformation measurements,
which are sensitive to solid-earth tides, over length scales between 10 and 100
meters. Temperature-sensing fiber will be placed in the water in the No. 6 Winze
down to 8000-ft depth, in shorter-length boreholes, and along drift walls to
monitor water inflows. In complementary research the Japanese team will deploy
fiber-optic monitoring arrays at an underground vault in Aburatsubo and deep
underground laboratories in Horonobe and Mizunami. They will also refine FBG
deformation monitoring technology to improve resolution by one to two orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UBroader Impacts: (1) The U.S. research team
will gain international perspective and knowledge. Graduate students from
Wisconsin, South Carolina, and Montana will be trained in multi-institutional,
multidisciplinary research. (2) The training of students and teachers at the
high school and college level in the EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research) states of Montana and South Dakota will be enhanced. (3)
Multidisciplinary connections will accelerate the development of fiber-optic
techniques for structural health monitoring. (4) The prototype fiber-optic
sensor network will provide firsthand operational information about its
capabilities to personnel at SUSEL. The methodology and research data will
contribute to the design, construction, and safe operation of DUSEL. &lt;br/&gt;