* 0900362
* Workshop for Student Introduction to Human Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Henrik Christensen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2009
* USD 24,950.00

This is funding to support a workshop of approximately 30 graduate students and
recent graduates from master's and doctoral programs in diverse communities
(including computer science, engineering, psychology, cognitive science, and
communications), along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take
place on Tuesday, March 10, 2009, immediately preceding the Fourth Annual Human
Robot Interaction Conference (HRI 2009) to be held March 11-13, 2009, in San
Diego, which is sponsored by ACM and cosponsored by IEEE. The theme of HRI 2009
is ?Interacting Naturally with Robots,? which highlights the critical need to
develop human-like communications capabilities as robots become more common in
everyday settings (including the home, office, museums, and shopping
environments), and begin to collaborate with humans to accomplish complex tasks.
This workshop is designed to complement the conference, by providing a forum for
students and recent graduates in the field of HRI to present their current
research before peers and a panel of senior researchers in a setting that is
less formal and more interactive than the main conference, and by providing all
participants with opportunities to talk about the important trends and issues in
the field with a view to encouraging the formation of collaborative
relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries. To these ends, the
workshop will include sessions in a variety of formats. Participants will hear
15-minute presentations on their current research from 9 of the students, with
time allotted for questions and discussion after each talk. A morning breakout
session will divide the participants into 2-4 groups to discuss a focused
question on common research themes posed by the organizers, while an afternoon
breakout session will involve a small group project in which participants must
work together to address some facet of HRI in a given domain/application.
Following a keynote address from a distinguished researcher in the field, a
group presentation session will provide each breakout group with the opportunity
to present a summary to the entire workshop.

Broader Impacts: This workshop will afford a unique opportunity for the best of
the next generation of researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to
and discuss current and relevant topics as they are being studied in several
different research communities (including but nor limited to computer science
and engineering, psychology, robotics, human factors and ergonomics, and human-
computer interaction). This is important for the field, because it has been
recognized that transformative advances in research in this fledgling area can
only come through the melding of cross-disciplinary knowledge and multinational
perspectives. Participants will be encouraged to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development, to form collaborative relationships, and to generate
new research questions to be addressed during the coming year. Workshop
organizers will act aggressively to recruit young researchers from minority and
underrepresented groups in order to assure diversity of the participants across
a variety of dimensions, so that the students' horizons are broadened to the
future benefit of the field.