* 0900318
* Landslide and Debris-flow Induced Static and Dynamic Loads on Protective Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Pedro Arduino, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 439,700.00

This research focuses on advanced modeling of landslide and debris flows with an
emphasis on determining the static and dynamic loads induced on protective
structures arising from such events. The work is based on numerical techniques
utilizing the material point method (MPM) capable of modeling a broad range of
landslide and debris flow phenomena, including transitions between solid and
fluid-like flow behaviors. The objective of the work is to extend the
understanding of loading effects in general pertaining to natural and man made
geomorphological and structural boundary conditions, as present in natural
landscapes, highway systems, and protective structures. This research will
advance knowledge and understanding by shedding new light on landslide and
debris flow-induced loading. The PIs are well-qualified to carry out the work,
having demonstrated expertise in the required aspects of geotechnical
engineering, constitutive modeling, numerical analysis, and computational
modeling in general, and in developing a landslide modeling prototype, in
particular. The proposed work is complementary to current and existing
techniques and approaches, but it is fundamentally orthogonal to existing work
in its conception and scope. The work has been organized, budgeted, and linked
to available facilities and personnel such that the objectives can be achieved
within the proposed time frame.

The research will demonstrate the possibility of a unified modeling framework
capable of tracking the entire sequence of moisture-induced landslides and
debris flow events, starting from an initial stable state, continuing through to
the onset and manifestation of large scale flow, and ending with a return to a
stable configuration, all while allowing the observation and quantification of
key engineering phenomena and effects. These kinds of capabilities can
dramatically impact how infrastructure can be designed for such events in
regards to both prevention and mitigation measures. This research will have
broader impact on several fronts: (1) improved analysis capabilities can help
mitigate the economic and social costs associated with infrastructure protection
against landslides and debris-flows, which cause hundreds of billions of dollars
of damage annually in the US alone; (2) enhanced modeling capabilities for
geotechnical and related engineering applications will help extend the
computational infrastructure available to engineers, researchers, and students;
(3) visualization capabilities and materials specifically designed for
educational use will broaden the contexts in which landslides and debris-flow
related phenomena can be studied and understood, both at the undergraduate and
graduate level. We also will leverage the capabilities of the Engineering
Advising & Diversity Center in the College of Engineering at the University of
Washington, to involve undergraduates from diverse backgrounds into this
research project.