* 0900238
* Hydrophobicity Switching on Nanoscale and its Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Sergei Smirnov, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces is to develop and evaluate unique
properties of a new class of hybrid nanomaterials and to study hydrophobicity
switching process in nanoporous materials. Hydrophobicity is a fundamental
property that is responsible for numerous physical and biophysical behaviors of
nonpolar substances in water. This water-induced effective attraction between
nonpolar molecules is called the hydrophobic interaction. The interplay between
hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties is due to conformational changes in
biologically important molecules and is responsible for many of their
biochemical functionality, such as stability and penetration of bilipid cell
membranes, protein folding and misfolding, DNA-protein interaction and many
other related phenomena. This project will study the hydrophobicity switching in
response to various physical and chemical stimuli for possible regulation of
molecule and ion transport through lipid bilayers or cell membranes. A systemic
study of hydrophobic switching will be carried out to understand the release of
intracellular release of molecules including drugs in response to their high
concentrations using two types of nanopores, namely, hydrophobic nanoporous
membranes and hydrophobic nanotubes. In addition, the proposed model for a new
drug delivery mechanism will be evaluated that could avoids endocytosis and thus
avoiding many side effects during intracellular drug delivery.

The proposed project is expected to develop an understanding of how to control
hydrophobicity and transport of molecules and ions through hydrophobic
nanopores, and this knowledge base is critical in the development of novel drug
delivery systems. The use of hybrid nanomaterials and bio-inspired approaches in
these applications offers the possibility of innovative solutions that are not
only versatile, but also cost effective, robust and environmentally benign. The
New Mexico State University at Las Cruces is a Hispanic-serving institution, and
the PI plans to continue recruiting, teaching and training students (graduate,
undergraduate and high school), especially underrepresented minority students
including women and Hispanic students. In addition, web-based education,
recruiting and training students for Chemical Olympics and Chemical Education
are some of the other planned outreach activities.