* 0900226
* New Approaches to Protecting Transportation Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Sheldon Jacobson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2013
* USD 343,882.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This grant provides funds to explore new transportation security system
paradigms that are proactive and meet the needs of our national transportation
infrastructure. Methodologies from control theory and Markov decision process
models and algorithms will be explored to create a new generation of security
systems that are risk-based and multi-level, and hence, economically and
operationally viable, robust, and sustainable. Given that terrorists remain
enamored with the drama of disrupting and inflicting damage on our commercial
aviation system, aviation security is the primary domain of application for such
systems. The requirement to create robust and sustainable transportation
infrastructure security systems suggests designs that exploit real-time, up-to-
the-minute security information, which makes control theory and Markov decision
process models ideally suited to exploit and manage the uncertainty and dynamics
inherent in such systems. Feedback mechanisms in control theory models also
provide a structure to design and analyze novel, systematic approaches to
optimally exploit both existing and future security technology capabilities and
information sources.

The results of this research will provide a systematic approach to compare and
evaluate different types of risk-based, multi-level transportation security
system designs and operations that incorporate both new and existing security
technologies. This approach also has the potential to be used to design and
implement new transportation security systems capable of enhancing the level of
security attainable given the security resources and technologies that are
currently available or may be available in the next twenty years. The results of
this research may also be used to quantify the value of new investments in
different types of transportation security technologies, to determine, for
example, their potential impact on enhancing aviation security at airports
within the nation. Lastly, this research will provide insights into the
development of next generation transportation security system paradigm
performance specifications that will push forward the boundary of achievable
levels of security, given existing and forecasted budgetary constraints.