* 0900197
* RUI: Excitation of Macro and Micro Cantilevers Using Ultrasound Radiation Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Thomas Huber, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 03/31/2014
* USD 219,943.00

The goal of this faculty-student project is a comprehensive study of excitation
of vibrational modes of macro and micro cantilevers using the ultrasound
radiation force. The ultrasound radiation force excitation method is a non-
contact technique that relies on the interference between two or more ultrasound
frequencies incident on an object. This interference produces a radiation force
at the difference frequency, which can induce vibrations in the object. The
ultrasound radiation force will be used to vibrate cantilevers spanning over two
orders of magnitude in size and with resonance frequencies from less than 100 Hz
to over 200 kHz. Of particular interest will be the study of a method whereby a
pair of ultrasound transducers can selectively excite different vibrational
modes, depending on whether the transducers are driven with the same phase or
differing phases. A computational model of the ultrasound excitation process
will be developed, both to better understand the underlying excitation
mechanism, and also to facilitate future research. This project will result in a
more fundamental understanding of the capabilities of ultrasound radiation force
for noncontact excitation of macro and microcantilevers and similar
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact, because of
the important role that the vibration of microcantilevers plays in an ever
increasing number of applications. By monitoring changes in the vibrational
state of a microcantilever, it is possible to detect the minute change in mass
when single cells, viruses or certain molecules attach to the microcantilever.
Similarly, in the realm of materials science, researchers routinely use atomic
force microscopy to study surfaces. These important techniques may benefit from
the noncontact nature of the ultrasound radiation force. The capability of
selective excitation of microcantilevers may enhance the sensitivity of these
techniques as compared with conventional excitation
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate students involved in this
project will get the extraordinary opportunity to perform cutting-edge on-campus
research and also collaborate with well-known research groups at other
institutions. The students will gain experience in a wide range of fields,
including acoustics, optics, computer-controlled data acquisition, signal
processing, modal analysis and computer modeling; this is valuable training for
careers in either physics or engineering. They will also develop demonstrations
to better communicate this research area to the public and to enhance Gustavus'
well-established K-12 outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;