* 0900907
* W-algebras and algebraic group actions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Pavel Etingof, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 09/30/2013
* USD 137,751.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project proposes research on two subjects: 1) Representation theory of
W-algebras, 2) uniqueness properties for algebraic group actions. W-algebras (of
finite type) are certain finitely generated associative algebras associated with
nilpotent elements in semisimple Lie algebras. They originate from the work of
B. Kostant of late 70's. In 90's they were studied by physicists. Starting from
2000 they attracted lot of attention of specialists in Representation Theory:
Brundan, Ginzburg, Kleshchev, Premet, and others. In two recent years the
investigator discovered a completely new approach to W-algebras based on
Deformation quantization. This new approach allowed to him to prove many
conjectures on W-algebras (mostly due to Premet) and, in particular, obtain the
classification of their irreducible finite dimensional modules. The investigator
plans to continue the study of representations of W-algebras and their
q-deformations. In particular, he plans to prove a conjecture of Brundan-
Goodwin- Kleshchev on the structure of the category O of W-algebras. Algebraic
transformation group theory is a classical topic of algebraic geometry and group
theory. One of major developments in algebraic transformation groups in recent
25 years is the theory of spherical varieties developed by Brion, Knop, Luna,
Panyushev, Vinberg, Vust, and others. Spherical varieties are a particularly
nice class of varieties equipped with a reductive group action. When the group
is a torus, spherical is the same as toric. One of the nice features of
spherical varieties is that their classification may be obtained in entirely
combinatorial terms. In the recent few years the investigator obtained certain
uniqueness properties of spherical varieties in terms of their combinatorial
invariants proving conjectures due to Brion, Knop and Luna. The investigator
plans to generalize these results to arbitrary varieties equipped with an action
of a reductive group. In particular, he plans to prove that a smooth affine
G-variety is uniquely determined by its algebra of U-invariants.

This research projects deals with different kinds of symmetries arising both in
pure mathematics and in physics. For instance, W-algebras are certain algebraic
structures appeared in pure algebraic studies of Kostant in late 70's. Since
then they found a number of applications in representation theory. On the other
hand they are a manifestation of the notion of W-symmetry from Conformal field
theory extensively studied by physicists. So the investigator's research project
will contribute to pure mathematics and may have some applications to physics.
The second part of this research project deals with a more classical notion of
symmetries coming from geometry.