* 0900113
* Less Conservative Criteria for Analysis and Synthesis of Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George Chiu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 249,900.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research objective of this award is to build tools for
analysis and synthesis of nonlinear systems with particular emphasis on Atomic
Force Microscopy. Existing methodologies are conservative and often the desired
performance cannot be achieved even if the potential to obtain the performance
is present. The main concept on which the research is based is as follows. Often
the nonlinear system is desired to have a certain nominal behavior and near the
desired nominal behavior the system typically admits a precise characterization.
However, there are external agents that cause the system to deviate from the
nominal behavior and this might cause the required nonlinearity description to
be complex. One of the main concepts utilized in the proposed research is to
first manage the system behavior when the system is away from the desired
operating condition. Once it is determinable that the system can recover from
such excursions from the nominal condition, a less conservative characterization
of the nonlinearity with its domain restricted to a smaller region is employed.
This two stage approach has large potential to improve the performance of
nonlinear systems. A framework to methodically exploit the above strategy for
obtaining less conservative tools for absolute stability, domains of attraction
and for addressing influence of external inputs will be developed Framework
developed will be applied to Atomic Force Microscopy. The research deliverables
include new theoretical tools for nonlinear system analysis and synthesis, new
ways of AFM based imaging, engineering student education at the undergraduate
and graduate levels and transfer of knowhow to the AFM related industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, a new body of control theoretic work will
be produced. The innovative contributions of this research will directly impact
most aspects of AFM, as the proposed methods apply to most of the existing
setups. The PI has strong collaboration with AFM related industry. The transfer
of knowhow from the PIs academic institution and the AFM industry will make the
US industry more competitive. The research will lead to graduate and
undergraduate students who will obtain better insights into nonlinear systems
with the intuition gained from AFM dynamics.