* 0900170
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Understanding and Controlling Variation Propagation in Periodic Structures: From Geometry to Dynamic Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Xiaoping Qian, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 143,327.00

The objective of this collaborative research is to understand and control the
variation propagation between product geometry and its dynamic response in
periodic structures. Manufacturing processes are inherently imprecise, producing
products that vary in geometry. The geometry variation detrimentally impacts not
only the fitness of the final assembly, but also in many cases the
functionalities of the final product. In this research, we will model and
analyze the variation propagation in periodic structure from the manufactured
part geometry to its dynamic response and then to provide guidelines on
mitigating the undesirable dynamic response via controlling the mean and
variation of part geometry. The proposed methodology includes variation
propagation analysis in two directions: (i) In the forward prediction, the
geometry variation of the manufactured products is characterized based on dense
measurements, and then the probabilistic distributions of the dynamic responses
are computed. (ii) In the backward analysis, using the abnormal dynamic response
as input, a group of local geometric features that, upon modification, can
mitigate the undesirable dynamic response are identified. If successful, this
research will positively impact a variety of periodic structural products,
including bladed-disks in aero-engines and power generation equipment, cutting
tools in high speed machining, and space antenna, etc. Through the collaboration
with General Electric, this research will directly benefit a host of industries
such as aerospace, automotive and manufacturing industries where these periodic
structures are used. Through its integrated research, education and outreach
activities, this project will provide advanced knowledge in variation
propagation and reduction for students from high schools to graduate schools and
will enhance domestic students? interest in science and engineering and
therefore strengthen our competitiveness in the global workforce.