* 0900901
* Quantum Limits to Timing Jitter in Femtosecond Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* James Fujimoto, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to explore the fundamental limits for timing jitter in femtosecond
(fs) lasers and develop a new technology for optical clock and microwave
generation using compact diode-pumped Cr:Colquiriite lasers producing 10-100 fs
pulses with ultralow timing jitter approaching the quantum limit. The proposed
research builds upon our recent achievements in diode-pumped Cr:Colquiriite
lasers and attosecond timing jitter detection and control. The proposed program
consists of the following aims: 1. Modelling timing jitter in mode-locked lasers
operating in the soliton pulse shaping regime. 2. Attosecond timing jitter
characterization using balanced nonlinear optical cross correlation. 3.
Extraction of low noise microwave signals and its characterization. 4.
Development of Cr:Colquiriite lasers with repetition rates ranging from 100 MHz
to 20 GHz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will
make important contributions to the fundamental understanding of fs lasers and
develop new methods to achieve ultrahigh stability microwave generation. These
studies represent a critical step toward developing the next generation of
ultrahigh speed signal processing techniques integrating optics and electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Low-cost, high-power, compact and portable
fs lasers are critical for many scientific and technological applications. The
ultralow timing jitter which can be achieve using optical pulse trains from
modelocked lasers makes them very attractive for applications such as fs
precision timing distribution and synchronization of large scale accelerator
facilities, low phase noise microwave generation, arbitrary waveform generation,
high-speed, high-resolution optical sampling and analog-to-digital conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;