* 0900968
* Studies in Noncommutative Geometry and Index Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Alexander Gorokhovsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,605.00

Gorokhovsky

This project is concerned with applications of noncommutative geometry to
problems in geometry and analysis. The main emphasis is on the index problems
and related question solutions of which require extensive use of tools of cyclic
cohomology and K-theory. Such problems arise naturally in the study of the index
theory for foliations. Another important aspect of this work is the application
of the formal deformation techniques. This requires further development of the
theory of formal deformations.

The proposed research belongs to the area of noncommutative geometry. The
starting point of the noncommutative geometry is the appearance in physics and
mathematics of the objects which, while having clearly geometric nature, can not
be adequately described by the means of the classical geometry. Noncommutative
geometry is based on the fundamental observation of A. Connes that for an
extraordinarily wide class of such nonstandard spaces, one can naturally
associate an algebra that fails to be commutative, but behaves well in every
other respect. In noncommutative geometry such an algebra, called a
noncommutative space, is the central object of study. The present project is
concerned with applications of the powerful techniques developed within the
noncommutative geometry to the study of the classical spaces.

