* 0900996
* Algebraic structures arising in physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Victor Kac, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 06/30/2013
* USD 347,791.00

This proposal is concentrated around the following five interrelated topics. The
first topic is on rational W-algebras and modular invariant representations.
Quantum Hamiltonian reduction has been developed as a powerful tool for solving
many open problems coming from physics and representation theory. The next goal
is classification of rational W-algebras, which should play an important role in
Conformal field theory. The basic idea is to utilize modular invariant
representations of affine Lie algebras. The second topic is on four fundamental
algebra structures. This is a general framework, which unites in one picture
Poisson algebras, associative algebras, Poisson vertex algebras and vertex
algebras, that underline classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, classical field
theory, and the simplest quantum field theory, respectively. The third topic is
on classification of freely generated simple vertex and Poisson vertex algebras.
A conjecture on classification of freely and finitely generated vertex algebras
and Poisson vertex algebras is discussed. The "infinite" problem is reduced to a
finite, but "non-linear'" problem. A computer search for the latter has
confirmed the conjecture. The fourth topic is on Poisson vertex algebras and
infinite-dimensional integrable Hamiltonian systems. Poisson vertex algebras is
the most adequate language for the theory of Hamiltonian PDE. This point of view
leads to further development of the integrability theory of evolutionary
equations. The last topic is on Lie conformal algebra cohomology and calculus of
variations. The goal is to study the relation of the classical variational
complex to the cohomology theory of Lie conformal algebras. This connection
should lead to further development of both theories.

It is expected that this proposal will have a significant unifying impact upon
several branches of mathematics and, possibly, upon theoretical physics. For
example, the development of the theory of classical and quantum W-algebras
should lead to further progress in the theory of classical and quantum
integrable systems. The theory of four fundamental algebraic structures should
lead to deeper understanding of connections between representation theory,
topology and soliton theory on the one hand and the four fundamental frameworks
of physics theories on the other hand. The theory of Poisson vertex algebras
should lead to further development of the theory of integrable systems, such as
the KdV hierarchy and the non-linear Schr√∂dinger hierarchy. The cohomology
theory of Lie conformal algebras should lead to a better understanding of the
variational calculus, a theory that goes back to the works of Euler and
Lagrange.