* 0900007
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Finite Strain and High Strain-Rate Electromagnetic Loading Processes in Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Nicolas Triantafyllidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 04/30/2014
* USD 275,000.00

FUNDAMENTAL EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF FINITE STRAIN, HIGH-
STRAIN RATE ELECTROMAGNETIC LOADING PROCESSES IN DUCTILE
METALS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction between electromagnetic and mechanical
fields in electrically conducting materials generates high forces and large
temperatures, and enables important practical applications, such as the
Electromagnetic Forming (EMF) method for shaping sheet metals at high-velocity.
The complex nature of the coupled electromagnetic and thermo-mechanical
phenomena that occur during these rapid processes, have not been the object of a
systematic study from the mechanics standpoint. The goal of the proposed work is
a systematic investigation of electromagnetic loading phenomena, which is
expected to help: a) characterize, using fundamental experiments, the
constitutive response of structural metals under EMF conditions and: b)
establish the modeling capability required for such processes, and validate with
experiments in which full field strain measurements will be performed in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will enable a useful new
technology, since the EMF process has the advantage of being a rapid, low-waste
and environmentally friendly process for manufacturing parts out of alloys that
are difficult to shape through conventional means. Recent advances in
electronics and energy storage technology make EMF technology ripe for mass
production, and plans are well under way for the large scale manufacturing of
fuel cell plates and tubular frames for the automotive industry. The fundamental
understanding of this process will significantly push the use of EMF towards
large-scale applications through links that have been established with
interested industry to facilitate such transition. Furthermore, education and
training of a diverse group of graduate students is an integral part of this
proposal. &lt;br/&gt;