* 0900662
* Effects of Environmental Cues and Informal and Official Warnings on Protective Action Decision Making: A Case Study for Earthquakes and Tsunamis in the Indian Ocean
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Sorensen, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 279,954.00

The objective of this research study is to translate the results of an earlier
Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award (BCS-0522301, HSD SGER:
Factors Affecting Behavioral Response to Natural Warning Signs of Tsunami: the
Case Study of the December 26, 2004 Earthquake) to a robust longitudinal study
to provide greater insight into people?s social-cognitive processing of
information related to environmental cues and warnings and corresponding
protective action behavior. Very few social science studies had investigated
human response to tsunamis? environmental cues and informal and official
warnings before the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, but the largest
and most comprehensive study was conducted in Thailand in the months afterward
by NSF SGER award BCS-0522301. The SGER showed that the high death toll from the
2004 tsunami was not due to a lack of warning, but to people?s inability to
accurately interpret and act on information that was available to them before
the tsunami impacted the shore. The information included diverse environmental
cues and informal warnings at differing time scales. For example, the SGER
showed that environmental cues and informal warnings provided enough forewarning
for most people to survive in 2004, as some 74 percent of tsunami survivors in
Thailand noticed the shoreline recession or unusual waves and currents up to
15minutes before the first wave crest hit the shore. However, these cues did NOT
trigger appropriate behavior, as 65 percent saw many people in the danger zone,
watching the sea, when the first crest arrived! Similar behavior was recorded in
nearly every tsunami-affected country. This project will study the current
situation in Thailand and aspects of the 2004 and 2005 events there. First, the
SGER respondents (N=663) will be re-interviewed to test whether the Protective
Action Decision Model (PADM; Lindell and Perry, 2004) can predict response to
environmental cues and warnings in 2010. A separate but parallel study focuses
on understanding aspects of disaster memory in this population. The goal is to
improve fundamental understanding of the links between environmental cues and
warnings and response and to develop improved predictive models and educational
materials.

No behavioral model has been tested for tsunamis but the SGER data provide the
best starting point. The PADM has proven successful in predicting response to
other hazards in the US, but is untested elsewhere. Demonstrating the utility of
the PADM, developed for a Western society, in an Eastern (Asian) society would
add greatly to its utility. Likewise, understanding the occurrence, order and
timing of environmental cues, warnings and response in diverse settings during
2004 and how memory of the event has changed will help identify root causes of
many deaths across space and time as the 2004 disaster unfolded. This is
important because tsunamis will continue to threaten both residents and visitors
in swelling coastal populations worldwide. Through improved understanding of how
society interfaced with the 2004 disaster and recalls memory of it now (five
years later), real change can be created in how and what information should be
communicated. Moreover, these methods can be replicated for other hazards. This
research is critical to help build coastal community resilience to tsunamis in
the US and elsewhere and it addresses the fact that an effective tsunami warning
system must reflect the social dynamics associated with environmental cues and
informal warnings in addition to official warnings. Findings will be widely
disseminated through print publications, the Web and used to frame effective
education programs preparing communities for future tsunamis.