* 0900919
* Spectroscopy of Positronium Molecules and Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 610,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positronium, with the chemical symbol
Ps, is a very light form of hydrogen atom consisting only of an electron bound
to an anti-electron or positron. Being composed of equal amounts of matter and
antimatter, the Ps atom lives for only a fraction of a microsecond before
annihilating into gamma rays. Nevertheless, its ephemeral existence is long
enough for us to learn important things about metrology, chemistry, and the
collective properties of matter. Scientists at the University of California,
Riverside (UCR) have recently found that dense collections containing millions
of Ps atoms can make di-positronium molecules Ps2 in analogy with the well known
hydrogen molecules H2. In the period of this award, the team of UCR scientists
and their students will measure the properties of the newly discovered molecules
and will assemble and study the first Bose-Einstein condensates formed from a
dense gas of Ps atoms. These topics are of compelling interest because they
represent new species of antimatter that should exhibit fascinating quantum
properties that will be measured via laser spectroscopy. The light mass of
positronium means that Bose-Einstein condensation can occur at near room
temperature compared to the usual extremely low temperatures of ordinary matter
atom traps. Because the positronium atom is fully described in terms of pure
quantum electrodynamics theory, precision measurements on the positronium energy
levels in the Bose-Einstein condensed state can be directly related to the
fundamental constants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the long term, positron source
developments associated with this work will have direct benefits to industry for
materials characterization, to medicine for developments in positron emission
tomography (PET), and possibly to defense. Achieving a Bose-Einstein condensate
of positronium is one of the prerequisites for making an annihilation gamma ray
laser which could have significant technological and military applications that
would promote the security of the United States, particularly if energies
greater than 1 MJ eventually become feasible. The experiments are opening up
interdisciplinary aspects of the research, leading to partnering with a variety
of institutions and enhancing the educational program at UCR. The fabrication of
elaborate microstructures for containing Ps atoms requires applications of
silicon technologies such as electron beam lithography. Precision measurements
require collaborations with The Time and Frequency Division at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology. Further developments of positron
technologies are being done in collaboration with scientists from a small
business, First Point Scientific Inc., providing a chance for students to learn
about the small business side of scientific research. The project will address
the problem of attracting underrepresented minorities and women to science using
the intriguing concept of antimatter to help attract students from a wide
background to the pipeline of scientific inquiry. The research will be published
in high impact journals via the web to insure the wide dissemination of the
results and its availability to a large audience.&lt;br/&gt;