* 0900101
* Multiscale Structure-Function Relationships of Collagen in the Marine Cyanobacterium Trichodesmium erythraeum
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Frederick Silver, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 09/30/2013
* USD 403,148.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is
to measure and model the forces and nanoscale structure-function relationship of
a recently discovered collagen gene within the ultra-colony forming marine
cyanobacteria, Trichodesmium erythraeum. Over the course of this three-year
project the investigators and their students will test the hypothesis that the
expression of the collagen gene found in serves a unique mechanical role in
maintaining colony integrity in this photosynthetic, nitrogen-fixing neurotoxin-
producing organism. The hypothesis will be tested with static and dynamic cell
culture, protein isolation and purification, a collagen gene knock-out model,
atomic force microscopy imaging, and transmission electron microscopy of
fibrillogenesis experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If we are able to establish
the hypothesized mechanical role that collagen serves in this organism, we will
not only gain valuable insights into the nanoscale mechanics of cell colonies,
but also into cyanobacteria ecology. The presence of this collagen within T
erythraeum may represent an interdomain gene transfer event that occurred during
the Devonian or Silurian period from a multicellular organism such as a
vertebrate (Layton et al., 2008 J Molecular Evolution 66 539-554), into an
ancestor of modern marine bacteria, endowing a prokaryote with the ability to
gain access to additional food sources via neurotoxin concentration and gill-
clogging mechanisms. The specific collagen gene found in this organism also has
potential applications for the tissue engineering, such as an alternative to
Matrigel, programmed collagen expression, or accelerated wound healing. Outreach
to the local K12 community through a 2-week NSF-RET-style teachers program to be
held during the summer quarter at Drexel University will give teachers from
local high schools with the greatest need, enhanced access to the important
recent scientific discoveries in cell and protein mechanics, evolution and
nanotechnology.