* 0900960
* Switching Dynamics and Control of Complementarity Systems: a Hybrid System Perspective
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jinglai Shen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 119,590.00

Objective: The objective of this program is to investigate dynamics and control
issues of complementarity systems from a hybrid system perspective with
applications to engineering and biological systems. Various physical, biological
and economic systems are subject to inequality constraints that are
complementary to each other, i.e., at least one of a pair of inequalities holds
with equality. Such dynamical systems, called complementarity systems,
constitute an important class of hybrid and switching systems in applications.
Complementarity approaches, along with system and control techniques, will be
exploited to address critical dynamic analysis and control design
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit lies
in three aspects:&lt;br/&gt;(1) characterization of local switching dynamics of
complementarity systems; (2) long-time switching dynamic analysis and control of
piecewise smooth systems; (3) applications to contact mechanical systems,
systems biology, safety verification, and dynamical optimization. The analytic
results to be developed in this program will lay down a rigorous foundation for
computation, analysis and design of a broad class of applied nonsmooth systems.
The obtained control analysis and feedback design algorithms will be applied to
emerging practical systems in robotics, biology, and electronics, and will
facilitate analysis and design of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The broader impacts are: (1) This program is interdisciplinary and
potentially transformative due to the fundamental nature of the focused research
topics and their diverse applications, such as robotics, biomedical systems, and
systems biology. (2) The proposed research will be closely integrated with
educational and outreach activities, including development of graduate
curriculum on nonsmooth systems, active involvement with high-school students
for engineering education, undergraduates'&lt;br/&gt;research mentoring, and
advising graduate students on research and career development through a local
SIAM student chapter.