* 0900556
* International Research Fellowship Program: The Impact of Adaptive Strategies of Below Ground Water and Biogeochemical Cycling and Their Thermody Namic Implications
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Darren Drewry, Drewry                  Darren         T
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 111,182.00

0900556&lt;br/&gt;Drewry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellowship Program
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of
research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,
and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an eighteen-
month research fellowship by Dr. Darren T. Drewry to work with Dr. Axel Kleidon
at Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry in Jena,
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Belowground processes play a critical role in
hydrologic and carbon cycling on land. Root systems of vegetation have been
shown to extend tens of meters into the soil to forage for moisture and
nutrients that control plant growth and energy exchange with the atmosphere. The
observed passive redistribution of moisture between dry and wet soil layers by
root systems may provide an adaptive advantage under water-limited conditions.
Tightly coupled to root function are biogeochemical processes, particularly
microbial transformations of carbon and nitrogen from organic litter to
inorganic minerals that are necessary for a variety of plant functions including
photosynthesis. Vegetation modification of below-ground biogeochemical function
can thus impact the long-term fitness and competitive advantage of the
vegetation itself. Motivated by the need to enhance the predictive capabilities
of state-of-the-art Earth-system models, several key ecohydrological and
biogeochemical processes that govern ecosystem function and evolution are being
incorporated into an existing dynamic global vegetation model. The vegetation
model is capable of accounting for diversity in vegetation form and function
within a simulation pixel. This allows for hypotheses centered on the role of
root processes and their interactions with biogeochemical cycles on global
vegetation dynamics and biodiversity to be tested over decadal or century
timescales. Through coupling to a general circulation model, which simulates the
global atmospheric flow and composition, an analysis of the sensitivity of
atmospheric circulation patterns, and key variables such as the temporal and
spatial distribution of precipitation, can be performed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research conducted here has broad implications for
fundamental questions about how vegetated land surfaces modulate the global
hydrological and biogeochemical cycles, and hence global climate. This work will
have practical implications for understanding the impacts of anthropogenic and
natural landscape modification on global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;