* 0900806
* Control-Theoretic Approaches to Communication-Efficient, Distributed Convex Optimization over Wireless Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Choon Yik Tang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2014
* USD 229,715.00

The objective of this research award is to develop efficient, robust, and
scalable distributed algorithms, which allow agents in a mobile ad hoc or sensor
network to collaboratively and asynchronously solve convex and separable
constrained optimization problems over the network. The approach is based on a
blend of tools and ideas from control theory, optimization theory, and wireless
networking, bringing together notions of feedback iteration control, Lyapunov
stability concepts, networked dynamical systems, Lagrange multiplier methods,
and protocol design techniques. The problems to be addressed include general
convex program and its two important special cases, linear and quadratic
programs. The models to be studied include models with static and dynamic
problem data, agent memberships, and network topologies. The deliverables
include a collection of distributed algorithms, theoretical analysis of their
behaviors, computer simulation of their performances, documentation of the
research outcomes, and integration of the research with high school,
undergraduate, and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will enhance the capability and functionality of mobile
ad hoc and wireless sensor networks, enabling agents to cooperatively accomplish
sophisticated tasks that require fusion of information, decentralized decision
making, and coordination of actions. These will, in turn, broaden the scientific
and engineering applications of such networks. The results will also make
contributions to control theory by creating a new paradigm in control of multi-
agent systems, namely, Lyapunov-based feedback control of when to communicate
and compute, so that agents can achieve optimized global behavior quickly
through minimal local interactions. Integration of the research with education
will benefit high school students via outreach activities and robotics
competition mentorship, undergraduate students via classroom instruction and an
NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates grant, and graduate students via
research supervision and offering of a new graduate course.&lt;br/&gt;