* 0900582
* Microfluidic Fabrication of Self-Healing Microfibers  for Composite Construction Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Zhanping You, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 298,921.00

The research objective of this project is to fabricate self-healing microfibers
and investigate the impact of their shape and size on their self-healing
performance. These microfibers will be embedded into construction material
(e.g., asphalt in the proposed project) to form a self-healing composite. When
this composite develops a crack, the microfibers will be ruptured to release
healing agents that can automatically restore the integrity and toughness of the
composite. Novel microfluidic devices will be developed to form and solidify
microfibers with healing agents encapsulated in them. The proposed self-healing
microfibers are expected to outperform existing spherical microcapsules even
when used in lower concentrations. The research project will provide a
fabrication platform with unique controllability and flexibility. Therefore, it
will enable the researchers to investigate how the shape and size of the
microfibers affect their self-healing performance by employing the proposed
micromechanical modeling and experimental techniques. As a result, a guideline
will be provided for the design and implementation of future self-healing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will
contribute to the nation?s goal of employing more durable construction material
so as to provide safer and more sustainable transportation infrastructure
systems. The proposed research holds the promise to benefit engineering
structures ranging from microelectronic devices to spacecraft, bridges, and
other large infrastructures. It can potentially contribute to the
commercialization and broad applications of self-healing materials by improving
performance and reducing costs. Research results will be widely disseminated
through publications to inspire further investigation and stimulate future
interdisciplinary collaboration on self-healing materials. Education and
outreach activities, such as undergraduate enterprise and summer youth programs,
are also planned for a diverse group of students, including minority and female
students. &lt;br/&gt;