* 0900462
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Research on Titanium Drilling with Rotary Ultrasonic Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Jiangang Sun, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2015
* USD 335,363.00

This collaborative research award supports fundamental research on rotary
ultrasonic machining of titanium and its alloys in order to develop an
innovative and cost-effective titanium drilling process for the nation's
aerospace industry. Specifically, the research will develop a physics-based
predictive model for cutting forces in drilling titanium with rotary ultrasonic
machining and conduct experiments to verify the model, test the hypothesis that
coolant-flow direction is the determining factor for surface roughness in
titanium rotary ultrasonic machining, evaluate the feasibility of using cold air
as a coolant to replace cutting fluids in titanium rotary ultrasonic machining,
establish the relationship between the dominating tool-wear mechanism and
machining conditions, measure the cutting temperatures, and quantify the damage
to machined titanium parts caused by rotary ultrasonic machining and twist
drilling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will provide knowledge and
understanding to meet the critical need to develop more cost-effective titanium
drilling processes for the nation's aerospace industry. A globally competitive
aerospace industry will contribute to the nation's economy, and airplanes with
better quality and lower manufacturing cost will benefit consumers and the
society. Research results will also benefit other industries where titanium is
widely used. By replacing cutting fluids with cold air as a coolant, the
research will have a positive impact on the environment. This collaborative
research project features a unique collaboration among Kansas State University,
University of Massachusetts Lowell, Argonne National Laboratory, and industry.
This collaboration provides excellent synergy for project resources, ensures the
relevance of the research to industry, and expedites technology
commercialization. It will also positively impact engineering education at two
universities, promote lifelong learning for industrial practitioners, and
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research.