* 0900159
* Development and Characterization of Reative Enamel-Coated Steel Rebars for Improved Concrete-Steel Bonding and Enhanced Corrosion Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Richard Brow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 250,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This study is aimed at developing a chemically-bonded reactive enamel-coated
steel rebar that is corrosion resistant, and enhances the bond strength between
the rebar and its surrounding concrete. The scope of work includes 1)
Characterize the corrosion resistant properties of the rebar in alkaline
environments; 2) Characterize and quantify the long-term bond strength between
the rebar and concrete both for physical and chemical effects, including the
?self-healing? behavior of cracks induced on enamel coating; 3) Determine the
overall significance of the rebar in reinforced concrete structures under static
and cyclic loading. The optimization of the new technology will be achieved by
tailoring enamel compositions to create chemically strong bonds to steel, and to
react and form a strong bond to the surrounding cement matrix. The increased
bond strength will be validated by testing a large-scale beam-column structure.

Corrosion is responsible for annual bridge expenditures in the United States of
nearly $10 billion with indirect costs approaching 10 times that amount per
year. The development of a corrosion-resistant coating technology for steel
rebar will have a huge economic impact. This project represents a collaboration
of materials scientists and structural engineers with strong participations of
two Ph.D. students and one or more undergraduate students, particularly those
from underrepresented groups. The students will present their results at
professional meetings and at the annual undergraduate research conference on
campus, respectively.