* 0900460
* Collaborative Research: Uncountable Markov Decision Processes and their Applications to Optimization of Large-Scale Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mark Lewis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 09/30/2013
* USD 169,778.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project develops new methods for analysis and optimization of Markov
Decision Processes with general state and action sets. In the case of continuous
time Markov Decision Processes, this project also studies problems with
unbounded transition rates. A Markov Decision Processes is a fundamental
stochastic optimization model broadly used in various applications including
control and management of production and service systems. The methods to be
developed in this project stand to fill important gaps left in the literature
that are becoming increasingly more crucial to applications. These gaps are how
to control natural and man-made systems with large state spaces and with the
possibility of rapid changes of the system states.

This project focuses on three tasks. Task 1 will cover Markov Decision Processes
with general state spaces, weakly continuous transition probabilities, and
general action sets. This task will develop new theoretical concepts and
methods. Moreover, since weakly continuous transition probabilities covers most
inventory control and revenue management problems, this provides academics and
practitioners with a general tool to solve such problems. Task 2 will study
continuous time problems with unbounded transition rates. Even in the case when
the state space is discrete, this general problem has been open for quite some
time. However, in the areas of parallel processing and distributed computing it
is becoming increasingly more common to not have an a priori bound on the action
set. Our work will address these issues. The third task is dedicated to applying
our results from the first two tasks to several areas. We shall investigate
stochastic inventory control and revenue management problems. If successful,
this project will develop optimization methods for broad classes of stochastic
systems and provide theoretical and computation foundations for solutions of
large-scale inventory and revenue management problems.