* 0900735
* Gravitational waves from black hole binaries: modeling, astrophysics and strong-field tests
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Emanuele Berti, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Two black holes gradually approaching each other and
eventually merging to release a large amount of energy in gravitational waves
are one of the most promising sources for gravitational wave observatories, such
as LIGO and LISA. One of the main challenges in gravitational wave data analysis
consists in extracting the signal emitted by such binaries from the noisy
detector output. For the extraction to be successful, accurate theoretical
"template" waveforms of the signal are needed. The goal of the research
supported by this award is to improve theoretical knowledge of gravitational
waveforms from merging black holes. A combination of techniques will be used:
(1) a "post-Newtonian" expansion of Einstein's theory of gravity during the
early inspiral, when the black holes are far apart and small corrections to
Newtonian theory provide a reasonable description of the system; (2) a numerical
solution of Einstein's equations when the black holes merge; (3) a technique
known as "black hole perturbation theory" when the system finally settles down
to a single rotating black hole solution.

Black hole collisions will be studied both in the astrophysical context and from
a theoretical point of view. Improving knowledge of theoretical waveforms from
astrophysical black hole binaries and exploring possible astrophysical
implications is timely and relevant for gravitational wave searches in LIGO
data, has applications in observational astrophysics, and is of fundamental
importance in the planning of LISA. The study of black hole collisions at speeds
close to the speed of light is a theoretical investigation that will reveal
poorly known details of Einstein's theory of gravity in extreme conditions and
will allow a quantitative estimate of the maximum energy and luminosity that can
be radiated in a merger, solving long-standing questions in fundamental
gravitational physics. This research will provide the opportunity to train a
graduate student in gravitational physics.