* 0900181
* Collaborative Research: Tribologically Durable UHMWPE Nanocomposites for Total Joint Replacements: Nano-mechanics and Bio-tribological Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Iskander Akhatov, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 06/30/2013
* USD 207,650.00

Collaborative Research: Tribologically Durable UHMWPE Nanocomposites for Total
Joint Replacements: Nano-mechanics and Bio-tribological
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to study the nano-mechanics and bio-
tribology aspects of graphitic UHMWPE nanocomposites for total joint
replacements, and to establish models for the design of tribologically durable
materials that can provide longer life expectancy for prosthetic implants. The
conventional method for increasing wear resistance of UHMWPE components of total
joint replacements is crosslinking UHMWPE material by irradiation followed by
re-melting. These methods have resulted in severe problems such as reduced
fatigue strength and toughness, as well as the generation of wear debris in the
most biologically active size range, raising concerns of osteolysis, bone
resorption, and implant loosening. This project aims at solving those problems
through studies of nano-mechanics and bio-tribological modeling for durable
UHMWPE nanocomposites reinforced by newly developed graphitic nanomaterials.
This research will result in a new design methodology for polymer materials used
in artificial joints, and thus lead to optimal UHWMPE nanocomposites and
dramatically extended life expectancy for total joint
replacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this project
will provide a base for design and development of tribologically durable UHMWPE
materials that can lead to longer life spans for a variety of artificial joints
to meet a wide range of patient needs. This research will benefit and contribute
to bio-engineering, nanotechnology, materials science, heath care system
capability, and our society at large. It will also contribute to multi-level
education in both ND and WA states. This project will directly involve both
undergraduate and graduate students, and will also lead to new lectures for
course development in both universities. Native American tribal college
students, woman and minority students will benefit from this research through
summer workshops