* 0900931
* Free Resolutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Irena Peeva, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 107,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is in the field of Commutative Algebra. The proposed research deals
with the structure of graded free resolutions, their numerical invariants, and
applications. The general research goal is to study graded free resolutions
using a variety of methods from Commutative Algebra, Computational Algebra, and
Topological Combinatorics. The project focuses on: Borel ideals and applications
of mapping cones over Clements-Lindstrom rings, resolutions of monomial edge
ideals, and infinite cellular resolutions. The proposed research involves
interdisciplinary approaches and connects Commutative Algebra with the fields of
Combinatorics, Computational Algebra, and Topology.

The idea to associate a free resolution to a finitely generated module was
introduced by Hilbert in two famous papers in 1890 and 1893. He proved that over
a polynomial ring (over a field) every finitely generated module has a finite
free resolution. If the ring and the module are graded then there exists a
minimal free resolution; it is unique up to an isomorphism and is contained in
any free resolution. The minimal free resolution is graded, and its properties
are closely related to the invariants of the module. From another point of view:
in essence constructing a free resolution consists of repeatedly solving systems
of linear equations. Recent computational methods have made it possible to
compute graded free resolutions by computer. For many years, free resolutions
have been both central objects and fruitful tools in Commutative Algebra; they
have many applications in other mathematical fields.