* 0900904
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: 'el Proyecto Arqueologico Lago Suches: Rural Land Use, Sedentary Pastoralism and Ecology in the Andean High Puna'
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Norman Hammond, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 14,994.00

Under the direction of Dr. Norman Hammond, Mr. Benjamin Vining will land-use
history in one of the highest regions of the Andean cordillera of southern Peru
from approximately 6000 BC to AD 1450. He will focus on shifts in settlement
types and location in the archaeological record of the basin which reflect
social and climatic changes over the past millennia.

The Lake Suches basin is in marginal environment located at 4600 meters above
sea level that presents several limitations to human occupation, including
extreme cold, hypoxia, and low levels of unpredictable precipitation. Early
inhabitants of the basin adapted to these limitations by developing a
distinctive pastoral economy focused on domesticated llamas and alpacas. Andean
camelid specialists supplement their economy with non-pastoral commodities
procured through long-distance social and economic relations, which changed
through the rise and decline of the Tiwanaku and Inca states. This research
examines the relationships that dispersed rural communities (who are
underrepresented in archaeological literature) have to state-level economic
systems. By documenting settlement and material culture in the Suches basin, the
project considers some of the factors that make Suches distinctly "rural" and
how the rural history of this community is connected to other rural and urban
communities in the Andean region.

Pastoralists in Suches rely on unique alpine wetlands, called bofedales, which
provide year-round sources of browse and water for domestic stock in an
otherwise inhospitable region. Previous research suggests that bofedales are
highly susceptible to climatic changes, and this sensitivity may have been
exacerbated by low precipitation and water shortages that make Suches marginal
under recent conditions. Understanding Holocene climate change is important for
understanding ancient land-use in Suches. The project will investigate
palaeoclimatic conditions through climatic evidence found in lake sediments and
is using these data, along with data from satellite imagery and rainfall
stations, to model the flux in available plant biomass in bofedales under modern
conditions. These will be used to assess the potential impact of wet-dry
climatic phases on pastoral resources in the past.

This project thus addresses two issues of considerable modern relevance. It
examines and expands our anthropological understanding of rural communities,
which incorporate the majority of the population in many countries but which
nonetheless are marginalized. This research also addresses Holocene climate
change in the high Andes and examines the impacts that alternating humid and dry
cycles had on pastoralists living in this region. These issues are directly
relevant for rural development and water resource management in the Peruvian
Andes. Information from this project has been and will continue to be directly
disseminated to local herding communities in print and digital formats; it is
anticipated that this information can help to develop the rural economy. Results
also will be presented to the academic archaeological, anthropological, and
geological in refereed publications and on-line geo-spatial databases. The
fieldwork will provide the opportunity to train US and Peruvian graduate
students and archaeologists in inexpensive, high-technology geospatial research
methods.