* 0900182
* Design Space Analysis with Hyperdimensional Metamodels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Cameron Turner, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop methods that enable the
product design space to be modeled so that promising regions can be identified
and developed. Every product has a design space associated with the choices made
during design. Often, these choices are made with limited or changing
information and thus the resulting design may not lie in the best region of the
design space. By modeling the design space, information about design tradeoffs
and opportunities for technological innovation can be identified and used to
improve the design of the product. This research focuses on the tasks of
accurately modeling the design space with available data, recognizing the
regions within the design space that contain the most promising designs, and
applying multi-objective optimization techniques to select the best designs from
these regions. Deliverables include the development of algorithms to support
adaptive data collection and the handling of data from multiple sources, methods
that characterize and can identify promising regions within the design space,
and the integration of optimization methods within a software system that
supports multi-objective optimization problems.

If successful, the results of this research will provide opportunities to
dramatically reduce the time it takes to design a new product while improving
the quality of product designs developed with these methods. These methods will
be general enough to be applied to a wide range of product design problems.
Results from this research will be widely disseminated through professional
meetings and conferences and through publication in disciplinary journals.
Collaborations with industrial partners to evaluate these methods on real-world
problems are anticipated and the undergraduate and graduate students involved in
the project will benefit from their exposure to an emerging design technology.