* 0900715
* High Throughput Nanoimprint Manufacturing of Shape-Specific, Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric Nanocarriers for Drug and Imaging Agent Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Krishnendu Roy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2013
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop nanomanufacturing methods for fabrication of shape-specific ?smart?
nanoparticles capable of delivering drugs or imaging agents to targeted tissues
in response to disease-specific or physiological signals. Specifically, high
throughput, bio-compatible nanoimprint manufacturing processes are developed in
this research to fabricate highly monodisperse, enzymatically-triggered
nanoscale carriers of drug and imaging agents. The sizes and shapes of the
nanoparticles are controlled during the top-down nano-imprint process.
Experiments are carried out to evaluate nanoparticle loading, the release of
drug and imaging agents, and to characterize the effects of nano-carrier size
and shape on carrier transport and cellular uptake in cell cultures and
microfluidic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can transform the
manufacturing of nanoparticles for drug and imaging agent delivery as well as
address fundamental questions regarding the optimal size and shape of nano-
carriers. The obtained nano-carriers can significantly improve therapeutic care
of complex diseases such as cancer or cardiovascular diseases. Moreover, the
results from this research would not only provide new directions in fabricating
drug delivery vehicles with disease-responsive properties, but would also
explore the fundamental limitations and practical capabilities of generating
three-dimensional, complex structures with nanomanufacturing techniques. If
successful, this would eventually lead to the next generation of disease-
specific and highly effective therapeutics and also provide novel biomedical
applications for nanoimprint lithography. The project is inherently
interdisciplinary and involves principles from manufacturing, mechanical, and
biomedical engineering. This provides a unique and rewarding educational
environment for the students involved including students from underrepresented
groups in engineering professions. The results and concepts developed here
directly benefit several graduate and undergraduate courses and are disseminated
into industry and public by the active participations of the investigators in
short courses and seminars for industry and K-12 teachers, students, and
parents. &lt;br/&gt;