* 0900342
* Magneto-Active Polymers: Characterization and Modeling for Engineered Microstructures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Wei Hong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary M. Toney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 315,899.00

The research objective of this award is to gain understanding of the basic
science governing the behavior and tunability of Magneto-Active Polymers (MAPs).
These polymer based composites with a filler of magnetic particles have the
ability to change their size, stiffness, water retention and other magneto-
mechanical properties when exposed to a magnetic field. The specific changes
desired can be engineered into the microstructure of the materials by
controlling the local elastic and magnetic ordering during the cure process as
well as manipulating a variety of other synthesis conditions. This is only
possible with a thorough understanding of the behavior of MAPs and a predictive
model of this behavior. The specific aims of this project are: (1) the
experimental characterization of MAP magneto-mechanical property dependencies,
(2) micromechanics-based analytical models explaining the behavior of MAPs, (3)
quantitative prediction of the performance of MAP-based devices, and (4)
synthesizing protocols for MAPs with an engineered microstructure.

The successful completion of this research will enable applications that will
transform not only how MAPs are used but also the capability of technology in
fields ranging from virtual and augmented reality to bio-medicine, noise and
vibration control, and high resolution positioning. The research will be
incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum through example
problems and used in a broader educational effort to understand the
instructional pedagogy for teaching ill-structure problem solving. Additionally,
the personnel development of this project will involve training PhD and Masters
level students as well as undergraduate researchers recruited through minority
programs at Iowa State University. These students will gain valuable technical
abilities as well as mentoring, team work, and other non-technical skills. The
research will also be simplified into hands on activities for K-12 students and
will be used in collaboration with a variety of existing programs.