* 0900891
* SGER: Resiliency of Agricultural Communities after the 2008 Mississippi Floods
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Heather McIlvaine-Newsad, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2010
* USD 23,643.00

With the support of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research, Dr. Heather
McIlvaine-Newsad and David G. Casagrande, both of Western Illinois University,
will undertake research on community resilience after natural disaster. The
researchers' goal is to quantitatively model resiliency of agricultural
communities in western Illinois after flooding during summer of 2008 using the
community as the unit of analysis.

Resiliency is conceptualized as a dependent variable comprised of five social
characteristics: 1) social equity as a function of income; 2) population change;
3) local school consolidation; 4) ability to buy food, hardware, and medical
services locally; and 5) quality of life measured with a standard happiness
index. Four independent variables that affect resiliency are: 1) knowledge of
past disasters and responses; 2) amount of kin in social networks; 3) access to
financial capital; and 4) whether cultural models of social responsibility are
orientated primarily towards kin, community, or the nation.

The researchers will conduct semi-structured interviews and focus groups with 60
families and community meetings. Transcriptions of these materials will be
analyzed to determine how people talk and think about the focus variables.
Results of the qualitative analysis will be used to develop a structured survey
to be mailed to 2000 families in 20 different communities within one year after
the floods.

This research is important for its potential contribution to both disaster
theory and to improved post-disaster interventions. Although the variables will
differ, the methodology can be broadly applied to studies of disaster and
resiliency. This research will benefit society at large by explicating a social
science approach to resiliency that is compatible with ecological
conceptualizations and policy considerations. It will be possible to integrate
results directly into state recovery policy. Research findings also will be
presented to participating communities in a series of informational meetings.