* 0900148
* Ultrasonic Assisted Microextrusion and Microtube Hydroforming
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 294,226.00

The research objective of this award is to study the mechanics of ultrasonic
assisted microforming, focusing on micro-extrusions and microtube hydroforming.
Microforming is one of the miniaturization technologies with great potential for
high production rates. There is great potential for miniature parts that cannot
be microformed due to part complexity, low material formability, inhomogenuity,
severe tribological conditions and other size effects, to be successfully
produced by ultrasonic assisted microforming. In this research, the influence of
ultrasonic vibrations on material flow characteristics, material formability,
and tribological conditions will be studied through analytical modeling,
numerical, and experimentation. Analytical models for predicting temperature
generation caused by ultrasonic vibrations, coupled with temperature induced due
to plastic deformation will be established. Through experimentation, the
transformation of material characteristics due to temperature rise caused by
ultrasonic vibrations at different energy levels will be studied. The effect of
ultrasonic energy on the reaction response of lubricant chemicals at the tool-
workpiece interface will also be studied with an ultimate goal of identifying
suitable and effective lubricant chemicals for this process.

If successful, the fundamentals established from this study will be used to
build a knowledge-base for developing cost-effective manufacturing method for
3D-miniature parts via ultrasonic assisted microforming. The knowledge gained
from this research may lead to novel warm microforming process techniques, where
billet heating is achieved through the heat energy induced from ultrasonic
vibrations. This research will be of significant value to manufacturers of
miniature parts and developers of microforming machine systems for mass
production of hollow and solid micro parts. Biomedical, electronics, ordnance,
and communication industries are expected to benefit from this technology due to
high demand of miniature parts. Research findings will be incorporated into
manufacturing courses and dissemination through seminars, conferences and
journal articles. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit
through classroom instruction and involvement in the research.