* 0900188
* Collaborative:  Brittle Epoxies Rendered Ductile- Crazing in Thermosetting Epoxy Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Catalin Picu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 07/31/2012
* USD 218,011.00

Crazing is the phenomenon by which cracks in polymers are bridged by highly
aligned polymer fibers. The addition of functionalized carbon nanotubes is found
to initiate crazing in thermosetting epoxies which are a class of polymers that
do not exhibit crazing. The objective of this project is to understand the
mechanism by which crazing is initiated in thermosetting epoxy polymers by the
addition of functionalized carbon nanotubes. To this end, the effect of
structural changes induced by these nanotubes on the cure chemistry of the epoxy
will be studied. The relationship between these structural changes and the
mechanism of crazing will be established. Furthermore, the effect of multiscale
static and dynamic stress heterogeneities on the mechanical response of the
material will be studied. An ability to control crazing in thermosetting epoxies
could significantly enhance their toughness and ductility without reducing their
mechanical strength. Given the widespread use of epoxies in structural
applications this is expected to translate into significant practical
applications. The results of this work will provide a fundamental understanding
of the mechanisms by which functionalized carbon nanotube additives can initiate
crazing in thermosetting epoxies. This can lead to the development of a new
class of nanocomposite thermosetting polymers with significantly enhanced
toughness, ductility and fatigue resistance, while at the same time enhancing
the strength and stiffness of the polymer. A variety of applications involving
thermosetting epoxies such as paints, coatings, adhesives, industrial tooling,
composites as well as the semi-conductor and electronics packaging industries
will benefit from this research. In order to integrate research and teaching,
specially designed interactive modules will be introduced into the curriculum as
well as in the science courses taught at a science museum. The outreach
activities will also include experimental demonstrations and presentations to
high school students and teachers.