* 0900877
* The Geometric Function Theory and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Evgeny Poletsky, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 191,190.00

This project proposes the further study of the geometric function theory in
complex analysis and its applications. The geometric function theory, whose goal
is to obtain qualitative characteristics of investigated objects when
quantitative approach fails, is represented by several topics. (1) Studies of
quotients of holomorphic loop spaces on complex manifolds, which are responsible
for several intrinsic properties of the manifolds. Introducing different
equivalence relations it is possible to construct objects ranging from
holomorphic fundamental groups similar to classical fundamental groups to
expansions of complex manifolds, where all holomorphic and plurisubharmonic
functions can be extended. The initial work in this direction has shown an
interesting mixture of analysis, geometry and topology. (2) Pluripotential
theory on compact sets. In this setting such major tool as the Monge-Ampere
equation does not work, while many classical questions have a natural reduction
to the compact case. In particular, it is a problem of the existence of
pluriharmonic fibrations of maximal plurisubharmonic functions. Since it is
known that, in general, fibrations by complex curves do not exist, the PI will
look for fibrations by compact sets such that the restrictions of a maximal
plurisubharmonic function to these sets are pluriharmonic. (3) The theory of
Hardy and Bergman spaces on hyperconvex domains. This is another topic that can
be approached by geometric methods. Here the primary goal is the connection of
the Poisson kernels with the geometry of the domains and applications to
composition operators. As applications of the geometric function theory the PI
is going to study such related subject as: uniform algebras, algebraic
dependence of entire functions and approximation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
the major advances in mathematics achieved in 19th and 20th centuries were due
to our better quantitative skills, the modern mathematics became too complicated
to be described by formulas. For example, such important objects as fractals
cannot be described by any equations. This project intends to study complex
mathematical problems using geometry. Geometry, as a part of mathematics, aims
to describe qualitative, rather than quantitative, links between different
objects. However, the geometric links can provide quantitative information about
the subjects of study. The main goal of the project is to develop tools which
can allow us to find geometric links between properties of functions and
properties of their domains when complex numbers are involved. In its turn the
knowledge of these links will lead us to better understanding of other areas of
mathematics such as: the geometry of complex spaces, the transcendental numbers
and the theory of approximation of functions by polynomials. As a broader
impact, funding for this project will support the infrastructure of the Syracuse
University's analysis group, which has historically been very strong. Some of
the questions raised by this research will lead to PhD dissertation topics for
graduate students, and others will provide an opportunity to involve
undergraduate students in mathematical research. The funds will be used to allow
PhD students to attend conferences for learning and disseminating their own
achievements. A textbook which will be written as a part of the proposal will
allow students in mid-size universities to access this important subject.