* 0900778
* GOALI: Nanoscale Testing and Molecular Modeling of Aging in Asphalt
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Rafiqul Tarefder, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 303,700.00

Asphalt aging is a complex process in which asphalt binders undergo important
modifications of their structure and composition through processes such as
oxidation, formation/breaking of weak bonds (chemical aging), ordering of
similar molecules, evaporation of volatiles (physical aging) due to temperature,
pressure, air, and other environmental factors. These modifications have
dramatic effects on binder and mixtures? mechanical properties such as
stiffness, harness, adhesion, and cohesion. Understanding how and what
structural modifications affect the asphalt binder and mixtures? mechanical
properties has remained unexplored, largely because these modifications occur at
the atomic to molecular scales. This research offers a novel approach to
understating the link between asphalt molecular structure and mechanical
behavior through nanoscale experimentation and advanced molecular modeling. In
this research, molecular dynamic models will be developed, validated, and
employed to predict rheological and mechanical properties determined in the
laboratory using nano experimentation, in addition to other traditional methods.

This project is an integration of asphalt chemistry and mechanics, which will be
integrated in an educational program that will improve the quality of
engineering education. The molecular dynamics simulation will be supported
through industry collaboration, which will strengthen the PI?s on-going research
activities, and benefit the industry from broadening its product applications.
This study may result in a general understanding of aging at a molecular scale,
which is applicable to a wide range of construction materials. The integration
of research and teaching will be addressed by involving graduate students,
increasing diversity in engineering education, outreaching to high school
students, development of new courses, and broad dissemination of research
results.