* 0900278
* Modeling the Mechanics of Light Activated Shape Memory Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,02/29/2012
* I. Joga Rao, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 02/29/2012
* USD 149,953.00

MODELING THE MECHANICS OF LIGHT ACTIVATED SHAPE MEMORY POLYMERS

Light activated shape memory polymers are novel materials that can undergo large
changes in shape on exposure to specific frequencies of light. These materials
are being utilized in a variety of technologically challenging applications. To
hasten their use, it is essential to have models that can predict the behavior
of light activated shape memory polymers under a variety of different
conditions. To answer this need, this research focuses on developing
constitutive models that can describe the mechanical response of light activated
shape memory polymers. This is accomplished using the theory of multiple natural
configurations within a consistent thermodynamic framework. The accuracy of the
models is validated by comparing the predictions of the model against
experimental data. The validated models are then used to generate computational
tools capable of simulating the behavior of these materials undergoing complex
three dimensional deformations. Due to their unique properties, light activated
shape memory polymers are finding use in a variety of areas ranging from
implantable biomedical devices, actuators to aerospace applications. These
materials can result in the invention of groundbreaking new devices. To assist
in creating and developing these applications to their fullest extent, and in an
efficient manner, it is critical to calculate accurately the behavior these
materials. The results of this research will enhance the understanding of these
materials and directly enable engineers and designers to simulate and model
applications computationally with confidence. In addition undergraduate students
will participate on the project, giving them hands on research experience. The
results obtained will be used to improve active and cooperative learning in the
mechanics classes taught by the principal investigator at both the undergraduate
and graduate level.

