* 0900167
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  A Combined Materials and Mechanics Study on Failure and Materials Improvement of Coating/Substrate Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Michael Drory, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2013
* USD 200,142.00

This GOALI project is a collaborative effort between Louisiana State University
(LSU), Vanderbilt University (Vanderbilt), and the Timken Company (Timken), and
concentrates on a subtopic within the field of surface engineering. We plan to
conduct a systematic investigation of how the fracture toughness of the
interface between a ceramic coating and a substrate depends on the structure and
chemistry of the interface region. Our plan combines coating/interfacial layer
synthesis, atomic-level structural/chemical&lt;br/&gt;characterization, and
quantitative interfacial fracture toughness measurements. Such a detailed
materials/mechanics study on how the structure and chemistry of the interfacial
region impact its fracture resistance is the key to establishing quantitative
materials design criteria for coating/substrate interfaces in specific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modifying the near-surface
mechanical/chemical properties by applying coatings is important to applications
in the traditional machinery and transportation industries and to the emerging
micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) industries. Correct applications of
coatings enable macro/micro scale&lt;br/&gt;mechanical systems and manufacturing
techniques to perform beyond their current envelopes. A better understanding of
the failure of coated systems is critical to the future success of "old" (e.g.,
machinery and transportation) and "new" (e.g., MEMS)
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project from LSU, Vanderbilt, and
Timken builds on significant past and ongoing research on the synthesis and
structural/chemical characterization of coating/interface/substrate
systems(LSU), novel mechanical property characterization of layered materials,
and in particular, their interfaces (Vanderbilt). The participation of the
industrial partner (Timken) offers added expertise in tribological testing of
coated components, and establishes a firm connection between interfacial
mechanical properties and performance under engineering contact
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LSU-Vanderbilt-Timken collaboration is
interdisciplinary, and promises enhanced educational opportunities for LSU and
Vanderbilt students. Our existing LSU/Southern University educational
collaborations offer opportunities for minority students to be informed of and
involved in cutting-edge research, and advance NSF?s goals in both research and
education.