* 0900813
* Rationality problems and homotopy theory for varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Aravind Asok, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 132,552.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will work
on problems relating arithmetic properties of classical objects of study in
algebraic geometry, i.e., so-called rational and nearly rational varieties, to
their geometry by means of extremely refined invariants rooted in topology.
Together with F. Morel, he will investigate the problem of classifying such
varieties using recently introduced techniques inspired by the celebrated
Browder-Novikov-Sullivan-Wall classification of manifolds. Together with B.
Doran, he will continue to investigate invariant theory for unipotent group
actions, its relationship to construction of A^1-contractible varieties, and the
problem of characterizing affine space as an algebraic variety. By their very
nature, these problems draw together several branches of mathematics and thus
illustrate the fundamental unity of the subject. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic
geometry, one of the oldest branches of mathematics, is at its core concerned
with the study of algebraic varieties, i.e., solutions to systems of polynomial
equations in many variables. Algebraic topology studies the problem of attaching
invariants, e.g., numbers or, more generally, so-called abstract algebraic
structures to spaces; the most important property of such invariants is that
they do not change as the underlying geometric object is pulled and twisted, so
long as it is not torn in the process. A fundamental problem in algebraic
geometry is classification of algebraic varieties, i.e., explicit determination
and taxonomy of the possible configurations of solutions. When solutions to
systems of equations have topological structure (think of the equation defining
a sphere), one can try to distinguish them by means of invariants. However,
solutions to systems of polynomial equations arising in arithmetic do not always
have obvious topological structure (think of the integer solutions to the
equation defining a unit sphere). Nevertheless, the relatively recently
introduced subject of A^1-homotopy theory provides a framework in which one may
apply the full power of techniques of algebraic topology to algebraic varieties
--spaces having deep arithmetic (but a priori limited geometric) structure are,
from the standpoint of invariants, put on equal footing with those that are more
inherently geometric. The aim of this project is to further amalgamate ideas of
arithmetic, topology, and algebraic geometry by transplanting the fantastically
successful method of classifying topological spaces via surgery, a cutting and
pasting procedure very carefully controlled by appropriate invariants, into
algebraic geometry by means of A^1-homotopy theory.