* 0900865
* Research in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 270,321.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The PI will undertake research in harmonic analysis, and partial differential
equations (PDE). In PDE, the focus is on the dynamical properties of Schrodinger
evolution (SE). One subject of on-going research is dispersive estimates for SE.
He will also work on mathematical problems on non-linear SE motivated by the
numerical studies in fiber optic communication systems. In harmonic analysis, he
focuses on problems in Euclidean spaces centered around Lebesgue norm
inequalities. In particular, he proposes to continue his investigations on
restriction estimates relative to fractal measures, and on their applications in
PDE and geometric measure theory. He also proposes to continue his research on
the mapping properties of generalized Radon transforms (GRT) -- a huge class of
averaging operators over lower dimensional submanifolds of Euclidean spaces. By
applying the techniques developed for Kakeya problems, he obtained interesting
results in some cases. The results on the mapping properties of GRT have
important applications in Fourier restriction phenomenon and in general in the
summability theory of multi-dimensional Fourier series.

Harmonic analysis has always found wide applications in natural sciences and
engineering. It underlies a powerful and diverse array of tools currently widely
used in applications, and offers the promise of further applications in the
future. The proposed research deals with foundational issues which may
ultimately help to underpin such future applications. The proposed research on
nonlinear SE are directly motivated by the engineering problems in fiber optic
communication systems, and the methods used are likely to be useful in a range
of applications. The study of the mapping properties of GRT has various
applications in engineering. For example, the X-ray transform (which is a
particular GRT) applied to the density function of a patients body is
essentially the data obtained by magnetic resonance imaging. The study of
Fourier restriction, summability theory of multi-dimensional Fourier series, and
dispersive estimates are irreplaceable tools in the study of a wide class of
PDE. The proposed research would make a contribution to the general
understanding of these problems. The planned research is also related to certain
discrete problems of interest in combinatorics and number theory, which in most
cases remain wide open.