* 0900534
* Dynamic Stress-Strain Prediction of Vibrating Structures in Operation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Julie Chen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2012
* USD 195,000.00

The research objective of this project is to integrate novel dynamic
experimental measurements and computational modeling to predict the total
spatial response and most importantly, how internal structural members respond
to externally induced dynamic loads. For many complex composite structures (e.g.
wind turbine, helicopter blades and other large flexible structures), mechanical
failure is not externally apparent and typically occurs at the interfaces
between the structure's surface and the internal ribs or stiffening members.
Unfortunately, the interior dynamic response due to time-varying environmental,
aerodynamic, and operating loads is not currently predictable from measured
data. The proposed research will examine the use of analytical shape expansion
functions for a large number of measured distributed points while rotating to
predict interior dynamic stress-strain information at intricate joint
interfaces, where failure often occurs. Such an approach will also enable the
estimation of the externally applied distributed forces that are currently not
measurable. The modeling approach can be applied to virtually any structure that
has intricate joint interfaces by using a reduced number of measured degrees of
freedom to interrogate or monitor a structure?s integrity. The proposed research
is a new technology that will enable full-field dynamic measurement of rotating
structures in operation, resulting in an improved understanding of the
structural response of blades in flight. Both graduate and undergraduate
students involved will gain an appreciation for current research areas important
to industry and academia. The analytical tools can be used to create visually
stimulating data that connects the effect of design decisions to the vibration
response, and examples from music and sports can be tailored to the interest of
different audiences to show how scientific research can contribute to our
everyday lives. A strong outreach effort, building on previous successes, will
be implemented using the animated image correlation data to motivate women and
K-12 students to become interested in science and engineering.