* 0900935
* Applications of polynomial families and free probability
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Anshelevich, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 105,000.00



The PI's research is concentrated at the interface of functional analysis,
probability theory (commutative and non-commutative), and combinatorics. In
previous work, the PI has developed the machinery of polynomial families
associated to Free Probability theory. He now proposes to use this machinery to
obtain a number of applications in free probability and related fields. Specific
projects include the investigation of von Neumann algebras coming from special
tracial states on polynomials, the study of the free Fisher information of these
states, as well as their connection with multi-matrix models in the theory of
random matrices. He will also investigate operator algebras arising from
Gaussian pairs of states in the two-state free probability theory, for which
polynomial families provide extra structure. Conversely, the PI plans to use
probabilistic techniques to investigate combinatorial properties of polynomial
families, such as their linearization coefficients. He will also explore the
issue of whether further classes of polynomial families have probabilistic
interpretations.

It is a fundamental property of matrices that they may not commute. Since the
beginning of quantum mechanics, probability theory of non-commuting objects has
been an important field of research. In the 1980s, Voiculescu started the
investigation of free probability theory, a theory of this type which also has
numerous (sometimes spectacular) applications to operator algebras and the
theory of random matrices, itself playing an increasingly important role in
physics and signal processing. On the other hand, polynomials are ubiquitous in
mathematics, although polynomials in variables which do not commute are less
familiar. This proposal applies fundamental techniques of non-commutative
polynomials, combined with methods from free probability, to the study of
operator algebra and random matrices. Parts of this project are well-suited for
undergraduate research, which encourages interest in mathematics among students.
The PI will continue to organize a seminar, which provides opportunities for
young researchers to disseminate their work and meet colleagues. Finally, the PI
will organize a conference on topics covered in the proposal, with the goal of
bringing together researchers from different fields of mathematics, resulting in
mutually beneficial interactions.