* 0900354
* Stochastic Kriging: Modeling and Controlling Uncertainty in Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Jeremy Staum, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 324,999.00

PI: PI_NAME Staum, Jeremy &lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Stochastic Kriging: Modeling and Controlling
Uncertainty in Simulation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Stochastic Kriging: Modeling
and Controlling Uncertainty in Simulation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
aims to improve algorithms that rely on simulation of stochastic systems to
support decision-making by increasing the algorithms? computational efficiency
and enabling more reliable statistical inference about the quality of proposed
decisions. Two kinds of algorithms are considered. One kind is for the
exploration and optimization of the performance of a stochastic system as a
function of its design. The other kind is for assessing risks due to uncertainty
about system parameters, e.g. the average time required to service a customer,
or about financial scenarios, involving e.g. asset prices or loan defaults. The
primary research objective is to improve the algorithms by devising efficient
plans for running simulations that can support accurate predictions of system
performance given any of a wide range of
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to algorithms for the exploration and
optimization of the performance of a stochastic system as a function of its
design could make it possible to provide decision-makers instantly with accurate
estimates of the performance of system designs they wish to explore. This would
enable simulation to better support decisions about investment in manufacturing
and service systems. Better algorithms for risk assessment would encourage
better decision-making and risk management practices. At present, risks due to
uncertainty about system parameters or about financial scenarios are often
treated with methods less accurate or less illuminating than simulation, because
simulation is thought to be too unwieldy or slow to handle those risk assessment
problems.