* 0900814
* Conformal Mapping
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Donald Marshall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2012
* USD 285,265.00



The main theme of Marshall's research program is to study conformal mappings
generated by the Loewner differential equation, and related topics. The Loewner
equation has as input an arbitrary continuous function and produces a continuous
family of conformal mappings. Marshall plans to investigate properties of the
solutions of Loewner's equation under various assumptions on the driving
function, and conversely to investigate how properties of the boundaries of the
associated regions are reflected in the driving function. This is a classical
problem where progress has been made only recently. The Loewner equation is also
related to an algorithm for numerical conformal mapping discovered by Marshall
and K\"uhnau. Marshall will analyze convergence and error-estimates for the
"zipper"' algorithm and improve the speed of convergence using "generational"'
techniques.

Conformal mappings have been used as a tool in science and engineering for many
years. They are often used to change coordinates from a complicated region to a
simpler region like a disc. A partial differential equation on the complicated
region is then changed to a similar equation on the disc, a setting where it is
easier to solve. Classically, this method was used for problems related to
Laplace's equation, such as electrostatics and two dimensional fluid flow.
Numerous non-classical applications have been developed in the last three
decades such as electro-magnetics, vibrating membranes and acoustics, transverse
vibrations and buckling of plates, elasticity, and heat transfer. The Loewner
differential equation was introduced in 1923 to study extremal problems for
conformal maps in the unit disc. Schramm's recently invention of stochastic
Loewner evolution SLE, the fusion of Loewner's differential equation and
probability, has formed a bridge between the important areas of conformal
mapping in mathematics and conformal field theory in physics. It has led to the
discovery of new results in percolation and random walks, for example, as well
as the discovery mathematical proofs of results known to the theoretical physics
community. This project is likely to increase the understanding of solutions to
Loewner's equation, as foundational work, which should increase its usefulness
in understanding stochastic processes. Broader impacts include the continued
improvement and dissemination of the conformal mapping computer codes, which
have been used by a number of investigators not in mathematics, as well as by
mathematicians. Greater speed and new knowledge of convergence should lead to
wider applicability and use of this algorithm. The mentoring of postdoctoral
scholars and graduate students through our complex analysis "working seminar",
has supported the work of several women. Support of our research increases the
number of students interested in pursuing a career in this direction.