* 0900196
* GOALI:  Dynamic Multi-Mode Design Methodology for Efficient Energy Conversion System Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Christopher Ha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 06/30/2013
* USD 279,862.00

The research objective of this GOALI award is the development of a dynamic
multi-mode design methodology for an efficient energy conversion system. The
research will characterize and model key design aspects of an engineering system
that must undergo multiple operating conditions, formalize the design
methodology, and validate the methodology in a realistic energy conversion
system design case (diesel engine) with an industrial partner -- Caterpillar,
Inc. The design methodology will utilize the idea of equilibrium (or
complementarity) constraints in a multidisciplinary design optimization
framework. The results of this research will provide and validate a new class of
problems and solutions for dynamic multi-mode system design that is emerging
from the energy conversion system design practices in industry, including
alternative energy sources.

If successful, the results of this research will overcome limitations in
existing design methods with respect to scalability, dynamic behavior and
autonomous selection of operational modes. Long-term environmental and societal
benefits include reducing emissions, decreasing negative environmental impact,
and developing cleaner energy sources such as solar, wind, clean coal, hydrogen,
among others. Designing energy conversion systems, including diesel engines,
will be more efficient in complying with the stricter environmental regulatory
policies. By adopting the new multi-mode design methodology, manufacturers will
be able to achieve the goal of cost-effective compliance while producing energy
conversion systems with better performance. Women and minority students will
benefit from the education efforts in partnership with the Women in Engineering
Program and the Morrill Engineering Program, and graduate students will gain
valuable research experience via the industry-university research assistantship
program.