* 0900940
* Improved Photovoltaic Arrays with Local Switched-Capacitor Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Kimball, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 292,912.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to improve residential photovoltaic installations with switched-capacitor
power converters. The approach considers a system topology in which each panel
is connected to a high-voltage-gain switched-capacitor converter, whose outputs
are paralleled. This approach will increase the total array output power and
improve system reliability. Conventional photovoltaic installations use several
panels in series to achieve high voltage, whereas this project uses parallel
connections. Also, new analysis tools for switched-capacitor converters and
parallel arrays will be derived.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project pertains to the comparative study of
parallel- and series-connected photovoltaic arrays, detailed performance
modeling and improvement of switched-capacitor converters, and the combination
of switched-capacitor converters with photovoltaic arrays for improved
performance and reliability. Parallel-connected photovoltaic arrays have a
greater performance potential than series-connected arrays and switched-
capacitor converters are capable of high-efficiency power conversion with high
voltage gain. This project will combine the two concepts to increase array power
output by 39% or more in partially shaded conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are the potential for greatly
increased solar energy generation, a significant undergraduate research program,
and broad dissemination in both non-technical and interdisciplinary venues.
Undergraduate researchers will be involved in every step of the project. The
recruitment strategy will emphasize attracting women and minorities to the
research program. The results will be published in interdisciplinary journals
that address all aspects of solar energy. The research results will be
synthesized and published in a form and forum suitable for non-specialists and
non-engineers.&lt;br/&gt;