* 0900924
* Gross-Stark units and p-adic families of Hilbert modular forms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Samit Dasgupta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This project proposes to study the explicit construction of class fields by
proving explicit formulas for Gross-Stark units. This will build on recent work
of the principal investigator in collaboration with Henri Darmon and Robert
Pollack, in which the weak Gross-Stark conjecture was proven under certain
assumptions. It will also incorporate previous work of the principal
investigator in which an exact formula for Gross-Stark units was conjectured.
Furthermore, this project hopes to develop a unified theory of formulas for
Stark units in rank one abelian settings. The project would conceptually unify
the "modular methods" of some authors with the "Shintani methods" of others
through the formalism of group cohomology. One goal of the project is to connect
Darmon's integration theory to the Langlands program.

Kronecker's "dream of youth" was to explicitly construct all the abelian
extensions of quadratic imaginary fields. Hilbert presented the problem for
general number fields as the 12th problem in his famous list. The search for an
explicit class field theory has motivated many great advances in number theory.
Its prime successes include the Kronecker-Weber theorem and the theory of
complex multiplication. This project hopes to extend the understanding of
explicit class field theory beyond the setting of complex multiplication. The
main technique is to study the connection between units in number fields and
special values of zeta-functions. This connection is a central motivating theme
in number theory.