* 0900945
* Dynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Leonid Bunimovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 225,001.00

The proposed research addresses some long-standing problems in the theory of
dynamical systems and statistical mechanics, as well as some new natural
questions that are important from a general point of view and for applications.
The project develops a new approach to the design of hyperbolic billiards that
will allow one to prove hyperbolicity for more a general class of billiards.
This approach is based on a new general characterization of absolutely focusing
curves, which are the only admissible focusing components of hyperbolic
billiards, in terms of continued fractions. A long-standing problem on whether
one can smooth the boundary of a stadium billiard will be resolved. The project
will also shed new light on the question of where the border lies between
completely chaotic billiards in convex domains and billiards with divided phase
spaces into chaotic and regular components. Two natural questions raised by the
principal investigator on the dynamics of open systems will be addressed. The
first one asks how the escape through a hole depends on the position of a hole
in phase space. The second question is about the relationship between escape
through one hole and escape through multiple holes. These questions reveal some
subtle connections between combinatorics and number theory. The dynamics of a
finite-size billiard particle in nonconvex polygon will be shown to be
hyperbolic. This will be applied to the classical Ehrenfest periodic wind-tree
model in statistical mechanics and demonstrate that, from a natural physical
point of view, this model surpasses the periodic Lorentz model in the richness
of its dynamics.

The project will provide new visual and relatively simple models of billiard
dynamical systems with chaotic as well as with mixed (coexisting regions with
chaotic and with regular dynamics) behavior. (N.B."Billiards" is a technical
mathematical concept that does not refer to the parlor game of that name.)
Moreover, some of the models introduced by the principal investigator will be
(and some already have been) used in physics by both theoreticians and
experimentalists, who have actually built such devices, and therefore will
foster interdisciplinary collaborations. A problem of finding an optimal (to
ensure the fastest/slowest escape) placement of a hole will have a potentially
large variety of applications for open systems. This question, as well as the
one on escape through multiple holes, was inspired by experiments on atomic
billiards. Moreover, this approach opens up the possibility of making finite-
time (rather than asymptotic in time) predictions of dynamics (e.g., predicting
a moment after which escape through a specific hole is more likely than escape
through any other hole of the same size). The analysis of the wind-tree model
with a finite-size particle will have applications in statistical mechanics. The
project will enhance the infrastructure for research and education through
collaborations with researchers in the US, Mexico, Canada, and Europe. Graduate
students are already involved in this research, and the involvement of
undergraduates is anticipated. The results of the project will be broadly
disseminated to enhance scientific and technological understanding via
participation of the principal investigator (often with plenary talks), his
collaborators, and his students in interdisciplinary conferences with a broad
participation of physicists, biologists, and engineers.