* 0901448
* Statistical Properties of Hyperbolic Systems with Singularities
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Hong-Kun Zhang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 118,686.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is devoted to the rigorous investigation of statistical properties
of dynamical systems and their applications to the physical sciences. The
primary goal is to study hyperbolic systems with singularities. Most of those
under study in the project fall under the chaotic billiards heading, which
includes popular physical models such as the Lorentz and hard-ball gases that
provide the mathematical foundations of statistical mechanics. These systems
have properties similar to those of geodesic flows on negatively curved
manifolds and Axiom-A diffeomorphisms and flows, but their singularities give
rise to an unpleasant fragmentation of phase space, which makes them much harder
to study. In particular, dynamical systems with weak statistical properties
(such as slow decay of correlations) play extremely important roles in
applications to physical sciences. The dynamics in such systems are intermittent
between regular and chaotic. However, mathematical methods for the analysis of
systems with slow mixing rates were developed only recently and are still
difficult to apply to realistic models. Based upon recent results of Young,
Dolgopyat, and Chernov, the principal investigator proposes to develop new
approaches to estimating the decay of correlations that can be applied to more
general systems with singularities, systems that could not be handled by
existing techniques.

The first major component of this project deals with systems with singularities
that represent the most general mathematical models of physical phenomena. Of
special interest in the project is the subject of "chaotic billiards," a term
used by mathematicians and physicists to describe certain phenomena that are
observed in the study of Boltzmann's ergodic hypothesis. The second key
component of the project focuses on ergodic theory, which is an important
mathematical research field in which the subjects of probability and dynamical
systems come together. Through a collaboration with Feres, the principal
investigator will explore the scattering properties of gas-surface collisions
through random billiards (again the mathematical concept, not the parlor game).
This demonstrates the contribution of the rigorous study of abstract singular
systems to the concrete field of chemical engineering. Indeed, such a study may
ultimately lead to new techniques for gas separation in industrial processes. It
is expected that the progress in understanding statistical properties of
dynamical systems that will be made in this project will have an impact on our
knowledge of many important events in nature and find application in other
scientific and engineering disciplines.