* 0901410
* A Test-bed for Analyzing the Security and Resilience of the DG-Integrated Electric Power Distribution Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2013
* USD 345,426.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop a simulation test-bed to
analyze the security and resilience of the microgrid under diverse operating
conditions. This test-bed will allow a detailed performance evaluation of
different types and sizes of distributed generation and storage units, together
with various generation and load control mechanisms. This research applies
concepts from the fields of power systems, agent-based technologies, IP-based
network and game theory to address the modeling and simulation of an intelligent
microgrid at the distribution level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
The intellectual merit of this research is the development of a simulation test
bed that comprises detailed device models and multi-agent technologies for
microgrid operation. The test bed is expected to assist with the analysis and
evaluation of electric power microgrid designs. It will assist researchers,
system planners, and policy makers in quantifying and analyzing the impact of
various distributed generation devices, as well as various load and generation
control algorithms, on the security and resiliency of the electric power
microgrid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The microgrid simulation test
bed is expected to broaden the student experience beyond the academic
environment through real-world examples and case studies. In addition, it will
provide a platform for collaborative research opportunities with colleagues in
academia and industry who are active in similar research areas.&lt;br/&gt;