* 0901907
* Collaborative Research:  Topic in Many-Body Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Theodore Kirkpatrick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made on a collaborative proposal supports
theoretical research and education to investigate the electronic properties of
condensed matter systems at very low temperatures, with particular emphasis on
universal properties that do not depend on the details of the materials in
question. In particular, the PI will further explore analogies between "soft"
condensed matter and "hard" condensed matter that have proven to be productive
in the PIs' recent work on helimagnets and promise to provide additional insight
into other materials of current interest. Problems to be studied include quantum
analogs of liquid crystal states that are relevant for quantum hall systems and
high-temperature superconductors, quantum phase transitions away from
equilibrium, and spiral phases in ferromagnetic
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will also pursue two more
additional problems: one involves the meaning of certain singularities in the
screening of effective electron-electron interactions that are mediated by an
exchange of bosons; the other, involves technical problems controlling the
perturbative renormalization-group treatment of certain classes of quantum phase
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to advancing our
understanding of the basic electronic properties of solids, creating knowledge
that is crucial as a basis for future technological innovation. It will train
students and postdoctoral associates in an important and very broad research
area, and thus contribute to the generation of human resources that are
essential for our technologically oriented society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports collaborative theoretical
research and education to uncover universal electronic properties of materials
that appear at low temperatures. Universal properties transcend many of the
details of specific materials, such as strength of interactions between
electrons or electronic energy relations, and can connect seemingly different
materials at a deeper level. The discovery of universal properties may signal
the existence of a fundamental principle that provides a unifying understanding
of seemingly different materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to advancing our understanding of the basic electronic properties of
solids, creating knowledge that is crucial as a basis for future technological
innovation. It will train students and postdoctoral associates in an important
and very broad research area, and thus contribute to the generation of human
resources that are essential for our technologically oriented society.