* 0901711
* Vibration-Insensitive and Large-Range MEMS Scanning Fourier Transform Spectroscopy for Portable Chemical/BioSensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fan Ren, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2013
* USD 409,063.00

NSF # 0901711: Tilting-Insensitive MEMS Scanning Fourier Transform Spectroscopy
for Portable Chemical/BioSensors

PIs: Huikai Xie; Fan Ren (University of Florida)

The objective of this research is to develop miniature infrared (IR)
spectrometers for portable or handheld chemical/biosensors. The approach is to
use novel micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) techniques to miniaturize the
mirror scanning mechanism and the IR detector. A unique interferometer design is
also proposed to compensate mirror tilting.

Fourier transform spectroscopy, especially in infrared range, or FTIR, is very
powerful in chemical/biosensing. However, most of FTIR systems are bulky and
expensive. MEMS technology has been used to miniaturize FTIR systems, but
researchers still face several challenges: low spectral resolution due to small
displacements of the MEMS mirrors; tilting of scanning MEMS mirrors; and lack of
small-sized uncooled IR detectors for FTIR. This research will address these
challenges with several innovative techniques: a new MEMS mirror whose scan
range will reach over 1 mm that is 10?e improvement compared to its
counterparts; a single-mirror Michelson interferometer design capable of tilt-
insensitive scanning; and a capacitive MEMS uncooled IR detector that is small,
inexpensive and highly-sensitive.

The proposed integrated technology has a broad range of applications including
homeland security, antiterrorism, food safety, and environmental monitoring. Due
to their small size and low cost, such devices can be used onsite by first
responders such as soldiers or border guards, so that explosives, chemical
weapons, toxic hazards and biological agents can be identified quickly to
prevent or minimize damage and save lives. Through this project, efforts will be
made to attract more young students especially minority students into
engineering and science areas.

