* 0901903
* Quantum Phases and Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ramamurti Shankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on quantum phases and phase transitions as well as the PI's constant
efforts to communicate developments in his field to a wide audience using a
variety of vehicles like summer school courses, dialogs, public lectures, books,
and review articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum phase transitions occur when
the ground state of a system undergoes a change of phase, say from
superconductor to insulator, in response to a changing parameter in the
Hamiltonian. Equally interesting as the transitions, are the phases themselves:
the excitations they support, their degeneracies and their responses to external
probes. The PI has developed two tools to this end: (i) the renormalization
group for fermions in which low-energy states near the Fermi surface are
systematically eliminated to display the ultimate properties of the ground state
and its instabilities (ii) and the Hamiltonian Theory of the Fractional Quantum
Hall Effect which is an operator treatment of the problem that allows the
computation of gaps, relaxation rates etc. He plans to extend and apply the
renormalization group in many ways: to describe the singular Coulomb
interaction, to describe ferromagnetism, to describe Fermions with more than one
momentum direction normal to the Fermi surface, to describe the vexing but
important problem of how to formulate a renormalization group for bosons and
fermions at the same time and bilayer graphene. He plans to apply the
Hamiltonian theory to describe the response of the Hall system near half-filling
to microwave radiation. Finally he proposes to pursue a rather tantalizing
connection between Lie groups and fermion motion on several lattices- where Lie
groups generate the very lattice and determine its unusual
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to continue disseminating ideas here
and abroad, to a broad audience, ranging from school children to advanced
graduate students in summer schools, from professionals to the lay public via
review articles, public lectures, web-based lectures, and his third text book,
this time on the methods of quantum field theory in condensed matter physics. He
will continue to actively disseminate his work on renormalization group to
sister disciplines like Nuclear Physics and Particle Physics which have adapted
it to describe matter at finite density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on
quantum phase transitions and quantum states of matter. Unlike the more familiar
phase transformations, like water to steam, quantum phase transitions occur at
the absolute zero of temperature as an external variable, like pressure, is
tuned through the transformation from one phase to another. It is believed that
these phase transitions can influence the electronic properties of materials for
a wide range of temperatures and hold promise to explain anomalous electronic
properties of some classes of materials. The PI will further develop and apply a
powerful technique first developed in particle physics but later applied to
theory of phase transitions. The technique, called the renormalization group,
enables one to examine the physics contained in a theory across expanding length
scales. While this approach has yielded great insights into a number of
important problems to condensed matter and materials physics, its application to
others has proven more difficult. The PI aims to clear conceptual roadblocks and
harvest the valuable insights it offers into quantum phase transitions and
quantum mechanical systems of interacting particles more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to continue disseminating ideas
here and abroad, to a broad audience, ranging from school children to advanced
graduate students in summer schools, from professionals to the lay public via
review articles, public lectures, web-based lectures, and his third text book,
this time on the methods of quantum field theory in condensed matter physics. He
will continue to actively disseminate his work on renormalization group to
sister disciplines like Nuclear Physics and Particle Physics which have adapted
it to describe matter at finite density.