* 0901951
* RUI: Studies of Nucleon Structure Using Electromagnetic Probes at Jefferson Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Doughty, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 650,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group's program of experiments at
the Jefferson laboratory - past, present, and future - embody one of the primary
goals of Nuclear Physics - to elucidate the underlying structure of protons,
neutrons, and mesons. Specifically, these experiments further our understanding
of how the moving charged quarks are distributed inside the proton, and how
other fundamental properties of the proton are related to the static and dynamic
properties of the quarks themselves. As well, these experiments will strengthen
our quantitative understanding of the phenomenon of quark confinement - the
notion that quarks are always "confined" within protons, neutrons, and other
particles - by exploring the role of gluons, the particles that bind these
quarks together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the goals of the RUI
program, education of undergraduates and masters-level graduate students is a
central component of this program. The major projects that will be undertaken by
the group provide a multitude of opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students in the Applied Physics, Computer Engineering, and Computer Science
streams. The projects will provide excellent training for students in the areas
of programming, modeling, analysis techniques, and critical judgment. Finally,
the team has demonstrated that the physics program at Jefferson Lab provides an
exciting opportunity to expose undergraduates to the field of Nuclear Physics,
and that their students do continue on to graduate study in the field.