* 0901178
* Creating the Next Generation Power Grid with Massively Distributed Intelligent Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* V. Jain, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2013
* USD 329,997.00

Creating the Next Generation Power Grid with Massively Distributed Intelligent
Sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to improve the
reliability and restoration capability of wide area Power Grids (PG) thereby
reducing power outages and their cascade effects. The approach is to embed novel
intelligent sensors with distributed processing tools to provide real time
monitoring and control of PGs from transmission and distribution levels. Our
sensors will provide accurate information to protective relays and enable
intelligent islanding. The unique sensor architecture, fabrication, and signal
processing issues will be addressed through a ?3-D Heterogeneous Sensor System
on a Chip (3-D HSoC)? in a two-plane prototype: a sensor plane populated with
multiple power grid sensor types, and a processing plane with both analog and
digital (DSP) circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being compact, power stingy, and ultimately very
inexpensive, the 3-D HSoC sensors will be massively deployable in wide and local
area power grids. Disturbances, dislocations, or changes in state in the PG will
be sensed and analyzed on chip for wide area monitoring and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-D HSoC
proposed here can begin to transform our power grid to a next generation ?smart
grid.? The grant will also have a major impact in promoting teaching, training
and learning. It will support two graduate students, and will significantly
benefit several graduate courses including ?Smart Power Grids?, ?Microsystems
and MEMS Technology?, and a nationally unique ?Heterogeneous System on a Chip?
course. To broaden impact, the advances will be shared with the power industry,
government, and academia through a dedicated web site and scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;