* 0901702
* GOALI: High Sensitivity Thermal Conductivity Sensor for Micro Gas Chromatography and Harsh Environment Chemical Detection
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Hua Chen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 09/30/2013
* USD 239,537.00

Proposal # 0901702

GOALI: High Sensitivity Thermal Conductivity Sensor for Micro Gas Chromatography
and Harsh Environment Chemical Detection

PI: Xin Zhang Institute: Boston University

Abstract: This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The objective of this research is to develop a
highly sensitive, mechanically robust and mass producible gas micro-detector,
designed for integration into a portable micro-gas chromatographic system
capable of competing with the performance of traditionally laboratory
instrumentation. The approach taken will be to optimize performance and
sensitivity of the detector by modeling, analyzing and testing the different
heat flux pathways from the active element of the detector. Furthermore, the
modeling and testing will be performed to enable violent mechanical shocks and a
wide range of thermal and chemical operating environments.

In the push for novel gas sensors and detection mechanisms, little effort has
been put into enhancing thermal conductivity detectors, one of the oldest gas
sensors. However, thermal conductivity detectors are uniquely suited for
miniaturization, since they are sensitive to the concentration of substances
within a mixture, not the total mass of a sample, a limitation of flame
ionization detectors and mass spectrometers. Therefore, miniaturization of gas
chromatographic systems employing thermal conductivity detectors can maintain
functional sensitivity while processing smaller sample masses, while
simultaneously reducing power consumption and increasing mechanical robustness.

The development of a highly sensitive, yet simple and robust detector,
integrated into a miniaturized system will enable applied gas chromatography to
make an impact on fields ranging from point of care health services and homeland
security, to industry process control and geological exploration. Educationally,
this program will impact a diverse student population through merging
micro/nanosystems and engineering education research to train the next
generation of scientific/engineering leaders.