* 0901673
* Strong Field and Ultrafast Atomic and Molecular  Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anthony Starace, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 279,000.00

This project focuses on understanding theoretically the interaction of intense
coherent radiation with atoms and molecules and on investigating the use of
ultrafast (attosecond scale) laser or electron pulses to pump or probe
electronic processes in atoms and molecules. Such processes are difficult to
treat theoretically because electronic interactions with both intense laser
fields and with atomic and molecular potentials must in general be described
non-perturbatively; also, interactions with short laser or electron pulses must
be described time-dependently. In support of these investigations we have
developed a number of new theoretical approaches. Investigations include using
attosecond scale electron pulses as both temporal and spatial probes of
electronic motion in both atoms and molecules; investigating the origin of
laser-intensity-induced enhancements of ionized electron yields for electron
energies corresponding to the so-called "ATI plateau"; developing novel closed
form analytic formulas for high order harmonic generation amplitudes and rates
for negative ions, extending those results to neutral atoms, and applying those
results to seeking ways to enhance high order harmonic yields; and investigating
two-electron effects in high order harmonic generation by short-pulse lasers.

Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers involved with this project are
given a broad education in theoretical atomic physics, first hand experience in
all aspects of scientific communication, and in teaching undergraduates at a
large AAU Land Grant university. Project results are not only published in
leading physics journals and presented at national and international meetings,
but are also periodically distilled and integrated with related work by others
in review articles written by the PI and collaborators. All graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers involved with this project in the past have been
sought after by a variety of other employers, including technology companies,
medical researchers, and other leading AMO theory groups. The basic research
supported by this project contributes broadly to our understanding of means to
control matter on an atomic scale. Our work on increasing the intensities of
high order harmonics may one day lead to sources of coherent x-rays, thus
providing a new means for visualizing living biological structures as well as
nanoscale materials structures. Our investigations involving attosecond pulses
of electrons may lead to ways of resolving electron motion both temporally and
spatially. A workshop on attosecond science at the Kavli Institute for
Theoretical Physics co-organized by the P.I. in 2006 has helped to enhance the
infrastructure for research in this emerging new discipline. The P.I.'s co-
editing of a special focus issue of New Journal of Physics on attosecond science
in 2008 is evidence of his continuing service to the research community.