* 0901491
* Implicit Learning-Based Optimal Control of Uncertain Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Warren Dixon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

A Summary Project Summary: This project focuses on the synthesis of new implicit
learning-based methods that can optimally achieve some control objective for an
uncertain nonlinear system. The main research goals include the development and
experimental verification of implicit learning and adaptive methods that enable
the mismatch between the desired and actual response of an uncertain nonlinear
system to converge while optimizing a trade-off between performance and control
energy. Efforts will investigate if different learning and adaptive methods have
properties that yield more optimal solutions or lead to improved stability
margins. Progress on this research topic has been stymied by the challenge of
solving a Hamilton-Jacobi equation, and the lack of mathematical tools to
asymptotically compensate for generic disturbances with a continuous controller.
With the emergence of new implicit learning methods and general Lyapunov
analysis techniques, the community is now well positioned to focus increasing
attention on simultaneously achieving optimality and stability for uncertain
nonlinear systems. The learning capacity of the developed controllers will
enable analytical optimal control solutions for a broader class of engineering
systems than is currently possible. Optimizing the performance of a control
system along with the required control effort will yield improved efficiency
that can lead to timely economic and environmental cost savings. Intellectual
Merit: Few mathematical tools exist to synthesize controllers for nonlinear
systems with model uncertainty and unmodeled disturbances. Of the few tools that
exist, either the developed controller requires discontinuous feedback or
exhibits degraded steady-state performance in the sense of residual errors.
Recent developments have produced a new class of continuous controllers that can
implicitly learn such disturbances through a nonlinear differential equation.
This advancement opens new possibilities to refocus the nonlinear systems
community on the dual stability and optimality problem for general systems.
Efforts in this project seek to explore how such implicit learning controllers
(and potential permutations) can be used to yield analytical solutions to
different optimal control problems. The ability to integrate the proposed class
of implicit learning controllers (and such controllers integrated with other
adaptive and learning techniques) with optimal control methods is an unexplored
concept. New closed-loop error system development, stability analysis, and
optimal analysis methods will be required to determine the interplay of
optimality, learning capacity, and robustness. Outcomes from these aims may
provide an inroad to new ways to augment controllers to incorporate optimality
into the design process. Broad Impact: The theoretical discoveries are expected
to have a transformative impact on optimal control methods for uncertain
nonlinear systems. One approach to solve current optimal control problems is to
use numerical methods that only provide local optimal results (at best),
typically do not have a proof of stability or optimality, and are typically
open-loop. Also, numerical methods are black box approaches, so the designer is
shielded from any intuition regarding the effect of the system parameters on the
optimality. These issues motivate the need for analytical methods. Yet, the
challenge to develop analytical solutions is that they often do not optimize the
real engineering problem because of the narrow class of systems that can be
analytically examined. The expected outcomes of this project are new
mathematical tools to develop analytical stability and optimality solutions for
broad classes of nonlinear systems. Further broad impact will be realized by
integrating the research outcomes into educational and outreach efforts. Efforts
will seek to disseminate the research outcomes to engineers in industry,
researchers, and students ranging from grade school through graduate school with
an emphasis on under-represented groups. Outcomes of the research will be
disseminated to these groups through outlets including: peer-reviewed
publications, conference workshops, curriculum development, the development of a
new certificate program for industrial control engineers, undergraduate honor?s
thesis research, existing University of Florida programs for highschool and
under-represented students, and a robotics summer camp for grade school
children. A-