* 0901438
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of the Changing Seasonality of Wind-driven Mixing on the Arctic System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 104,337.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a study that
addresses the hypothesis that the expanding extent and duration of seasonal open
water in the Arctic has the potential to reshape the properties and
stratification of the upper ocean, dramatically altering mixed layer depths,
strengthening the internal wave field by at least an order of magnitude, thereby
enhancing turbulent mixing in the halocline and pycnocline. If sufficiently
strong, this enhanced mixing could bring nutrients and heat from the Pacific
Ocean into the Arctic Ocean surface and photic zone, with implications for
ecosystems, surface fluxes and feedbacks to sea-ice formation. This is an
interdisciplinary study that will analyse data from past and current research
programs, and use theory and numerical modeling to address four major
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Given observed sea-ice extent and winds, what
are the potential and observed impacts on wind-driven mixed layer depth within
the Arctic?&lt;br/&gt;2. What is the observed and potential change in the
internal wave field of the Arctic Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the spatial and
temporal variation of the increased mixing rates implied by a more energetic
wave field?&lt;br/&gt;4. What are the impacts of this enhanced mixing on Arctic
ecosystem and heat/freshwater balances?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has
numerous 'Broader Impacts' for a variety of audiences. Scientifically, this
study of the system-wide impacts of Arctic Ocean mixing aims to quantify
anticipated changes, and make the initial foray into physical and ecosystem
implications. These are the basis of changes with implications up the food-chain
through to subsistence hunters, and are also considerations for the
environmental impacts of oil/gas and mineral exploration. Results of the study
will also be used in inter-disciplinary Arctic science courses at the University
of Washington, and bring the Arctic and Arctic Change to schools and the general
public via a special ocean mixing exhibit 'The Ocean in Your Kitchen' at the
annual Polar Science Weekend at the Pacific Science Center, Seattle's main
science museum. The investigators will also reach new groups by organizing
presentations and activities with the Young Professional International Network
in Seattle and Science Caf√©s in Massachusetts and Maine.