* 0901768
* Geometry of Langlands Duality
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ivan Mirkovic, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,707.00

This project is directed towards search for geometry that is expected to
underlie the Langlands conjectures. One aspect is the interpretation of
Langlands duality of reductive groups in terms of homotopy theory (in the
framework of Derived Algebraic Geometry). Another aspect is a continuation of
the work on developing a particular geometric Koszul duality (``Linear Koszul
Duality'') and applying it to representation theory. In relation to physics, the
project envisions a mathematical formalism of t'Hooft operators and a
construction of a certain extended topological field theory in four dimensions,
with applications to knot theory. The project also contains a speculation on the
relation of number theory and physics. Here, a geometrization of number theory
is expected to arise through a connection to quantum field theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims towards relating and unifying
developments in mathematics and theoretical particle physics. The origin of
these developments in mathematics is the so called Langlands program, which is
the modern view on a classical discipline of number theory. In time this program
incorporated a number of central disciplines of mathematics, starting with
representation theory, then algebraic geometry and currently the homotopy
theory. The relation to physics is a part of the current melting of barriers
between mathematics and physics which arose in a period when the two subjects
developed separately. The central impact on mathematics in the last quarter
century was the import of the ideas from quantum field theory (in particular
string theory), which is the part of physics that studies elementary particles.
Recently, Witten, Kapustin and Gukov established a long sought bridge between
Langlands program and quantum field theory (in particular gauge theory and
string theory). The proposed work attempts to work in both directions by
applying ideas from physics to mathematics and mathematical constructions to
physics. It also aims towards deeper understanding of the relation between
quantum field theory and number theory. The proposal also contains more standard
topics within representation theory and Langlands program.&lt;br/&gt;