* 0901706
* IHCS: Small Satellite Communications and Sensor Networking System: Design, Analysis, and Proof of Concept
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Norman Fitz-Coy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to design a mobile ad hoc network
for small satellites that seamlessly integrates these new devices into the
existing space communications infrastructure and, also, advances the
transformative capabilities of small satellites, such as spatially distributed
sensing and monitoring. The approach is to design low power, low mass small
satellites with high data rate (greater than 1 gigabit per second)
communications capabilities; design a network architecture, based on ad hoc and
sensor networking concepts, that maximizes the capabilities of the limited
power, mass and volume small satellites; and conduct simulations and
experimental analysis of an actual space network to verify and validate the
network design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, the
project has the potential to advance the capabilities of small satellites, which
are a transformative technology that can lead to a responsive and cost-effective
space industry. The new models, architectures, and protocols have the potential
to provide researchers with more accurate techniques for space network
simulation and planning, which will expand the utility of space vehicles and
foster new research on space and terrestrial applications. The project leverages
a unique set of resources, including a multidisciplinary team of investigators,
industry partnerships, and state support, to design, build and deploy a space
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, this project has
the potential to advance important applications, such as earth observation,
disaster monitoring, and multi-point remote sensing. Potential economic benefits
include lowering design cost, shortening deployment time, and extending
functionality for space vehicles. The research is integrated with the
investigators' ongoing educational efforts as faculty advisors of various
student organizations that will encourage U.S. and students from
underrepresented groups to seek advanced degrees in science and engineering
through their participation in this multidisciplinary project.