* 0901520
* Problems Related to Graph Packing
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Henry Kierstead, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2012
* USD 287,040.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kierstead, Henry A.
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0901520&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Problems Related to Graph
Packing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory
of graph packing provides a general framework for organizing many areas of graph
theory. Two famous results that can be phrased in this language are Dirac's
Theorem on the existence of Hamiltonian cycles and the Hajnal-Szemerédi Theorem
on equitable coloring. Both are special cases of another important graph packing
problem known as Seymour's Conjecture. This conjecture has been proved for
extremely large graphs by Komlós, Sárkõzy and Szemerédi using their own Blow-Up
Lemma and Szemerédi's Regularity Lemma, but is still open for ordinary sized
graphs. A final example is the Bollobás-Eldridge-Catalin Graph Packing
Conjecture, for which only very special cases have been solved. Each of these
problems requests a packing of certain graphs with bounded maximal degree. Many
versions and special cases of these problems have been investigated by
researches hoping to gain insight into the Graph Packing Conjecture, as well as
other areas of graph theory. So far these efforts have met with only partial
success. This project aims to advance these investigations, paying particular
attention to variations in which the maximum degree condition is replaced by a
weaker condition such as maximum Ore-degree, coloring number, or two coloring
number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graph theory is used to model many practical
problems. This project addresses questions of the following form. Given a graph
that satisfies some local density condition such as having large minimal degree,
e.g., every employee in a company works well with 2/3 of the other employees,
can we always find a sparse, but highly uniform, subgraph, e.g., a circular
ordering of the employees so that every employee works well with each of the two
preceding employees and each of the two succeeding employees? This example is
essentially Pósa's Conjecture (1960). In the early years of graph theory many
elementary techniques were introduced for answering such questions. One example
is the proof of Dirac's Theorem (1950). However many natural questions remained
unanswerable. Over the last thirty years deep and powerful techniques have been
developed for attacking many of these questions, but generally they can only be
applied to unrealistically large graphs. For example, Pósa's conjecture has only
been proved for such enormous graphs. On the other hand, elementary, but
complicated, methods can be used to show an open-ended (path) version of Pósa's
Conjecture for all graphs. One of the challenges for this project is to prove
the full Pósa Conjecture for all graphs.&lt;br/&gt;