* 0901411
* Tribologically-Enhanced Encapsulated Microball Bearings for Reduced Friction and Wear in High-Performance Rotary Microactuators and PowerMEMS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Reza Ghodssi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 330,000.00

Tribologically-Enhanced Encapsulated Microball Bearings for Reduced Friction and
Wear &lt;br/&gt;in High-Performance Rotary Microactuators and PowerMEMS
Devices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0901411&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Reza Ghodssi, Co-PI: Matthew McCarthy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to develop
high-performance rotary ball bearings for Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)
using tribologically-enhanced thin-film coatings. Particular emphasis will be on
the design, fabrication, and experimental characterization of
UltraNanoCrystalline Diamond (UNCD), Silicon Carbide (SiC), Titanium Nitride
(TiN), and Boron Nitride (BN) films as hard-coatings to reduce friction and wear
in microscale rolling contacts. The results of this will be implemented in a
low-friction, low-wear, and long-lifecycle microball bearing for rotary
microactuators and PowerMEMS devices. These support mechanisms will be capable
of continuous operation for speeds in excess of 100,000rpm and provide the
stability and reliability necessary for the realization of high-speed micro-
turbogenerators as well as accurate rotary positioning systems for directional
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits &lt;br/&gt;The work proposed
here constitutes fundamental research into the science and engineering of
microfabricated ball bearing support mechanism including the effects of hard
coatings to reduce friction and wear. It will specifically lead to reliable
support mechanisms for use within various rotary MEMS devices. The design and
engineering of MEMS-fabricated ball bearings using hard-coatings will allow the
realization of these technologies for high-performance applications. The in-situ
experimental investigation proposed here will comprehensively address the
effects of materials, loading, and operation on microfabricated rotary bearings.
This will be achieved through (1) bearing design and fabrication using thin-film
coatings, (2) in-situ experimental characterization using integrated
microturbine actuation, and (3) implementation of optimized bearings in
microfabricated rotary actuators and PowerMEMS devices.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Research &lt;br/&gt;This technology will yield a low-
friction/wear microball support mechanism necessary for the realization of
several high-performance rotary micromachines. Ongoing research is being
conducted on the development of compact micro-turbogenerators for small-scale
cost-effective power generation and rotary actuator platforms for directional
sensor systems. The reliable demonstration of such devices over long life-cycles
would have a substantial impact on distributed autonomous systems such as micro-
air-vehicles, portable power systems, and sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;Education&lt;br/&gt;This research will complement the
university?s well-established research and education programs in materials
science and MEMS. The interdisciplinary scope of the proposed research covers
three major areas: Materials, Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering. The
project offers an excellent opportunity to engage senior undergraduate and
graduate students in masters and doctoral-level research on materials
engineering and its broader impact on the MEMS field. The PI has developed a
two-semester multidisciplinary graduate-level course with an active laboratory
component (Design, Fabrication, and Testing of MEMS and Microsystems). The
proposed research will strengthen ongoing work developing ball-bearing supported
micromachines in the PI?s group, the MEMS Sensors and Actuators Laboratory
(MSAL), as well as the Maryland Nanocenter. The PI supervises a number of
undergraduate and graduate students, the majority of whom are US citizens. The
co-PI is a former NSF GK-12 Teaching Fellow, and currently a postdoctoral
researcher. These activities will directly impact the nature of the
interdisciplinary research curriculum, recruitment of outstanding students, and
dissemination of knowledge through conferences and refereed journal
publication&lt;br/&gt;