* 0901464
* Novel RF/Microwave Switchable Filters Based on Electrostrictive Resonance in Ferroelectric Thin Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
demonstrate novel intrinsically switchable filters for frequency-agile
communication systems and cognitive radios. The basis of the proposed effort is
the investigation of field-tunable electrostriction effect in ferroelectric thin
films. The resonant behavior of the ferroelectric thin film can be switched on
and off through application of a DC bias voltage, and can potentially be
utilized for designing low cost, high performance and integrated intrinsically
switchable radio frequency (RF) and microwave resonators and
filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frequency-agile devices provide the ability to
switch communication channels through switchable and tunable frontend filters.
The realization of frequency-agile components with minimal complexity is further
desired for miniature low-power wireless systems integrated into a single chip.
In this work, a key building block for a frequency-agile transceiver is
proposed, utilizing the acoustic wave and microwave interactions in
ferroelectric thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve to
educate graduate students through direct participation in the research. The
proposed research is of particular value for students due to the
interdisciplinary nature, where students will become experts in thin film
materials deposition and characterization, device fabrication, acoustic
resonance, and microwave devices. In addition, the efforts of this project will
include supporting outreach programs aimed at promoting diversity among
scientists and engineers. These efforts include involvement of undergraduate
students through the University Research Opportunity Program (UROP) at the
University of Michigan, the NSF REU, Marian Sara Parker and M-STEM Programs
specifically designed to provide research experiences to undergraduate and
graduate female and minority students.