* 0901683
* Evaluation of Carrier Velocity in Organic Single Crystal and Polycrystalline Thin-Film Transistors and Development of a Velocity-Field Model
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2012
* USD 346,333.00

The objective of this research is to evaluate the velocity-electric field
characteristics of single crystal based and polycrystalline organic transistors.
The approach is to use both DC and transient measurements to measure the
velocities at electric fields up to 106 V/cm. DC measurements involve the
extraction of velocities from the output characteristics of a set of small-
channel length devices. Transient measurements involve the measurement of
channel formation time and the extraction of velocity
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Knowledge of the charge
carrier velocity-electric field relationship is important in understanding
charge transport mechanisms in organic transistors. Such measurements are not
routinely done by research groups due to the requirement of specialized
instrumentation, device structures, and measurement methods. The proposed work
will address this need and fill this gap. Additionally, the proposed research
will enable the characterization of trapping phenomena and its effects on the
turn-on and turn-off characteristics of transistors. This will be useful in
designing circuits and systems such as displays based on organic transistors.
Trapping phenomena are especially important in thin-film
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.: This work will lead to the
continued development of coursework in organic electronics as well as the
production of trained human resources for industry/academia including Ph.Ds.
Minority and women students will be given research opportunities leading to
enhanced diversity in the workforce. Interactions with US-based industries will
lead to knowledge transfer of information generated from this work and
collaborative work. Outreach to area schools will promote interest in science
and engineering among such students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;