* 0901605
* SGER: Social Vulnerability and Urban Development Patterns:  Impacts on Community Resilience and Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Shannon Van Zandt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2010
* USD 144,671.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will examine the impact of
urban development patterns and social vulnerability on impact, dislocation, and
early repair and rebuilding decisions which are critical for community
resilience. The susceptibility of a community to social and physical impacts
from disasters is an important component of creating resilient communities that
are able to respond effectively to hazard events and recover quickly after
impact. Characteristics of the built, natural and social environment may
exacerbate or mitigate such vulnerability and impede or facilitate the ability
of residents and businesses to recover. Specifically, the research team will
assess the impact of existing social and physical development patterns on
community resilience and recovery. Data collection and analysis will be driven
by the following research questions:

- Did existing development patterns mitigate or exacerbate damage and loss to
property?

- Did the spatial distribution of vulnerable populations mitigate or exacerbate
damage and loss to property?

- Do social vulnerability factors facilitate or impede decision-making with
regard to dislocation and early repair/rebuilding decisions?

Data collected will build on existing databases of environmental, management,
and demographic data of the Texas coast. Specifically, the project team has been
involved in collecting and analyzing development, sustainability, and resiliency
data for the entire Texas Coast and these data have been made easily available
for local communities to plan future development (see coastalatlas.tamug.edu).
Consequently, findings from the analysis will be both more immediate and more
extensive than the proposed data collection alone would permit. Understanding
how current development and vulnerability patterns mitigate or exacerbate damage
from disasters is critical for enabling local communities and professionals
involved in the design, regulation, and management of the built and natural
environments to construct communities that are more socially and physically
resilient.

These data will serve a baseline for further study of community recovery, for
which additional funding will be sought. The ability to capture initial damage
assessments and early decisions related to dislocation and repair/rebuilding
will provide the foundation for the development of a longitudinal database which
will continue to generate a better understanding of the relationship between
community resilience and recovery. The data regarding dislocation and early
repair/rebuilding decisions are particularly ephemeral, justifying the funding
under the Small Grants for Exploratory Research.