* 0901253
* Beyond Kirillov--Reshetikhin modules: character formulae and  highest weight categories
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Vyjayanthi Chari, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2014
* USD 162,499.00

The main theme of the proposal is to study connections between the
representation theory of affine Lie algebras and their quantum analogs and other
algebraic structures. The theory of finite dimensional representations of affine
algebras shows many of the same properties as modular representation theory and
is remarkably complex. The PI intends to show that one can associate quasi-
hereditary algebras to such categories and to explore the possibility of proving
an analog of the famous BGG duality for these representations. Many of these
ideas will also work in the greater generality of extended affine Lie algebras.
Another theme of the project is to understand the relationship between
representations of quantum affine algebras and cluster algebras. An important
concept in this is the idea of prime representations and minimal affinizations
and the PI plans to develop a deeper understanding of these ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affine Lie algebras and their quantum analogs have
remarkable connections to a number of different fields including string theory,
conformal field theory, topological field theory, infinite dimensional geometry
and mathematical physics. Important physical phenomena can be better explained
and predicted via mathematical theories built on them. Representations of affine
Lie algebras and their quantum analogs will capture important physical
information and are the core of the building the above connections to other
fields. The main theme of this project is to study the representation theory of
affine Lie algebras and their quantum analogs.&lt;br/&gt;