* 0901543
* Particle Filtering for Stochastic Control and Global Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Steven Marcus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0901543&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of
this program is to provide new breakthroughs in the areas of stochastic control
and global optimization through insights gained from particle filtering and from
additional recent results in nonlinear filtering. With a focus on applying the
particle filtering methodology, the proposed research will result in (i) new
computationally efficient algorithms for continuous-state partially observable
Markov decision processes and global optimization, and (ii) rigorous analysis of
the algorithms through the development of bounds and convergence proofs. In
particular, for global optimization problems, the particle filtering framework
can prove transformative by providing a firm analytical basis for understanding
why algorithms work well, when algorithms break down, how to compare algorithms,
which algorithm works better than the others for a specific problem, and how to
develop new algorithms that should work well for particular
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partially
observable stochastic control and global optimization are areas with many
theoretical challenges and many potential applications. To attack difficult
problems of a size that are found in most applications will require significant
new methodologies. The proposed approach based on particle filtering will
provide new algorithms and rigorous analytical justification beyond that
available with other methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Stochastic control and optimization can be applied
to many problems of critical concern in US industry, so the resulting algorithms
will have broad and transformative applicability. In the project, they will be
tested on problems in industries from telecommunications to manufacturing to
finance. The project will closely integrate the training of PhD students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;