* 0901251
* Modeling Heating Effects in Low-Power Multi-Gate SOI Devices and High-Power GaN HEMTs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Stephen Goodnick, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/2012
* USD 306,184.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Since scaling of conventional semiconductor devices
will ultimately reach its limits due to both high production cost and device
reliability issues, alternatives to classical metal-oxide-semiconductor field
effect transistors (MOSFETs) are being sought. There are two ways one can
achieve enhanced device performance: (1) by using alternative materials such as
strained-Si, SiGe, GaN, etc.; and (2) by using alternative device
geometries.&lt;br/&gt;Fully-depleted silicon on insulator (SOI), dual gate and
FinFET devices are examples of al-ternative device technologies. Since the
active silicon film in these structures is placed on top of a buried insulator
layer, the power dissipation due to the substrate leakage current is eliminated.
However, the buried oxide layer (which has a thermal conductivity about 100
times smaller than bulk Si) is a tremendous barrier to heat conduction, and
degradation of the carrier mobility in the channel region of these devices
occurs due to self-heating effects. In addition to silicon on insula-tor low
power devices, heating is also a problem in high power wide-bandgap GaN HEMTs
due to the large operation biases. The understanding of self-heating in these
device structures can also shed light on their reliability, namely the
phenomenon of current collapse due to the formation of cracks at the gate-drain
end of the channel due to large electric fields and high lattice tempera-
tures.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the purpose of this project is to develop
sophisticated particle-based device simu-lation tools that simultaneously take
into account self-heating effects by solving the Boltzmann transport equations
(BTEs) for both electrons and phonons, and considering quantum confine-ment
effects for both the electrons and the phonons. Such a tool would be the most
sophisticated simulator to date since electron and phonon transport is treated
at the same physical level within the BTE.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this project
is two-fold. (1) For low-power devices it allows for better device de-signs
including the utilization of alternative buried insulator materials that may
lead to better de-vice performance. This in turn can lead to new generations of
CMOS devices. (2) Regarding the GaN HEMTs, if the problem of current collapse is
understood and prevented, then these devices will have applications in the
military and the automotive industry where both high-power, high temperature and
high-frequency devices are being sought. Yet another important component of this
project is that the students involved in the project will work on the state of
the art research