* 0901056
* US - South America Workshop:  Intraspecific variation and social systems: Explaining variation based on neuroendocrine and genetic mechanisms; Santiago, Chile, August, 2009.
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Loren Hayes, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2011
* USD 29,609.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0901056: Loren D. Hayes, The University of Louisiana at
Monroe&lt;br/&gt;0901045: Daniel T. Blumstein, UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
U.S.-Chile collaborative award will support a workshop on intraspecific
variation and social systems. The event will be held in August 2009 at the
Universidad Católica de Chile. The workshop will be organized by Dr. Loren Hayes
of the University of Louisiana at Monroe, Dr. Daniel Blumstein of UCLA, and Dr.
Rodrigo Vasquez and Dr. Luis Ebensperger from the Universidad Católica de Chile.
The meeting will serve as a forum for researchers to discuss new ways of
thinking about mechanisms that lead to instraspecific variation in animal social
systems. The workshop will foster communication between an interdisciplinary
group of experts in the fields of behavioral ecology, endocrinology, genetics,
and neurobiology. Particular emphasis will be placed on the participation of
graduate students and junior researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key objective
of the workshop is to plan the development of a mechanistically-sound model of
social variation, with an aim to predict the effect of intraspecific habitat
variation on the expression of social group living and mating systems.
Specifically this workshop will expand the scope of existing ecological models
for social group formation and maintenance. &lt;br/&gt;