* 0901760
* Regenerative Nanosensors for Quantitative Assessment of Oxidative Stress in Neurodegeneration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Lee Goldstein, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 253,545.00

Intellectual Merit Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress are major
contributors to the pathogenesis of important neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and cerebrovascular disease.
The central nervous system comprises the most oxidatively active organ system in
the body. Under normal physiological conditions, brain activity- and the
neuronal and synaptic processes underpinning this activity- generates free
radical species that progressively damage essential biomolecules (nucleic acids,
lipids, proteins). Under a variety of pathological states, ROS-mediated
oxidative damage is dramatically accelerated and leads to irreversible brain
damage, cerebral dysfunction, cognitive decline, and death. An overwhelming body
of scientific evidence now points to ROS-mediated oxidative damage as a key
pathogenic pathway involved in the earliest stages of many neurodegenerative
diseases. Technology to quantitatively detect and monitor ROS is critical for
understanding and treating these disorders, Currently available ROS assay
systems (1) detect only a single (or at most a limited number) of biological
relevant species, (2) chemically interact with the species under analysis, (3)
require complex, time-consuming, labor-intensive analytical processing, and (4)
are temporally disconjugate with respect to the short half-lives of most
biologically relevant ROS species. This last point is especially important and
frequently overlooked. By the time analytical measurements are initiated using
conventional methods, significant loss of signal has accrued due to
decomposition. For all of these reasons, available ROS detection technology does
not meet the analytical standards required for modern biomedical research. A
transformative research program to develop an innovative nanotechnology-based
toolkit for measuring ROS in biological systems is proposed. A non-enzymatic
probe (nanoceria), integrated sensor components, and simplified detection
procedure will enable sequential analytical operation on a small, inexpensive
chip. An outstanding merit of the proposed approach is the use of a versatile
nanoparticle detector array that generates a detectable amperometric signal
following oxidation state alterations induced by interaction with ROS. The
proposed technology development program will enable fundamental studies of
neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis that have not been previously possible.

Broader Impact The outcome of this research is linked to high-impact national
healthcare priorities. The program will establish an interdisciplinary
collaboration between the University of Central Florida; Boston University
School of Medicine, College of Engineering, and Photonics Center; and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH)-funded Alzheimer's Disease Center at Boston
University. Education and training are essential components and leverages
graduate and undergraduate teaching opportunities, coursework (including a
highly successful internet-based off-site access program), and summer research
programming. Additional emphasis will focus on minority and K-12 students who
participate in on-campus interdisciplinary educational programs at both
institutions. The proposed research and educational activities will provide a
unique cross-dimensional (nano-to-meso scale) and cross-disciplinary (materials,
electrochemistry, fluid mechanics, electrical engineering, neurobiology)
approach for development of innovative non-enzyme biosensors with far-ranging
biomedical impact. This research will deepen understanding of electrochemical
and biochemical reactions at the nanoscale and affords significant potential to
provide new insights into the pathogenic role of ROS in human neurodegenerative
diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and stroke.