* 0901250
* Mathematical Problems in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Sergiu Klainerman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 540,229.00

General Relativity has very important long term goals among which&lt;br/&gt;the
weak and strong cosmic censorship, final state and stability of
Kerr&lt;br/&gt;conjectures are the most outstanding. To complete such goals
one&lt;br/&gt;needs to solve many fundamental difficulties among which the PI
proposes&lt;br/&gt;to concentrate on the problems of uniqueness and stability of
the Kerr&lt;br/&gt;family as well as the bounded curvature conjecture. The PI
intends to&lt;br/&gt;continue his work with A. Ionescu, and more recently S.
Alexakis, to&lt;br/&gt;remove the restrictive real analyticity assumptions of
the well known&lt;br/&gt;results of S. Hawking and Carter-Robinson. The PI also
plans to continue&lt;br/&gt;to work with I. Rodnianski and J. Szeftel and settle
the important&lt;br/&gt;bounded curvature conjecture. Together with I.
Rodnianski they plan&lt;br/&gt;to adapt the recent work of Christodoulou, based
on what he calls&lt;br/&gt;the short pulse method, with which he was able to
derive the first&lt;br/&gt;result on the formation of trapped surfaces for
solutions of the Einstein&lt;br/&gt;vacuum equations. The PI and his
collaborator believe that the new method can be signifficantly improved and
applied to various situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the proposal
will give a better understanding of some&lt;br/&gt;of the main theoretical open
problems of General Relativity. The long&lt;br/&gt;term hope is that some of the
insight gained in the process will &lt;br/&gt;influence related areas such
Theoretical Physics and Numerical Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;Of paramount interest to
the gravitational wave experiments is to de-&lt;br/&gt;sign numerical algorithms
which can simulate, realistically, black hole&lt;br/&gt;interactions. The PI
also hopes that the interplay between geometric and an-&lt;br/&gt;alytic
methods, which are being developed, will influence other areas
of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear PDE, Differential Geometry and Analysis. The PI plans to
attract&lt;br/&gt;and train a larger number of PhD students and postdocs, than
he has&lt;br/&gt;done so far, in General Relativity. The PI believes that the
subject is going&lt;br/&gt;now through an exciting period when important
problems are solved and many new avenues of research are being open.