* 0901754
* QMHP:: Decoherence, dissipation, entanglement and control in nanostructures.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yuli Lyanda-Geller, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

QMHP: Decoherence, dissipation, entanglement and control in nanostructures. Over
the past decade, electronic devices have been getting smaller and smaller,
driving the progress of technology. Smaller devices are desirable for improving
computer speed and the complexity of computer chips. The possibility of
continuing this trend is limited because technology is already close to reaching
the atomic level. Remarkably, in this limit, different rules of electron
behavior, particularly quantum phenomena, become important. Tapping the laws of
quantum mechanics presents the opportunity of using quantum-mechanical
coherence, interference of electronic waves, and entanglement ? linking of
quantum mechanical objects so that one object cannot be described without
knowledge of its counterpart - for developing a new generation of nanodevices. A
fundamental challenge is the understanding and realization of quantum phenomena
in devices which function under voltage, i.e., in non-equilibrium conditions,
and in the presence of disorder and fluctuations due to impurity atoms that play
an important role in supplying charge carriers and defining electric and
magnetic properties. Quantum phenomena are limited by loss of coherence
(decoherence), and it is necessary to identify mechanisms of losses and to find
the means to control them. Decoherence will define dissipation per bit of
information in future information technology systems. Scientific efforts
directed at a theoretical understanding of decoherence and dissipation will be
focused on three interconnected projects: 1) absorption of power and Rabi
oscillations (cyclic quantum behavior) in artificial nanoscale atoms - quantum
dots, 2) loss of coherence by spin (intrinsic quantum angular momentum) and
charge in silicon quantum dots, 3) theory of coherence and transport in magnetic
semiconductor nanostructures, which may combine magnetic memory and electronic
functionalities in single devices. Intellectual merit: The proposed research
holds a promise to elucidate specific mechanisms of decoherence in quantum
devices and to devise methods to control decoherence and dissipation. Though not
the sole focus of the work the results may benefit quantum computing research.
The proposed approach promises to overcome formal challenges of treating time-
dependent quantum behavior in the presence of voltage, taking into account
strong correlations and entanglement effects. The expected analytical results
will have a potential to affect the future modeling of quantum devices. Broader
impacts: The proposed research has a potential benefit for society because it is
aimed at developing a fundamental understanding of how to decrease power
dissipation for bit of information, a trend as important as miniaturization of
devices. The impact for education will include curriculum development in a
nanoscience course for graduate students and advanced undergraduates, which aims
at training of future quantum engineers, fulfilling an important societal need.
Both the PI and a postdoctoral researcher funded via the proposed program will
actively engage in discussions of the program projects with the diverse group of
graduate students of the PI research group. A topical website on dissipation and
decoherence linked to the Purdue Department of Physics and the Birck
Nanotechnology Center websites will be focused on broad dissemination of the
expected research results in order to enhance scientific and technological
understanding.