* 0901679
* DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLIANT FREE-STANDING STRUCTURES FOR SUB 32-nm MULTI-CORE ICs
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Suresh Sitaraman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this research is to design, fabricate, assemble, characterize,
and test innovative compliant, free-standing, parallel-path, off-chip
interconnects for next-generation microelectronic systems. The proposed
interconnects will be wafer-level, scalable, cost-effective, environmentally-
friendly, and reworkable. The approach is to employ a heterogeneous architecture
that combines both column and parallel-path compliant interconnects that will be
fabricated through sequential lithography and plating processes. By developing
electrical and thermo-mechanical simulation models, the interconnect design will
be optimized.

The proposed compliant interconnects represent a paradigm shift in chip-to-
substrate interconnect technology and present an innovative approach to meet the
semiconductor packaging requirements for the year 2016 and beyond. Combining the
fundamental principles related to material, mechanical, electrical, and thermal
characteristics with practical aspects of fabrication, assembly, and testing of
interconnects, this high-risk far-reaching approach proposed in this program is
beyond the current focus of the electronics industry, and thus lends itself to
university-based research.

Through miniaturization, this program will have a unique impact in areas such as
high-speed computing, medical electronics and sensors implanted in the body for
health monitoring and drug delivery, integrated digital-RF-opto systems,
wireless and portable electronics, and smart "fly" electronics and sensors used
for intelligence gathering and bio/chemical sensing. Thus, by impacting
computer, communications, consumer, and medical microsystems, this research will
provide extensive benefits to the society at large. The research findings will
be integrated into classroom instruction and published in journals and
conferences. Through student internships and one-to-one mentoring, a diverse mix
of students will be motivated to pursue engineering education.