* 0901344
* Free Probability Theory and its Applications in Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,11/30/2012
* Liming Ge, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 11/30/2012
* USD 135,244.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Shen&lt;br/&gt;The PI will apply Voiculescu?s "non-
commutative" (or "free") probability theory to the subject of operator algebras,
which includes von Neumann algebras and C*-algebras. The study of operator
algebras is often viewed as the study of "non-commutative measure theory" or
?non-commutative geometry?. Over the last seventy years, this has turned out to
be a rich and fertile field of study. Non-commutative probability theory (or
free probability theory) in the context of non-commutative measure spaces was
developed by D. Voiculescu in the 1980's. Several important problems in the area
of operator algebras were solved by the tools from non-commutative probability
theory. In this project, the PI wishes to further develop free probability
theory; with a view to attacking other problems in the area of operator
algebras. In particular, he will study Voiculescu?s topological free entropy
theory for unital C*-algebras; to search C*-algebras whose BDF-extension
semigroups are not groups; to compute Voiculescu?s free entropy dimension for
more finite von Neumann algebras; and to study the generator problems for von
Neumann algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of operator
algebras was introduced to obtain a more rigorous mathematical formulation of
the basics of quantum mechanics. From a probabilistic point view, free
probability theory has surprising applications in the area of operator algebras.
This project aims to develop new tools in free probability theory aiming at
problems in the area operator algebras. The solutions to these problems will
provide us with new ways to classify von Neumann algebras and C* algebras. The
significance of the project lies in the fact that new developments in the theory
of free probability and operator algebras have always had profound applications
to several fields in mathematics and physics such as statistics and quantum
mechanics. Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activities: The project is the
continuation of principal investigator's prior work in free probability theory,
in BDF-extension semigroups, and in generator problem of von Neumann algebras.
Broader Impact of the Proposed Activities: The project will take place at a
location that strengthens the broader impacts of research development in the
University of New Hampshire. The research group of Operator Algebra and Operator
Theory in the University of New Hampshire consists of several well-established
mathematicians. Summer support for graduate students will help graduate students
to learn the subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5.