* 0901827
* GOALI: Terahertz Transmission-Line Metamaterials for Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tatsuo Itoh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2012
* USD 545,526.00

The objective of this research is to develop planar transmission-line
metamaterials integrated with active quantum-cascade gain material for novel
terahertz photonic and electronic devices. The approach is to use terahertz
quantum-cascade laser metal-metal waveguide (similar to microstrip transmission
line) that is fabricated using a wafer-bonding process as a platform for the
implementation of transmission-line metamaterials. Research will proceed via (i)
a comprehensive program of metamaterial electromagnetic design and modeling,
microfabrication, experimental characterization, and (ii) design of advanced
quantum-cascade gain material and its growth by molecular beam epitaxy by the
industrial collaborator.

The intellectual merit is the development of active terahertz planar
metamaterials that provide photonic gain from stimulated emission to balance
losses, and the demonstration of novel active metamaterial devices, such as
zero-index lasers, sub-wavelength lasers, and phased array terahertz emitters.
The terahertz spectral range is ideally situated to allow integration of
metamaterial and gain concepts from both electronic and photonic frequencies.

The broader impact is the development of terahertz technology for eventual
applications in sensing, imaging, communications, and spectroscopy applications,
and the transfer of this technology to the industrial partner to support its
programs in high-speed electronics for defense and space science. Outreach to
underrepresented groups will occur by working with UCLA's Center for Excellence
in Engineering and Diversity program to recruit undergraduate students for
research. Educational exchange will occur via students directly interacting with
industry, and industrial employees performing research at UCLA. The PI will
develop a graduate course "Terahertz Technology" that will be informed by this
research.