* 0901131
* Collaborative Research: Changing Seasonality of the Arctic: Alteration of Production Cycles and Trophic Linkages in Response to Changes in Sea Ice and Upper Ocean Physics
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Carin Ashjian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 152,342.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant seasonal changes in arctic
sea ice have been observed in recent years, characterized by unprecedented
summer melt-back because of the lengthening of the summer melt season with
earlier melt and later freeze onsets. As summer sea ice extent shrinks to record
low levels, the peripheral seas of the Arctic Ocean are exposed much earlier to
atmospheric surface heat flux, resulting in longer and warmer summers with more
oceanic heat absorption. The changing seasonality in the arctic ice/ocean system
will alter the timing, magnitude, duration, and pattern of marine production
cycles, by disrupting key trophic linkages and feedbacks in planktonic food
webs. These alterations will have consequences on the structure of arctic marine
ecosystems with reverberations through the entire arctic system up to and
including humans. It is, thus, important to understand the changes in the
patterns of seasonality in the arctic physical and biological system. The PIs
propose to investigate future changes in the seasonal linkages and interactions
among arctic sea ice, the water column, and the marine production cycles and
trophic structure as an integrated system. Their investigation will target the
following seasonality hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Changes in the timing
of spring sea ice retreat will cause a mismatch in the timing of primary and
secondary production such that the plankton community size structure is altered.
That in turn will modify the utilization of primary production and the
availability of large zooplankton prey for upper trophic levels (e.g., whales,
fish).&lt;br/&gt;2) Closer coupling of phytoplankton and zooplankton production
cycles will result in a reduction in the magnitude of the spring bloom over
productive shelves, greater utilization of primary production by water column
consumers and a reduction in its export to the benthos.&lt;br/&gt;3) A longer
growing season, which might include a secondary production peak later in
summer/early fall, will permit the colonization of the Arctic Ocean by subarctic
species that presently are unable to persist there because of the short duration
of the growing season. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be explored
by synthesizing model estimates and satellite and field observations. The PIs
will use the existing coupled pan-Arctic Biology/Ice/Ocean Modeling and
Assimilation System (BIOMAS), together with observations, to strengthen their
understanding of the integrated arctic system of sea ice, ocean, and the marine
production cycles. A series of model hindcasts, sensitivity studies, and future
scenario simulations will be conducted to identify seasonally sensitive linkages
and to test their hypotheses