* 0901196
* DDIG: Asheninka Perene: Documentation and Grammar
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Elena Mihas, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Keren Rice
* 06/30/2011
* USD 12,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ashéninka Perené is an endangered Arawak language
of 5,500 people in southeastern Peru, rapidly losing its vitality due to the
intensity of long-standing language contact with Spanish speakers and government
policy of integration (acculturation) of indigenous communities into mainstream
culture. Ashéninka Perené also falls in the category of undocumented languages
since the three necessary subsets of reference materials (grammar, texts, and
dictionary) for the language as well as audio and video recordings of Ashéninka
Perené speech are non-existent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a critical threshold in
the language's history, when it needs to be documented before it ceases to have
a vital speaker base, a two-year documentation project, necessary both for the
future community revitalization and language preservation programs and
linguistic research, will be conducted, with support from the National Science
Foundation. A linguist working in collaboration with a team of indigenous
community consultants will produce a full-scale reference grammar of Ashéninka
Perené, a lexical database, and an extensive corpus of audio and video
recordings, covering traditional and children's stories, accounts of everyday
activities and historical and social events, conversation, and ceremonial
speeches. Ashéninka Perené speakers will participate in all stages of the
documentation project, gaining skills in using lexicographic software, audio and
video recording, and linguistic analysis of the collected data. In addition to
producing a thorough permanent record of this endangered language, the materials
resulting from this project will benefit both the community of linguistics and
the native community. The grammar and the other reference materials will provide
a comprehensive documentation of the language for academic researchers of
Arawakan languages as well as for linguistic typologists and theoreticians.
Further, the products of this research will provide reference materials needed
to promote local literacy in both Ashéninka Perené and Spanish and to train
bilingual school teachers in the region. Lastly, the broad participation of
local speakers in this language documentation project will help create the
necessary knowledge and infrastructure to continue the language preservation
work after the project is finished.