* 0901761
* Harmonic analysis and partial differential equations: sharp geometric inequalities, fully nonlinear equations and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Guozhen Lu, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 10/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This research project involves topics that use harmonic analysis techniques with
a view toward applications to nonlinear partial differential equations. One part
of the project investigates the sharp geometric inequalities of Sobolev, Moser-
Trudinger, and Adams, considers the existence of extremal functions for them,
and explores applications of these ideas in a variety of geometric settings
(e.g., Euclidean space, Riemannian manifolds, the Heisenberg group, spheres in
complex space, CR-manifolds). Such problems are important in both analysis and
geometry. The principal investigator, jointly with his collaborators, has
succeeded in deriving the sharp constants and existence of extremal functions in
a number of important cases. Nevertheless, there are still many challenging
problems that remain open. Another group of problems is concerned with the
existence, uniqueness, and regularity of solutions to nonlinear partial
differential equations, in particular, the inhomogeneous infinity Laplacian and
degenerate Monge-Ampere equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic analysis and
nonlinear partial differential equations are central areas of modern
mathematics. They have found applications in numerous disciplines, including
engineering (such as vibration and noise reduction), stochastic control and
optimization, game theory, physics, chemical combustion, mass transport, human
vision and other topics in the life and medical sciences. Graduate students will
participate in this project by receiving research training under the supervision
of the principal investigator.