* 0901334
* Scattering Theory on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Antonio Sa Barreto, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 301,611.00

In this project the principal investigator will study scattering and inverse
scattering on asymptotically Euclidean and asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds.
Examples of asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds include quotients of hyperbolic
space by certain groups of motion. The de Sitter-Schwarzschild model of the
exterior of a black hole can be viewed as an asymptotically hyperbolic manifold
with two ends, while the Schwarzschild model of the exterior of a black hole can
be viewed as a manifold with two ends that is asymptotically hyperbolic on one
end and asymptotically Euclidean on the other. The principal investigator will
study the asymptotic behavior of solutions of the wave equation on nontrapping
asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds and the Schwarzschild model of a black hole.
In both cases the long-time behavior of waves is associated with the
distribution of resonances, or scattering poles, and the project will address
this question as well. The principal investigator will also study inverse
scattering, including the question of determining an asymptotically Euclidean
manifold from the scattering matrices at all energies. This requires the proof
of a support theorem that generalizes to this setting the well-known support
theorem for the Radon transform in Euclidean space.

One central problem in the study of partial differential equations is to
understand how geometric properties of a medium influence the way waves
propagate on it. The principal investigator will study the long time-behavior of
solutions to the wave equation on spaces that are motivated by examples from
physics. The "inverse problem" consists of using measurements obtained from
waves that propagate on a certain medium to determine some of the medium's
geometric properties. For example, by knocking on the surface of an object and
listening to how it responds to this signal, one can obtain information about
the object's interior; by measuring the time a wave travels between two points
on the surface of the object one would like to obtain information about the
variable speed of propagation of the waves in the interior of the object. The
principal investigator will study problems of this nature in the spaces
indicated above. The techniques that need to be developed might also have
applications in other areas, such as tomography.