* 0901618
* Micromachined Clog-free Ejector Using Thin Liquid Film Valve for Reliable Bioink Delivery
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jae Kwon, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 268,033.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
study novel aqueous-core embedded microfluidic valves to eliminate serious
clogging problems caused by evaporation of many bioink materials. The approach
is to investigate and utilize various aqueous-core materials having good bioink
compatibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This proposal addresses
historical and traditional clogging problems of nozzle-based microfluidic
systems. It is very important to eliminate drying-out problems during operations
of the microfluidic systems. The proposed device is a clog free ejector with a
thin liquid-film valve using immiscible and inert material to the system fluid.
A thin liquid-film with negligible evaporation speed provides a separation and
protection layer at the liquid-air interface of the system fluid. Well-
controlled movement of the liquid-film can be significantly enhanced on
superhydrophobic surfaces by employing nanotechnology. Aqueous-core-embedded
microfluidic valve will provide effective control of evaporation rate by the
complete separation of the microfluids from the air exposure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research will overcome
historical challenges being faced in contactless microfluidic delivery systems.
The results of the proposed research will also forge new frontiers in the area
of reliable microfluidic delivery systems. The transformative nature of the
proposed research will be a valuable resource for many other research
communities and will serve as a keystone for tying classical problems to high
reliable novel solutions. The education program of the research will focus on
increasing participation of underrepresented minorities, providing early
exposure of micro/nanotechnology to high school students and providing academic
career development opportunities in micro/nanotechnology.