* 0901053
* SKYMONITOR: A Network to Monitor the State of the Night Sky at Dark Sky Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Donald Davis, International Dark Sky Association
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Clegg
* 05/31/2013
* USD 152,529.00

This project will automate the production of, and then produce, 10 Night Sky
Brightness Monitors (NSBM), for distribution at major US astronomical
observatories. The NSBM is a specially equipped photometer created to resist
common outdoor conditions. The project aims to establish a network of NSBMs that
will operate remotely in an autonomous fashion and that will provide continuous,
long term measurements of the brightness of the night sky at ten major US
observatory sites.

The NSBM was developed by the International Dark Sky Association (IDA) and the
Vatican Observatory. Each consists of a remote photometer head with two
detectors and a base station that can be located up to 100 meters from the
detectors and is connected directly to the Web. Each photometer samples an area
of 5.6 degrees diameter of the sky, one near the zenith and another direction.
The detectors are equipped with a broadband filter that allows accurate
measurements of the skylight. The photometers will be calibrated for accuracy
and stability and their response will be correlated with other photometric
systems. A data collection and archiving center will be established at the
headquarters of the IDA located in Tucson, Arizona, and the data will be made
available to the public via a web-based interface.

Ground based astronomical observations are fundamental to our understanding of
the Universe and consequently preserving our ability to access dark skies from
the ground is critical. Today, the world is at risk of losing this important
natural resource to the increasing sky glow. Both national and international
astronomical observatories, which depend on the darkness of the sky to carry out
their observations, are threatened by the encroaching urban expansion. However,
to date, the only research by these observatories on the impinging sky glow
comes from an occasional photometric or spectroscopic observation. The objective
of the SKYMONITOR network is to change the way sky brightness is recorded and
observed.

Data will be transmitted to a central location, where it will be collected,
archived, and made available via the Web to the public. Such data will allow
assessing the long term trends in sky brightness at major astronomical sites and
other environmentally sensitive locations, and will also be available for
research projects, education and public outreach. Besides astronomical
applications, the equipment and the information created by this research can be
utilized in engineering, urban planning, and in other sciences. For example,
requesting a dark sky ordinance or laws to limit outdoor lighting nearly always
brings questions about the need for such controls. Having sound data to
demonstrate the quality of night skies at sensitive sites, or the impact of
light pollution on the quality of these skies is essential to establish
credibility with jurisdictional authorities while justifying the need to create
an outdoor lighting ordinance or to improve an existing one. Data obtained under
the project will also be useful in understanding the impact of light pollution
on flora and fauna. Launching the project in 2009 will integrate it with the
goals of the International Year of Astronomy (IYA).