* 0901166
* Dispersive PDE at critical regularity
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,11/30/2009
* Monica Visan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 11/30/2009
* USD 154,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this project is to
further the understanding of the global/large data behavior of solutions to
certain dispersive equations at critical regularity. More precisely, the
principal investigator considers global well-posedness and scattering questions
for nonlinear Schrodinger, Klein-Gordon, and (modified) Korteweg-de Vries
equations for initial data belonging to critical/low-regularity Sobolev spaces.
Critical-regularity problems for the nonlinear wave (NLW) and Schrodinger (NLS)
equations have attracted considerable attention over the past few years. These
works have developed a powerful set of tools and techniques meant to address NLW
and NLS at conserved critical regularity. The main purpose of this project is to
strengthen and broaden this toolbox. Immediate goals include treating the
focusing (low-dimensional) energy-critical NLS and the defocusing/focusing mass-
critical NLS, problems that lie a little beyond the reach of existing techniques
(except in the case of radial data). Second, the principal investigator wishes
to test the robustness of the toolbox developed thus far against new
difficulties, such as problems for which the critical regularity does not
correspond to a (coercive) conserved quantity or problems with broken
symmetries. The last part of the project is concerned with the global well-
posedness question for the (modified) Korteweg-de Vries equation for initial
data in low regularity spaces. Thanks to complete integrability techniques, this
problem is understood better in the periodic case than in the nonperiodic one.
The principal investigator proposes to revisit these new advances due to
Kappeler and Topalov from a purely partial differential equations point of view
in the hope of discovering an appropriate gauge that would allow the treatment
of the nonperiodic case at low regularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equations
under investigation in this project have a rich history. They have been studied
by mathematicians and physicists alike because they capture important facets of
certain physical behaviors, while maintaining an attractive simplicity. As such,
they serve as breeding grounds for new analytical techniques for studying
partial differential equations. Although the equations to be investigated are
drastically oversimplified relative to the needs of science or industry, the
principal investigator believes that the study of these equations will foster
the development of tools with much broader applicability, while even the tiniest
hastening toward an era when supercritical equations such as the celebrated
Navier-Stokes equation can be treated would be very beneficial indeed. Parallel
to the development of a toolbox is its dissemination. The principal investigator
will continue her activities in this direction, including the maintenance of a
set of lecture notes on this material.