* 0901136
* Projects on Modular Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Yi Hu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuing his previous work on
elliptic stable maps, the PI's near-term objective is to complete his joint work
on the structures of the moduli spaces of genus-two stable maps; then strengthen
the results that they already obtained in high-genus cases; for any genus, they
recently obtained the enumerative invariants using derived resolutions over the
primary components of the moduli spaces of stable maps; these new invariants
were then used to formulate a precise recursive relation for high-genus GW
invariants of smooth quintic; these should be useful for verifying physicists'
high-genus Mirror Symmetry prediction. Further, the PI plans to push and apply
the techniques that they have developed to Gromov-Witten theory, to Mirror
Symmetry, and possibly also to&lt;br/&gt;birational geometry. In addition to the
above, the PI has introduced a modular compactification of the space of n points
in general linear position on the projective plane; this potentially has
significant consequences on singularity theory. Lastly, he is also working
toward the weighted strong factorization for projective varieties with at worst
finite quotient singularities through GIT
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of mirror symmetry of
physics has exploded onto the mathematical scene in 1990's. This is a part of
extremely rich interaction between mathematics and physics, or more specifically
between geometry/analysis and quantum filed theory. Physicists, based on their
physical intuition and experiments, proposed that there is a deep duality
relation, the mirror symmetry, between two different physical models. Based on
this duality, they discovered several astonishing mathematical formulas and
statements. The challenge for mathematicians was to understand the mathematics
behind the physical theories and prove some of the predications made by the
physicists. The moduli spaces of stable maps are the main mathematical devices
that play key roles in linking physicists' predications to mathematical proofs.
These spaces all together can be quite arbitrary. One of the PI's main goal is
to provide local structures of each of these spaces so that some
important&lt;br/&gt;geometric tools can be applied. All the mathematical spaces
investigated in the project are connected to different branches of mathematics
and are also directly related to the active research in super string theory of
theoretical physics. Thus the potential impact of this project will definitely
go beyond algebraic geometry and mathematical research.&lt;br/&gt;