* 0901707
* Theory of Motivic Sheaves and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Vadim Vologodski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 35,599.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI intends to use
the theory of motives to create new&lt;br/&gt;tools for the study of problems in
algebraic geometry and number theory.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a theory of
motivic sheaves. His approach is based on&lt;br/&gt;the idea that the category
of motivic sheaves over a scheme can obtained&lt;br/&gt;by gluing the DG
categories of Voevodsky's motives over points. The PI&lt;br/&gt;plans to study
the functor of motivic vanishing cycles and prove that this&lt;br/&gt;functor
commutes with the Hodge realization and l-adic realization.&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will apply these results to the study of degenerations of&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
varieties and, more specifically, to the integrality conjectures
in&lt;br/&gt;mirror symmetry. Additionally, the PI plans to use the theory of
motivic&lt;br/&gt;sheaves to embed the category of log schemes into the category
of motives&lt;br/&gt;providing a bridge between the Fujiwara-Kato-Nakayama Hodge
and&lt;br/&gt;etale realizations of log schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory
of motives is a central part of algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry
deals with systems of algebraic equations. The theory&lt;br/&gt;of motives uses
ideas from algebraic topology (study of shapes by means of algebra)to understand
structural properties of the solution set&lt;br/&gt;even when one cannot
actually solve the equation explicitly. This theory&lt;br/&gt;provides a
language to relate seemingly unrelated objects such as the&lt;br/&gt;space of
complex solutions to a given system of algebraic equations
with&lt;br/&gt;integral coefficient and the set of its integral solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to borrow some ideas from singularity theory (a part of
algebraic topology, that studies shapes by degenerating them into simpler ones),
adapt these ideas to the new setting, using the language of motives, and then
apply it to solve problems in algebraic geometry and number theory that can not
be&lt;br/&gt;solved by other methods.