* 0901699
* GOALI:  3D III-V Green transistors with ultra-steep subtreshold slope
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Harlan Harris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 08/31/2012
* USD 331,910.00

&lt;br/&gt;" This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to design and construct a self-aligned tunnel
logic device will consume less power in the off-state and require less switching
power for device turn-on. The approach will be to use simulations to determine
the appropriate band-engineered heterostructures, implement the heterostructures
with metallorganic chemical vapor deposition, develop the etching and spacer
techniques needed to fabricate the 3D device, and to fabricate the devices for
physical and electrical characterization. This work is innovative in the use of
3D III-V structures and utilization of self-aligned processes to fabricate the
complex 3D device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The amount
of energy used by the world?s electronic devices in the passive state is
staggeringly excessive. The novel concepts implemented in this work will result
in a reduction of passive energy consumption by several orders of magnitude
making it a ?green? transistor for its energy saving nature. Thus this research
is transformative both in its divergent nature from CMOS and in its potential
environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The most
significant broad impact of this work is in the energy savings that can be
realized by the introduction of this passive power device. In addition, this
project will also support the PI summer effort in a ?Too Cool for School?
outreach program designed to reach those intelligent kids whose peer-pressure
culture has turned them away from science education. By demonstrating to
intelligent underachievers the cool-factors of nanotechnology, the PI hopes to
sway them toward the culture of academic achievement.