* 0901443
* Normal forms for integrable PDEs and billiards
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter Topalov, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 125,646.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is concerned with a variety of problems related to the construction
of normal forms and their various applications to well-posedness of solutions
and perturbation theory for classes of integrable nonlinear partial differential
equations. It also explores potential applications of these ideas to the
dynamics and the spectral geometry of a class of integrable billiard systems.
More specifically, it is proposed to study the focusing and defocusing nonlinear
Schrodinger equation and the focusing modified Korteweg-de Vries equation. The
principal investigator aims to construct various normal forms for these
equations in the phase space of square-integrable, 1-periodic functions and in
certain spaces of distributions. The analysis of the corresponding frequency
maps would eventually lead to new well-posedness results and to various
applications to perturbation theory. The principal investigator proposes to
establish spectral rigidity of a class of Riemannian manifolds with boundary
(known as "Liouville billiard tables") by introducing new techniques involving
quasimodes and a generalization of the Radon transform. The dynamical properties
of the corresponding discrete billiard system will play a crucial role in the
proof of the claimed spectral rigidity.

The scope of the project lies in the development of new methods coming from the
theory of Hamiltonian systems to fundamental problems in analysis, geometry, and
the theory of integrable nonlinear partial differential equations. Many of the
results obtained by these methods cannot be obtained by the traditional and more
general methods for solving such equations. Beyond applications to well-
posedness and perturbation theory, normal forms provide a very detailed
description of the solutions via so-called Birkhoff coordinates. The proposed
activity would lead to a better understanding of the dynamics and the stability
properties of the solutions of a class of nonlinear evolution equations that
arise in various physical systems such as water waves, plasma physics, solid-
state physics, nonlinear optics, and fluid mechanics. Recent applications of the
activity include new results in statistical mechanics (preservation of white
noise) and applications to astrophysics, namely, the problem of studying light
rays moving on black hole backgrounds in the presence of a cosmological
constant.