* 0901623
* Workshop: CDC 2008 Student Travel Support. To be held in Fiesta Americana Hotel, Cancun, Mexico, on December 7-11, 2008.
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Chaouki Abdallah, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

System theory plays a critical role in technological advancements in a wide
array of applications: from new flight control or guidance systems for airplanes
and other aerospace vehicles to advanced manufacturing techniques to systems
biology and high-speed communication networks. By providing a better
understanding of the underlying models, their limitations as well as their
potential, different branches of system theory are emerging as instrumental
tools in dealing with new challenges that have emerged especially in the areas
of modeling and control of large complex systems. For example, large
communication networks and power systems are particularly vulnerable to both
deliberate and accidental disturbances. Their interconnected structure implies
that isolated events can cascade throughout the network with disastrous effects.
The systems view also shows tremendous potential in other important fields such
as biology or quantum computing. The IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC) has long provided the best scientific forum for such deliberations as it
brings researchers from all over the world and facilitates their interaction.
This year, and for the first time ever the CDC is being held in Latin America
(Cancun, Mexico). We anticipate that CDC 2008 will draw approximately 1300
participants. Many of them will be distinguished members of the scientific
community, others will be seasoned researches and practitioners, while others
will be graduate students who are about to launch their careers. We are
particularly concerned about these younger participants as they constitute our
future. Recognizing the importance of this group, the Operating Committee of
CDC?08, and the leadership of the Control Systems Society (CSS) would like to
support and encourage the participation of graduate students. We have already
instituted a special graduate student Registration Fee that is one half that of
regular attendees. In this proposal we are asking that NSF continue its long
tradition of support of this Conference by providing funds that can be used for
graduate student travel support.

Intellectual Merit: Given the scope of the conference, its unprecedented
international cooperation and breath, its large number of key plenary and semi-
plenary lectures as well as tutorial sessions aimed at providing state of the
art view to the scientific community on 4 emerging technologies, CDC 08 provides
an exceptional intellectual and training opportunity for prospective control
faculty and researchers. We believe that the intellectual benefits of attending
this conference on student attendees and the future of the control systems
research will be quite significant and worthy of substantial support by all
interested parties.

Broader Impact: Such venues are of special importance for the training of new
researchers and graduate students in systems and control. This year, the large
number of plenary talks, interactive sessions, tutorials, as well the depth of
the international cooperation in staging of the conference will provide students
with a unique opportunity for training, far beyond a typical conference. A
successful Student Travel Grant will validate the commitment of current CSS
leadership in continued support of student activities for future generations of
students. The National Science Foundation has consistently supported these
activities over the years by providing partial travel support for graduate
students participating in the Conference. In this proposal we are asking that
NFS continue this long-standing tradition and provide travel support for
graduate students who will be participating in the CDC 08.