* 0901008
* Extremal problems on hereditary properties and partitions of combinatorial structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ryan Martin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 174,993.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Axenovich, Maria
&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principal Investigator: Martin, Ryan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
DMS - 0901008&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Extremal problems on hereditary properties and partitions of combinatorial
structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching theme of this proposal is the study of local substructures in
combinatorial objects, primarily networks. To what degree is a given
substructure unavoidable? Ramsey theory states that certain substructures are
always unavoidable in large enough systems. Others could be avoided by local
modifications such as, in graphs, edge deletion and addition. This proposal
deals, in part, with the efficient modification of graphs, referred to as graph
editing. Finding the edit distance from a graph to a hereditary property
provides insight into the general structure of such properties and has many
applications, such as property testing. The techniques proposed to address this
problem include pseudorandom graphs, regular partitions, colored homomorphisms
and optimization -- all of which promise to be useful in other facets of graph
theory. In the study of unavoidable combinatorial structures, this proposal
addresses a generalized Ramsey problem in which the substructures are not given
explicitly but rather are determined by a set of parameters. For example, such a
parameter can be the number of colors that are present on a given subgraph of an
edge-colored graph. This explores, in particular, the balance between classical
Ramsey and anti-Ramsey problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs' research belongs
to the discipline of graph theory, which is the study of networks and their
properties and which has applications in a wide variety of other disciplines,
including computer science, bioinformatics, operations research and economics.
Graduate students and collaboration are integral parts of the PIs' research. The
main objective of this proposal is to address two fundamental questions: "Which
structures are unavoidable in large systems, such as networks?" and "How can one
modify (edit) a network efficiently in order to satisfy desired properties?"
Answers to these questions will bring a better understanding of networks,
specifically those arising from scientific applications.&lt;br/&gt;