* 0901938
* Acquisition of a femtosecond laser ablation system
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Boyd
* 03/31/2010
* USD 72,000.00

0901938 Johnson

This proposal seeks funding of $60K for partial purchase of a femtosecond laser
ablation system (fsLA) to be used as an sample introduction system on an
existing multi-collector ICP-MS system within the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory
at UW-Madison. The University will contribute $355K and NASA will contribute
$60K toward the purchase. Isotope measurements may be improved by shorter
wavelength, faster pulse-width laser ablation systems. Systems with wavelengths
in the deep UV and femtosecond pulse widths are beginning to be fielded in the
geoscience community. Recent studies show radiogenic isotopes ratios with
elements like Sr, Pb and Hf are better preserved from source material when
ablated using fsLA. The prime goal for initial experiments is measuring Fe
isotopes in individual carbonates produced by microbial Fe3+ reduction. The fsLA
system will be necessary to tease out Fe fractionation factors which would not
possible with bulk analyses. Measurements with bulk carbonates is particularly
challenging because Fe isotopes tend to fractionate during dissolution. The
effect is noticeable when sequential acid digestions are performed. The fsLA
system should allow individual carbonates to be analyzed mitigating this bias.
The PIs present considerable evidence to support the fsLA system over microprobe
or SIMS analyses. Combination analysis with both SIMS and fsLA is suggested. The
fsLA system will offer a wide range of analytical possibilities to UW-M.
Students and post-docs will be able to utilize the system. While Fe isotopes
will be initial focus, sedimentary and igneous geochemistry will benefit from
shorter pulse laser ablation. Zircon U-Pb and Hf analyses will be possible.
Collaborative efforts with the Rare Gas Laboratory at UW-M will also be evident.

***