* 0901566
* GOALI: Nanothermite Based Micro Shockwave Generators and Nanoparticles for Targeted and Efficient Gene/Drug Delivery
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Keshab Gangopadhyay, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 372,000.00

GOALI: NANOTHERMITE BASED MICRO SHOCKWAVE GENERATORS AND&lt;br/&gt;NANOPARTICLES
FOR TARGETED AND EFFICIENT DRUG DELIVERY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop a novel digitally controlled micro
shockwave&lt;br/&gt;generator by integrating nanothermites with
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The&lt;br/&gt;approach is based on
shockwaves from redox reactions of nanothermites. The shockwaves
are&lt;br/&gt;used to deliver genes and/or drugs into cells with high
transfection efficiency and cell survival.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, organosilicate
nanoparticles synthesized on site will be utilized as an effective
and&lt;br/&gt;targeted delivery vehicle via the
shockwave.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed miniaturized systems will
cover the large impulse range&lt;br/&gt;necessary for permeabilization of a
variety of cells and tissues with different mechanical&lt;br/&gt;properties
and/or environments. Unlike physical gene delivery methods which rely on bulky
and&lt;br/&gt;expensive instrumentation or chemical delivery methods that
exhibit low transfection efficiency,&lt;br/&gt;the proposed MEMS-based shockwave
generator -- alone or in combination with nanoparticles -&lt;br/&gt;- will
produce shockwave interactions and drug delivery at the single cell level,
providing&lt;br/&gt;unprecedented control over cell transfection
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed research is expected to
transform the study and understanding&lt;br/&gt;of biological processes in
health and disease, and enable novel diagnostics and
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;Educational objectives include recruitment of students
from regional college programs, including&lt;br/&gt;those with predominantly
Black and Hispanic enrollment and a summer ?Nano Camp? for high&lt;br/&gt;school
students. Undergraduate and graduate students, particularly from rural areas of
Missouri&lt;br/&gt;will be trained to develop leadership, ownership, mentoring,
career skills and entrepreneurship to&lt;br/&gt;prepare them for the 21st
century work force.