* 0901090
* The distribution of the Fourier coefficients of modular forms and arithmetic applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Scott Ahlgren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2012
* USD 83,651.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

During the 20th century (and the beginning of the 21st), a number of deep and
surprising connections have been found between modular forms, elliptic curves,
quadratic forms, L-functions, Galois representations, and the representation
theory of the sporadic finite simple groups. These connections have led to the
resolution of a number of long-standing open problems, including Wiles' proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem. In this proposal, the investigator proposes to study the
distribution of the Fourier coefficients of modular forms, with a focus on forms
that are non-trivial linear combinations of Hecke eigenforms. Other topics
include arithmetic dynamics, non-linear recurrence relations, and modular forms
mod p.

The proposed research is in the area of number theory, one of the oldest
branches of mathematics. In 1770, Lagrange proved that every positive integer is
a sum of four squares. This notable result has motivated a significant amount of
present day research. A notable example is the recent work of Manjul Bhargava
and Jonathan Hanke in which modular forms are used to classify positive-definite
quadratic forms representing all positive integers. One application of the
proposed research is a classification of positive-definite quadratic forms
representing all odd integers.