* 0901851
* Efficient Operation and Control of Power System Networks with Increased DG Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* James Momoh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 308,000.00

Efficient Operation and Control of Power System Networks with Increase
Distributed Generation Penetration&lt;br/&gt;ECCS No:
0901851&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop insight into modeling of Distributed Generation (DG)
particularly Renewable Energy Resources for network penetration, incorporating
MW and MVAr demand response under load variability; to develop a value based
optimization tool for integration of DG interconnection; to develop new
performances metrics for evaluation of reliability, efficiency and congestion
management of power system . The approach is aimed at developing improved models
of DG and loads for grid penetration, Renewable Energy Resources response to
demand system and control data approximate and determination of limits as input
to overall optimized problems design of performance indices, metrics, and system
studies for different scenarios associated with DG for optimum energy of the
distribution or sub transmission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
research will use a computational approach to evaluate the impact of DG on
network operation. A preferred method of marginal benefits of DG as a function
of Location Marginal Price for voltage stability changes will be developed
utilizing interior point and integer programming extensions. The robustness of
the integrated scheme will be tested on a benchmark
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will enhance
optimization techniques for energy systems, thus improving system efficiency. It
will further provide a contribution to the development of the autonomous Smart
Grid under increased penetration of DG including alternative energy options.
This is of benefit for the Nation's energy security and quality of life. The
project will further facilitate training of minority students and have impact on
educating the future power and energy workforce. &lt;br/&gt;