* 0901303
* Integrated motor protein-based nano-devices for biomolecular transport
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Parviz Famouri, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 404,958.00

Harnessing the motion of motor proteins for transporting biomolecules requires
directional control. The chemo-mechanical energy conversion of motor proteins is
highly efficient and once directional control is achieved, a broad range of
applications from delivery, assembly, sorting and detection to micro/nano-
engines and energy transduction can be realized for a whole new generation of
hybrid bio-devices. The effort is to develop a methodology that will have
applicability on the transport of specific proteins from one location to a
targeted location for further manipulation for security, health or environmental
applications. The general approach to be developed is based on functionalized
micro/nano-sized patterning pathways on an inorganic substrate. Micro-patterning
will be developed along with localized flow fields to arrange and align F-actin
on selected surfaces with one structural polarity attached to the substrate.
This approach will give unidirectional movement of myosin coated shuttle
particles such as beads, nanowires and nanotubes, where specific cargo can be
bound and transported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
understanding and ability to develop transportation systems at nano-scale is of
paramount importance and will enable the capability to explore and engineer this
new frontier. The proposed research aims to develop transport systems suitable
for cargo delivery which are propelled by motor proteins. Engineered pathways
will be accomplished by means of orientated assembly of actin protein, selective
molecular micropatterning and photoreactive polymer synthesis. The knowledge to
be gained through this research includes generation of specific flow fields and
hybrid device integration. The broader understanding gained through this work
will lay foundation for the future applications of autonomous transport and
actuation systems, whether biological or synthetic in nature at nano-scale.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The proposed research effort seeks to establish the
underlying framework for cargo transport powered by nano-scale biomolecular
motors from within a microelectronic/chip environment. The proposed work will
examine fundamental properties of nano pathways and tracks for transport
purposes. Given the inevitable integration of electrical and biological
components in hybrid nano-systems, the knowledge gained about the relationship
between the protein-bead-cargo-myosin shuttle system in micro/nano-tracks
motility assays and their viability, is valuable to a wide range of research
fields beyond this fundamental study. This work is anticipated to have an impact
on engineering, physiological and biological research, as a working model of
physiological molecular transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge associated
with the promise of nanotechnology is training the workforce needed to support
its advancement and implementation. The inherent interdisciplinary nature of
this training is not well addressed by traditional academic, discipline-based
programs. The activities of this proposal offer opportunities for integrating
students' educational experience across diverse areas including
microfabrication, biochemistry, nanotechnology, microfluidics, physics, and
chemistry. The educational outreach program of this project will serve to
motivate the next generation of cross-disciplinary scientists by introducing
high school students and freshmen to cutting edge research in laboratories, and
by providing undergraduate researchers, especially underrepresented groups
including women and minorities, the opportunity to conduct cutting edge, genuine
research in a state-of-the-art setting.