* 0901732
* Palmetto Number Theory Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Michael Filaseta, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,096.00

ABSRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Palmetto Number Theory Series (PANTS) is a
series of three number theory meetings per year held at colleges and
universities in South Carolina, the Palmetto state. The meetings take place on a
rotating basis at Clemson University, College of Charleston, and University of
South Carolina. PANTS has successfully completed its first two years in
2006-2008. The three yearly meetings are to be held in October, December, and
February. The October and February meetings will feature two plenary talks,
while the December meeting will feature four plenary talks. The hour-long
plenary talks will be given by leading number theorists from outside the
Southeast. Each meeting will have 20-30 minute contributed talks from
Southeastern participants. One graduate or undergraduate student from outside of
the Southeast will also be invited to give a 45 minute talk at each
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of these meetings is to provide the
number theory community in the Southeast an opportunity to hear about recent
research in number theory, pure and applied. PANTS meetings attract prominent
number theorists. They also provide regional mathematicians, particularly
graduate students and junior faculty, an opportunity to speak. The frequency and
regularity of the meetings promotes collaboration and strengthens working
relationships between participants. Another objective of PANTS meetings is to
involve number theorists at all career stages and types of institutions at
minimal cost. PANTS speakers include graduate students, junior faculty, and
senior faculty. PANTS also encourages and helps the involvement of talented
undergraduate students. PANTS participants come not only from South Carolina,
but from schools in neighboring states. They come from Ph.D. granting
institutions, institutions whose highest degree awarded is a master's degree,
and from institutions granting only baccalaureate degrees. The organizers also
attempt to attract a demographically diverse participant base, including women
and other underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;