* 0901996
* Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Sabah Randhawa, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,634,499.00

Colleges and universities in the three-state region of Washington, Oregon and
Idaho are proposing to form the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (PNW LSAMP). This Alliance will enable educators and
advocates from science centers, pre-college programs, community colleges and
four-year institutions to leverage their resources and existing relationships to
increase minority participation in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) majors. The projected demographic shifts in these three
states of Idaho, Oregon and Washington present an extraordinary opportunity for
colleges and universities to greatly increase the diversity of students earning
STEM degrees. Each state has committed substantial resources to efforts to
increase degrees granted in STEM as part of economic development initiatives.

Intellectual Merit To take advantage of this opportunity and reach its goal of
doubling the number of STEM bachelor degrees granted to underrepresented
students, the Pacific Northwest Alliance will develop and/or strengthen programs
and services related to the following priorities: 1. Increase pathways to
college for URM students while strengthening their interest in pursuing STEM
careers; 2. Create a culture and community of success for URM STEM majors on
four-year college campuses to improve retention and graduation rates; and 3.
Expand opportunities for URM STEM majors to participate in campus-based and
national undergraduate research experiences.

PNW LSAMP partners will implement best practices in STEM diversity initiatives
that have been disseminated by existing LSAMP programs around the country
including early outreach and recruitment, community college transfer assistance,
supplemental instruction, mentoring, summer bridge programs, and undergraduate
research experiences. In addition to participation in a joint annual research
conference, each of the community college and 4-year institutions has committed
to establishing PNW LSAMP centers on their campus that will serve as visible and
accessible support systems for underrepresented students with an interest in
STEM

Broader Impacts

The Alliance will address the national and regional imperative to increase the
number of degrees granted in STEM by connecting institutions of higher education
with precollege and science advocacy programs. The Alliance partnership will
provide seamless transitions for students as they proceed on the pathway from
high school to college and from community colleges to 4-year colleges. The
diversity of institution type in the Alliance will supplement student access to
summer bridge and orientation programs, tutoring and mentoring relationships,
and undergraduate research experiences. The Alliance will further leverage its
efforts through the inclusion of science centers that serve as important portals
to the public and already have a number of established stellar programs targeted
to raise student interest in STEM. The Alliance will also encourage
collaboration between the many broadening participation programs funded by the
National Science Foundation that exist on member campuses, including Noyce
Fellowships, SSTEM/CSEMS, STEP, and ADVANCE. The synergy created by bringing all
of these diversity-related programs together will augment institutional
transformation on each campus.