* 0901613
* Multiplicity theory and related topics in commutative algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 06/30/2014
* USD 308,038.00

Linkage, or liaison, has been used as a tool for classifying ideals and
projective varieties. Finding necessary and sufficient conditions for two ideals
to belong to the same linkage class is the central, though wide open, problem in
the theory. The investigator suggests an answer to this question for zero-
dimensional monomial ideals. The local-algebraic and the projective-geometric
branch of linkage theory have proceeded in parallel, with only few implications
known between them. The proposer plans to investigate this subtle interplay by
studying the differences between local linkage and homogeneous linkage. Since
the equivalence relation generated by classical linkage might be too restrictive
for some purposes, the more inclusive notion of Gorenstein linkage has become a
welcome alternative. The investigator has the broader goal of showing that in a
given regular local ring all Cohen-Macaulay ideals of a fixed codimension belong
to the same Gorenstein linkage class. The proposer plans to exploit recent
advances on the topic of j-multiplicities to address some long standing problems
in equisingularity theory. Equisingularity theory strives to find numerical
conditions for when the members of a family of analytic sets are `equivalent' to
one another. The investigator seeks to provide such a criterion by proving a
general `principle of specialization of integral dependence' based on
j-multiplicities. The investigator also proposes an intersection theoretic
expression for the j-multiplicity of a module that would yield a recursive
formula for computing this multiplicity. The core of an ideal is a subideal that
encodes information about all possible reductions of the ideal, while being
closely related to Briancon-Skoda type theorems and a conjecture of Kawamata
about sections of line bundles. The investigator wishes to explore the
connection between cores and multiplier ideals, a notion from complex algebraic
geometry. He expects that a better understanding of this interplay will shed new
light on both concepts and may lead to a combinatorial description of the core
in the monomial case. Having worked out an algorithm for computing the core of
zero-dimensional monomial ideals, the investigator now wishes to find such an
algorithm for monomial ideals of arbitrary dimension. The known results about
cores of ideals require restrictions on the local numbers of generators of the
ideal as well as residual or depth conditions, assumptions that are satisfied by
any zero-dimensional ideal. The investigator proposes to advance the theory
beyond the class of ideals satisfying these conditions, using the monomial case
as a testing ground.

The proposer works in Commutative Algebra, an area concerned with the
qualitative study of systems of polynomial equations in several variables. Such
systems arise in algebraic geometry, but also in numerous applications outside
of mathematics. Over the past two decades commutative algebraists have become
increasingly interested in computational aspects, thereby establishing
connections to applied areas such as computer algebra, robotics, cryptography,
coding theory, statistics, and biology. This investigator's research too has a
strong computational component, and his work on equisingularity theory in
particular encompasses concrete geometric applications.

