* 0901849
* High Resolution Magnetophoresis using Multilayered Magnetic Nanodisks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Yaowu Hao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2013
* USD 321,787.00

ECCS-0901849: High Resolution Magnetophoresis Using Multilayered Magnetic
Nanodisks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to demonstrate that a high resolution magnetic multiplexed
bioseparation can be achieved by using multilayered magnetic nanodisks as
labels. This new magnetophoretic approach allows a continuous separation of
sub-100 nm sized magnetic nanodisks according to their distinct magnetic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed multilayered nanodisks,
consisting of two magnetic layers separated by a non-magnetic layer with two
capping layers, can provide a wide-range tunability of magnetic properties,
which results in two important advantages over commonly used superparamagnetic
iron oxide nanoparticles: opening up the new possibility of magnetic
multiplexing and filling the superparamagnetic nanoparticle size gap, from 30 nm
to 200 nm, to provide high-moment magnetic labels for bioseparation. In a
microfluidic arrangement, these nanodisks will be subjected to a magnetic field
varying with time in a triangle wave format. Nanodisks with different saturation
fields can be continuously separated. Since magnetic properties of labels and
magnetic fields are exactly known, the whole separation process can be easily
modeled, which will provide us a convenient tool to optimize conditions for
different kind of separations. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Separation is an
important part of any biochemical analysis. The proposed separation method
mimics widely-used electrophoresis, but replacing electric field with magnetic
field. Magnetic field does not interfere with biological process and materials,
and can be applied externally without physical contact between magnet and any
liquid. Magnetic forces are independent on ionic strength, pH or surface
charges. It can be seen that this proposed approach, if successful, will provide
an important alternative for bioseparation. Moreover, it can introduce valuable
multiplexing into many highly sensitive detection methods for biosensing. Both
of these will have a broad impact in many biological and biomedical research
fields. Also, this project offers an outstanding venue to integrate research
activities with the education and training for college and graduate students in
nanobiotechnology, which is considered as one of the most potentially valuable
technologies for U.S. in the global economic competition and for national
security. Three experiment modules will be created for a new practicum approach
on undergraduate nanobiotechnology teaching; ?experiment-oriented just-in-time
teaching?. In addition, through three existing summer camps at UT Arlington,
several hundreds of K-12 students will be exposed to this research. Among them,
about thirty percent are Hispanic students. The students will certainly be
affected positively and may spark their interest in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;