* 0901070
* Calculus of Variations and Evolutive Systems on the Wasserstein Space
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Wilfrid Gangbo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 01/31/2013
* USD 204,030.00

This project focuses on the analysis of a collection of variational problems in
connection with dynamical and mechanical systems. In particular, it seeks to
develop basic tools for studying the calculus of variations and the Monge-
Kantorovich theory. In the process of discovering new results in the variational
problem realm, it will hopefully unearth new connections with other areas of
science and mathematics. In the project, Hamiltonian systems that consist of
finitely many particles and possess underlying Poisson structures are
considered. When the number of particles becomes infinite, these finite
dimensional systems may converge in an appropriate sense to infinite dimensional
systems that are encoded as partial differential equations. Much work has been
devoted to identifying the Poisson structures for such limiting infinite
dimensional systems. Born and Infeld, and independently Pauli, started to
develop a quantum field theory in which the commutator operator is analogous to
the Poisson bracket studied by Chernoff, Marsden, Weinstein, and many others. In
joint work with collaborators, the principal investigator has examined physical
systems with no electric or magnetic fields. In this simplified model, they
obtained many rigorous results that can be used to handle a class of partial
differential equations involving singular measures. Some of the concepts
developed by the principal investigator and others are useful in formulating
problems such as the formation of coherent structures in connection with the
constrained Navier-Stokes equations that has been considered recently by
Caglioti, Pulvirenti, and Rousset. The project will investigate these equations
and their implications for the two-dimensional Euler equations of incompressible
fluids.

The ideas that underlie this project are not difficult to explain. Consider a
physical system that consists of finitely many particles evolving on a finite-
dimensional torus (think of the surface of a doughnut) and assume that the
forces applied to the system are derived from a periodic potential. One of the
central issues in dynamical system is the search for periodic orbits and so-
called invariant measures. In the simple case where there is no force, the
periodic orbits and invariant tori can be described explicitly. The celebrated
KAM (Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser) theory ensures that, if the potential is small,
then for certain initial conditions one can describe the solutions of the system
explicitly in conveniently chosen new coordinates. It is well-known that the
existence of these suitable new coordinates is equivalent to the existence of
solutions of a "cell problem" that arises in the theory of Hamilton-Jacobi
equations. The graph of the latter solution tells one what the "good" initial
conditions are. The KAM theory identifies parameters, called rotation vectors,
for which smooth solutions (twice-differentiable, say) of the cell problem
exist. The "weak" KAM theory considers a larger class of rotation vectors and
for each one of them establishes the existence of solutions of the cell problem
that are not quite smooth (i.e., that are only "Lipschitz" functions). The
principal investigator plans to continue his investigation on the limiting
systems where the number of particles becomes infinite. He anticipates his study
will shed new light on our understanding of stability issues for partial
differential equations. The project will pay special attention to the training
of students and the promotion of mathematics in colleges.