* 0901472
* Enhanced Vertical Transport III-Nitride Devices through  Chemical Lift-Off Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Kane, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
exploration of a growth and device processing technique to improve the energy
efficiency and reduce the cost of light emitting diodes for solid state
lighting. Key challenges to the widespread implementation of these illumination
devices include lifetime at high output powers, internal quantum efficiency of
green emitters, and the cost of solid state sources. Such challenges result from
the use of thermally and electrically insulating substrate materials which are
incompatible with the device layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach of this
research is development of vertical transport devices through a two-step hybrid
growth process. The first step employs low temperature integration of a
chemically soluble layer; the second step explores the high-temperature
overgrowth of device-quality material. Standard one-step growth techniques limit
the integration of dissimilar materials due to interfacial reactions and
interdiffusion of impurities, which can be avoided through hybrid growth. This
work will systematically investigate the effects of processing, regrowth, and
chemical liftoff on these materials and will ultimately compare the light
extraction and thermal management benefits of this route with existing device
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are
significant in both the areas of educational outreach and potential economic
development for the state. The outreach portion will provide hands-on lighting
and energy engineering demonstrations to students at rural and urban middle
schools populated by underrepresented groups. Successful implementation of this
proposal will position the investigators for other economic development
opportunities in the state, helping Oklahoma transition its leadership in energy
to green technologies.