* 0901846
* Emergence, Mitigation, and Exploitation of Complex Behavior in Networked Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Nicola Elia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 395,992.00

0901846-Elia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The objective of the proposed research
is to study and explore mechanisms for the emergence of complex behavior in
networked control systems based on the effects of limited information exchange
on the collective dynamics, to propose ways to mitigate and control the effects
of such behaviors, and to apply the findings to cooperative networked control
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal deals with the development of new analytical and computational tools
for understanding and analyzing how uncertainty is generated, propagates, and
can be managed in the system, based on the recent advancements in the integrated
theory information and control. The novelty of our research, and its most
transformative aspect, is that we focus on networked systems to develop new
foundations for complex systems. As networked systems are the cradle for many
complex behaviors, and will become even more central in the future society, and
the explicit presence of communication links simplifies the analysis of the
interplay between information and uncertainty propagation in the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is in the network sciences. The education of a new generation of
students and industry leaders, and society at large, as complex interconnected
systems are becoming more widespread and dominant in today society. The mix of
motivating applications and new theoretical problems offers a unique educational
opportunity to the students that will be involved in the program, and will
provide material that will be introduced in the existing undergraduate and
graduate courses and labs. The proposed further development of a networked
control systems laboratory will have a central role in completing the
educational program of students involved in the project, as well as it will
provide a hub for outreach and student retention activities.&lt;br/&gt;