* 0901594
* Automorphic Distributions, L-functions, and Cryptography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

This award involves two main research projects: a long-term joint project with
Wilfried Schmid (Harvard University) on automorphic distributions, and
collaborations with Ramarathnam Venkatesan (Microsoft Research) on applications
of number theory and discrete groups to cryptography. The first project involves
the study of automorphic distributions, and their analytic properties. The PI
and Schmid have developed an alternative method for proving the holomorphy of
Langlands L-functions, which establishes their holomorphy in new cases. It also
has been used to develop Voronoi-style summation formulas, which were later
applied to obtain the first subconvexity results for GL(3) L-functions. The
project involves extending their core analytic technique of pairing automorphic
distributions to more general situations. The second project seeks to develop
new algorithms and cryptographic primitives using information from modern number
theory, ranging from discrete groups to
L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L-functions are a central topic in modern
number theory, arising from problems as diverse as classical questions about
solving polynomial equations with integer solutions, to studying the properties
of waves on curved surfaces. The proposed research mainly involves establishing
further analytic properties of L-functions, primarily with applications to
Langlands' holomorphy conjectures in mind. Such information can be used, as in
the second project, to give explicit bounds and parameter estimates for
cryptosystems. Work of the PI and Venkatesan on this topic has already found
cryptographic applications in numerous Microsoft products. Indeed, modern
cryptosystems are often based on hard mathematical problems such as factoring
large integers. The proposal seeks to study these problems from the point of
view of SAT solvers and coding theory, and to create cryptographic algorithms
for other applications.&lt;br/&gt;