* 0901937
* Geometric Spectral Theory and Resonances
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Borthwick, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 124,204.00

Abstract: Geometric Spectral Theory and Resonances (DMS-0901937)

The spectral theory of non-compact manifolds is dominated by the study of
resonances, which are analogous to eigenvalues except that the corresponding
states are subject to decay by dispersion to infinity. The study of resonances
in a geometric context is driven by a few basic questions: How many resonances
are there? How are they distributed? What does their distribution tell us about
the underlying geometry? The PI will study the spectral geometry of complete,
infinite-volume Riemannian manifolds modeled on hyperbolic spaces. These spaces
are natural models of chaotic quantum scattering. The specific research goals of
this project include: (1) Studying the resonance counting function and
separating contributions from conformal poles from the true resonances, (2)
developing spectral tools such as determinants and trace formulas in cases where
intrinsic regularizations of these objects are not available, (3) inverse
scattering problems - deducing geometric structure from the resonance set,
scattering phase, etc., (4) perturbation problems - understanding the behavior
of resonances under perturbations of a hyperbolic metric.

The research in this proposal is motivated by one of the core issues in modern
physics, which is to understand the relationship between the structure of a
physical system, e.g. its underlying geometry, and its response to oscillatory
stimulus such as light or sound waves. Perhaps the most fundamental examples of
this relationship are the human senses of vision and hearing. Eyes and ears are
receptors for oscillatory signals, and the mind perceives images and sounds only
because of the brain's remarkable ability to decode them. Other cases of the
same basic relationship abound, from modern physics experiments involving
particle beam collision to medical procedures such as the CAT scan to
astronomical phenomena such as red shift. In all of these situations the
observational data consist of oscillatory signals, and mathematical analysis is
required to extract information about the underlying structure. "Spectral
theory" is the title given to the corresponding field of mathematics. Expressing
these problems in an abstract mathematical setting emphasizes the universality
of the fundamental relationship and fosters the cross-fertilization of ideas
from different areas. Advances in abstract spectral theory have led and will
continue to lead to applications across a broad range of scientific disciplines.
The PI has written one book and has plans to write others, which will help make
the results of this research available to a broad research audience, including
both physicists and mathematicians. The PI currently has two doctoral students.