* 0901569
* Harmonic Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, and Complex Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Francis Christ, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 783,611.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted into a broad
array of problems in Fourier analysis, partial differential equations, and
complex analysis. The PI will investigate upper bounds for multilinear
oscillatory integral operators, seeking to further develop the stationary phase
method and to characterize what it means for a phase function to give rise to
genuinely oscillatory behavior in the multilinear context. The analytic and the
underlying geometric theory of Radon-like transforms will be developed, with
emphasis on Lebesgue space inequalities. The PI will use Fourier analytic
methods to investigate solutions of the nonlinear Schrodinger equation, seeking
to rigorously establish strongly nonlinear behavior, to analyze the transfer of
energy between Fourier modes and between scales, to understand instability and
stability of solutions, and to shed light on uniqueness questions. He will work
to develop geometric criteria, phrased in terms of the symplectic geometry of
phase space, which characterize compactness and hypoellipticity for the Neumann
problem for the Cauchy-Riemann complex in several complex variables, and for
related linear partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
centuries, the fundamental laws of physical science have been most precisely
formulated as differential equations, which express relationships between
physical quantities and the rates at which they change. Fourier analysis was
first introduced as a tool for the solution of the specific differential
equation which governs heat flow, and has subsequently become a ubiquitous tool
in engineering, in applied physical science, in theoretical physics, and
throughout mathematics itself. This project is concerned with several different
types of differential equations, with potential applications of Fourier analysis
to them, and with fundamental issues internal to Fourier theory. The most
challenging mathematical issues around differential equations today concern
nonlinear equations, which model self-interacting physical systems. Basic
nonlinear interactions are multilinear, e.g. one physical quantity multiplied by
the rate of change of another; these appear for instance in the Navier-Stokes
equations describing viscous fluid flow, and in the nonlinear Schrodinger
equation, describing quantum optics in certain situations. Multilinear Fourier
analysis is potentially a valuable tool in this context, yet is only partially
developed and presents challenges. In one part of the project, multilinear
Fourier operator integrals themselves are the object of study. In another, the
PI will focus more narrowly on the behavior of solutions of the nonlinear
Schrodinger equation, and will employ multilinear Fourier integrals as tools
with the hope of analyzing stable and unstable behavior. As an integral part of
this project, the PI will mentor individual PhD students in both research and
teaching, so that they can in turn become productive researchers and
college/university level teachers.