* 0901587
* The Monge-Ampere Operator in Analysis and PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Diego Maldonado, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 131,451.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The research activities supported by this grant include the
following aspects of the geometric theory for the Monge-Ampere equation: a
regularity theory in the first Heisenberg group; regularity of solutions to the
linearized Monge-Ampere operator in Euclidean space; and the emerging
connections between solutions to the Monge-Ampere equation and quasiconformal
mappings with convex potential. Problems related to the quasiconformal and bi-
Lipschitz Jacobian problems, the characterization of certain quasiconformal
mappings with convex potentials in terms of their Monge-Ampere measure, and the
corresponding extensions to the subelliptic case will be investigated.

The Monge-Ampere operator is the nonlinear cousin of the omnipresent Laplace
operator, whose enormous importance for physics and engineering has long been
well documented. As a nonlinear operator, the Monge-Ampere operator is far more
complicated than the Laplacian. However, when acting on convex functions, it
produces geometric and measure-theoretic objects that help to clarify its
workings. For a long time, the Monge-Ampere operator has played a key role in
differential geometry and optimal mass transportation. Somewhat more recently,
it has found applications to the design of reflector antennas and to so-called
quasiconformal mappings. Another exciting aspect of the Monge-Ampere equation
comes from its linearization, which has applications in its own right to
Lagrangian models of front formation and fluid dynamics. The linearized Monge-
Ampere operator is a challenging object, for it does not fall into the category
of the well-known "uniformly elliptic" operators.