* 0901222
* Nonlinear Dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nikolaos Tzirakis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 231,217.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project conducts research in the area of dispersive partial differential
equations. Its intent is twofold. On the one hand, it is concerned with specific
questions about the behavior of solutions to certain dispersive equations. On
the other, it is focused on developing new theoretical tools that naturally
address a wide range of problems in the area Hamiltonian partial differential
equations. These two objectives feed into each other by way of multilinear
harmonic analysis techniques. The main problems in the area are associated with
solutions that tend to behave differently depending on whether their regularity
is subcritical, critical, or supercritical with respect to a symmetry of the
equation. In particular, the hope is that the project will supplement and
broaden our understanding about the properties of mass critical, mass
subcritical, and energy supercritical equations. This project looks closely at
the qualitative behavior of such solutions. This behavior is based on properties
that include local/global existence of solutions, uniqueness, regularity,
smoothing effect, finite-in-time blow up, and asymptotic behavior of solutions.

Dispersive equations model certain wave phenomena that occur in nature. Their
solutions tend to be waves that spread out spatially on unbounded domains. They
have received a great deal of attention from mathematicians, in particular
because of their applications to nonlinear optics, water wave theory, and plasma
physics. One famous example from this class is the nonlinear Schrodinger
equation. Building on the previous advances, the goal of the project is to
extend the known results to cases where the analysis is harder, the terrain is
unknown, and existing theoretical results lag behind conjecture for explaining
the properties that we expect and have observed numerically. The intent is to
provide analytical testing grounds for these physical observables.