* 0901918
* Ultracool Dwarfs and Their Companions: A Census of Binaries and a Search for Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Cullen Blake, Blake                   Cullen         H
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Cullen Blake is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Princeton
University. Dr. Blake will work to develop new techniques for measuring precise
radial velocities (RVs) at wavelengths longer than those previously used for RV
measurements. These techniques will enable searches for planets orbiting cool
stars and brown dwarfs (Ultracool Dwarfs; UCDs) in the Habitable Zone (HZ),
where surface temperatures may be amenable to life, as well as measurements that
will help us to better understand the physical properties of UCDs. The PI will
conduct a Doppler survey of UCDs in order to better understand the properties of
UCD binaries at small orbital separations. The PI will also investigate
obtaining precise RV measurements of UCDs using telluric absorption features in
Earth's atmosphere as a wavelength reference.

Dr. Blake will also work to involve talented high school students in astronomy
research by organizing a program called Matching Mentors with Young Scientists
(MMYS) to match high school students from regions of the country where there are
fewer opportunities for scientific research with a mentor. The PI will involve
one high school student as an integral part of the aforementioned UCD research
program.