* 0901282
* Collaborative Research:  Impact of Changing Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) to NOx Ratios on Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* William Carter, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 356,672.00

A large, state-of-the-art, dual 90-m3 environmental chamber, designed for low-
NOx experiments at the University of California, Riverside (UCR) will be used to
simulate atmospheric photochemical production of secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
from four aromatic species--those present in the Carter ambient reactive organic
gas (ROG) surrogate mixture and those used in state-of-the-art computational
modules; the Cal Tech Atmospheric Chemistry Module and the Model to Predict the
Multi-phase Partitioning of Organics (CACM/MPMPO); to simulate SOA formation.
The series of experiments, which includes single and binary mixtures of the
aromatic hydrocarbons, will explore the chemical mechanisms leading to SOA
formation and be used to improve the CACM/MPMPO
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SOA formation from aromatic hydrocarbons
appears to be underpredicted grossly in current air quality models due, at least
in part, to the dependence on experimental data from chambers utilizing
excessively high NOx concentrations. This work develops the necessary chemical
mechanisms to improve estimation of SOA formation locally, regionally, and
globally. The predictive models will then be available to the larger scientific
community in assessing gas-to-particle conversion processes. The scenarios
evaluated in this project provide critical insight into the role of aromatic
species in the atmosphere and the impacts of changing ROG to NOx ratio through
dilution and/or regulation. Improved chamber data will be available to the
entire community through websites and peer-reviewed literature. The project will
involve undergraduate and graduate researchers at UC Riverside and a graduate
researcher at Rice. A temporary graduate student exchange is will cross-train
modeling oriented students from Rice with laboratory oriented students from UCR.