* 0901333
* Random Holomorphic Sections and Complex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 300,403.00



Bernard Shiffman will continue his research on applications of pluripotential
theory and the Bergman-Szego kernel to the statistics of random functions of
several complex variables and more generally of random sections of positive line
bundles on compact complex manifolds. The principal focus of the project is the
interplay between geometry and probability. One of the goals of the research is
to refine our understanding of the distributions of zeros and critical points of
polynomials, holomorphic sections of ample line bundles, and entire functions. A
fundamental ingredient in the study of random sections is the Bergman-Szego
kernel, and this project involves an examination of the asymptotics of this
kernel for large powers of the line bundle. Shiffman will investigate asymptotic
statistics for polynomials of increasing degree, holomorphic sections of
increasing powers of a line bundle, or in the case of entire functions, on
domains of increasing size. One problem is to estimate "hole probabilities" and
"overcrowding probabilities" (i.e., the probabilities that random systems of
equations have no solutions or too many solutions in fixed domains). Shiffman
will also study the distribution of zeros of real and complex "fewnomial"
systems--polynomials of high degree with few terms. He will also investigate the
asymptotic distribution of critical points for spherical harmonics as the
dimension increases.

The distribution of critical points and zeros of random functions is relevant to
many areas in physics, signal and image processing, and other areas of
engineering. In the physical sciences it is often necessary to handle disorder,
where a certain amount of randomness is inserted into a system. Random
polynomials provide an elementary model for many systems, such as systems of
atoms and molecules and their component particles--protons, neutrons, and
electrons. Quantum mechanics describes these particles by wave functions, which
are solutions of Schrodinger's equation. The zeros and local maxima of wave
functions give important information on states of atoms and molecules; the zeros
are known in quantum chemistry and physics as nodal lines. Polynomials in
several variables correspond to systems with several degrees of freedom, and
those polynomials of high degree correspond to wave functions for highly excited
states. While Shiffman's recent research was concerned primarily with
demonstrating that average states of such large systems are typical, as in the
law of large numbers, this project will also include the study of "rare events,"
which has applications to various areas of current interest, such as economics
and the study of climatic extremes.