* 0901185
* Research in noncommutative and commutative algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Gordana Todorov, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 395,430.00

The proposal consists of several interrelated parts. The first part is to study
the rings of semi-invariants of quivers and of quivers with relations. The
investigator proposes to continue study the walls of cones of weights of rings
of semi-invariants of quivers and multiplicities of weight spaces for these
rings. In particular case this includes the cones defined by Klyachko
inequalities. For the semi-invariants of quivers with relations the main problem
is to characterize the finite type and tame quivers with relations in terms of
semi-invariants. Another aspect is the connection of quiver representations and
cluster algebras. The principal investigator plans to study quivers with
potential and the mutations of related Jacobian algebras. He also plans to study
the connection of certain sphere triangulations and the Igusa-Orr theory of
pictures related to nilpotent groups. The second part is devoted to studying
defining ideals of equivariant varieties. Several types of varieties are
proposed: orbit closures for representations with finitely many orbits,
tangential and secant varieties of orbits of highest weight vectors, and orbit
closures for Dynkin quivers corresponding to Schubert varieties in the
Grassmannian. The third part involves problems related to Boij-Soderberg
conjectures for Betti tables of graded modules. The principal investigator
proposes to study cohomology tables of vector bundles on homogeneous spaces and
equivariant refinements of Boij-Soderberg conjectures.



This proposal is related to several branches of mathematics: representations of
quivers and commutative algebra. A representation of a quiver is a way to
associate vector space data to the vertices of some oriented graph. The edges
can be viewed as relations between these data. Abstract algebra allows to study
such objects systematically and the results of research might lead to better
algorithms dealing with linear algebra problems. Commutative algebra studies
polynomial functions of geometric objects. The second part of the proposal is
devoted to studying polynomial equations defining objects characterized
geometrically such as rank conditions on matrices. Various conditions of this
type on tensors are of interest for engineers and computer scientists. The third
part of the proposal studies Betti tables: certain family of numerical
invariants associated to modules over a polynomial ring.





