* 0901603
* Local to Global Compatibility, p-adic Local Langlands and p-adic Level Lowering/Raising
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Robert Coleman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2011
* USD 52,729.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Coleman and Paulin first intend to study the consequences of the failure of
local to global compatibility (away from p) on the eigencurve. Its failure
should be intimately related to the local geometry of the eigencurve. In
particular it's failure should correspond to crossings between special and
principal series components. This is a a p-adic geometric analogue of Ribet's
level raising and level lowering theorems. As a second project they intend to
establish a local to global principle at p by developing the theory of p-adic
modular forms using Fontaine's notion of (phi, gamma)- modules and Colmez's
p-adic local langlands correspondence. This may help to suggest a more
conceptual definition for a p-adic automorphic representation, at least for GL2.

The classical Langlands philosophy suggests that there is a profound duality
between real analysis, arithmetic and geometry. The glue binding these different
mathematical realms is representation theory. Langlands original insight was
that there should be a natural corespondence between arithmetic data (Galois
representations) and real analytic data (automorphic representations), mediated
in many cases by geometry. The galois representations coming from geometry and
therefore conjecturally automorphic have strong restrictions - there are many
which cannot be geometric. In recent years it has become apparent that such
representations should correspond to some p- adic analogue of an automorphic
representation. Coleman and Paulin intend to study this new p-adic
correspondence in the case of modular forms. This will help to suggest a more
conceptual approach to the rapidly emerging p-adic langlands philosophy.