* 0901530
* Collaborative Research: IHCS-Cybersystems: Integration of Protocol and Hardware Design for Securing Internet Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Xun Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 02/28/2011
* USD 150,118.00

The objective of this research is to design a series of security enhancements at
the network layer to defend Internet services against malicious attacks. The
approach integrates protocol design at the network layer with hardware design at
the physical layer. The proposed approach has the potential to deliver
effective, low-cost, and easy-to-upgrade solutions to secure the next-generation
Internet.

With respect to intellectual merit, the research addresses the opportunity to
improve security at the network layer, while most recent advances in security
have focused on the transport and application layers. The research also
considers the integration of protocol design at the network layer with hardware
implementation at the physical layer. The proposed enhancements are co-developed
and co-deployed at the network and physical layers, with the goal of high
efficiency. The research focuses on the judicious integration of software and
hardware techniques to resolve the challenges of providing effective network
security with efficient hardware support.

With respect to the potential for broader impact, this research can serve as a
catalyst for the large-scale deployment of effective and robust security
services on the Internet, offering a high level of reliability for future
security services. The approach to developing security techniques simultaneously
across different layers has the potential to provoke more basic research in this
area. The project also focuses on integrating education and research activities
through enhancing undergraduate and graduate courses on network security and
very large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuit design.