* 0901088
* Miniaturized Waveguide RF MEMS Tunable Filters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Kai Chang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2013
* USD 252,097.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a waveguide radio-frequency micro-electromechanical systems tunable
filter as a unique three-dimensional microstructure in silicon. The approach is
based on combining 1) bulk micromachining for miniaturized cavity
implementation, 2) surface micromachining for radio-frequency micro-
electromechanical systems planar circuit development, and 3) high-aspect-ratio-
microstructure fabrication to bias the planar circuit embedded inside the cavity
using vertical signal routing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual
merit, the proposed highly miniaturized three-dimensional filter enables
vertical integration with front-end electronics to create a fully functional
frequency-agile microstructure through the major paradigm shift of combining
three aspects of microfabrication for the first time. The filter provides
superior electrical performance including ultra-high selectivity, wideband
tuning, low loss, high linearity and extremely low power consumption for tuning.
A dielectric-filled, evanescent-mode, micromachined waveguide filter is proposed
to provide low loss, and also to reduce the size of the filter relative to its
bulky resonant-mode counterpart. A planar electrostatic micro-electromechanical
systems circuit performs the task of tuning over a very wide range with ultra-
low power consumption and excellent linearity by loading the capacitive posts
fabricated inside the cavity. Vertical signal routing provides a novel approach
to successfully combine two and three-dimensional microstructures and make the
high performance vertically integrated tunable filter
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, the project has
the potential to advance the development of novel microfabrication techniques
and state-of-the-art microwave circuits. Providing a solution for ultra-
miniaturized, high performance, frequency-agile filters enhances capabilities
for reconfigurable systems including software-defined radios, electronic warfare
systems, radars and instrumentation systems. The proposed project also promotes
education and outreach activities by creating research projects for graduate and
undergraduate students and extra-curricular summer activities for high school
teachers and students. Educational opportunities for minorities and under-
represented groups will be explored by collaborating with Enrichment Experience
Engineering teacher summer research program at Texas A&amp;M University to
provide a one month workshop for minority high school teachers in science and
engineering. Also, annual Society of Women Engineers summer camps inspire high
school women to join the engineering program. The research and educational
results of this work will be disseminated to academic, industrial and government
sectors.