* 0901389
* Analytical, topological and numerical methods in the study of long range behavior in dynamical systems and differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Rafael de la Llave, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 04/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;de la Llave&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
proposal is to devise methods that &lt;br/&gt;allow to make predictions of the
long term (or the long range) &lt;br/&gt;behavior of dynamical systems or PDE.
We plan to &lt;br/&gt;develop a broad array of tools (invariant manifolds,
&lt;br/&gt;variational methods, numerical analysis) in such a way that they
&lt;br/&gt;can work together. We are particularly interested in applications
&lt;br/&gt;to instability in dynamical systems and to global behavior in
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations and in coupled networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the laws of nature are formulated as local
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;One point in space and time affects only its close
neighborhood. &lt;br/&gt;It can happen that these local interactions cancel each
other &lt;br/&gt;out so that the global &lt;br/&gt;effect is small and that the
systems remain kind of unaffected or it can &lt;br/&gt;happen that the local
interactions reinforce each other and&lt;br/&gt;lead to large scale effects. The
two alternatives do &lt;br/&gt;happen and they depend on very subtle effects
(e.g. rather&lt;br/&gt;deep and abstract number theory is the key to very
measurable effects). &lt;br/&gt;Even if the importance of the &lt;br/&gt;has
been recognized by applied mathematicians for centuries, it is &lt;br/&gt;only
very recently that a rich enough toolkit has been developed by many
&lt;br/&gt;start tackling it. Different people, &lt;br/&gt;have been making
different techniques to &lt;br/&gt;work together, and they have started
producing results. &lt;br/&gt;As a witness to the interest, the PI of this
&lt;br/&gt;proposal has&lt;br/&gt;been co-organizer of special semesters in CRM
(Barcelona) Fall 2008 &lt;br/&gt;and Fields institute (Spring 2011). &lt;br/&gt;