* 0901245
* Divergence-measure fields and the structure of solutions of systems of hyperbolic conservation laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Monica Torres, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 138,552.00

The study of multidimensional conservation laws, for both scalar and systems of
equations, is currently the subject of broad research efforts. Though
significant progress has been made in the case of multidimensional scalar
conservation laws, there is currently no general theory for multidimensional
systems of hyperbolic conservation laws. One of the main difficulties is that
solutions can develop singularities in finite time, regardless of the smoothness
of the initial data. These singularities are known as shock waves. For the
strictly hyperbolic one-dimensional system, it can be shown that if the initial
data has sufficiently small total variation, then there exists a global entropy
solution in the space of functions of bounded variation. However, solutions of
conservation laws are not in general functions of bounded variation. Moreover,
it has been shown that the space of functions of bounded variation is
mathematically insufficient for describing solutions of multidimensional systems
of conservation laws. These shortcomings in the state-of-the-art theory for
systems of conservation laws have motivated the principal investigator to
develop a theory for divergence-measure fields. Divergence-measure fields
provide a more general framework for characterizing solutions of systems of
conservation laws. The principal investigator conjectures that solutions of
systems of conservation laws have a special structure, in the sense that the
shock waves are supported on a codimension-one rectifiable set where the
solution has strong traces. Outside the shock waves, the solution is conjectured
to be approximately continuous. This project will investigate these questions by
analyzing the blow-up limits of the rescalings of the solution directly on the
equation given by the entropy inequality. This plan hinges on the analysis of
divergence-measure fields in that the existence of strong traces of the solution
are related to the existence of weak normal traces of divergence-measure fields.
Moreover, the analysis of divergence-measure fields provides information on the
entropy dissipation measures. The project will also explore the structure of
solutions to degenerate parabolic-hyperbolic equations, for they relate to
divergence-measure fields in the same fashion as the solutions of hyperbolic
conservation laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservation laws and their associated
vector fields govern physical processes from broad scientific disciplines,
including fluid mechanics, solid mechanics, acoustics, chemistry, and
electromagnetism. Shock waves are ubiquitous in physical systems, occurring in
aerodynamics, biological systems, and chemical processes, yet their mathematical
structure is not well understood. The analysis of the structure of solutions of
systems of hyperbolic conservation laws will open new doors to the understanding
of shock waves. The analysis of the space of divergence-measure fields, which is
larger than the space of so-called bounded variation vector fields and is the
focal point of this project, will provide new tools to research other equations
where "weakly differentiable vector fields" appear. The research plans of this
proposal are tightly integrated with the mentoring of graduate students and
cross-collaborations. This will encourage research dissemination through
collaboration among students, postdocs, and faculty who will be interacting with
the principal investigator. She will also integrate her research plan with
activities intended to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, as
she has done in the past.