* 0901965
* Investigating Dark Energy and Neutrino Mass with Pan-STARRS and LSST
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Molly Swanson, Swanson                 Molly
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 237,103.00

Dr. Molly Swanson is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA). Dr. Swanson will research the
mysteries of dark energy and neutrino mass using the upcoming galaxy surveys of
the Panoramic Survey Telescope & Rapid Response System (Pan-STARRS) and the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). Differences in fundamental physics lead
to changes in the large-scale clustering of matter, so one can use the universe
as a particle physics laboratory by measuring this clustering with surveys
cataloging large numbers of galaxies. However, galaxy formation physics also
impacts the clustering, which leads to systematic uncertainties in measuring
dark energy and neutrino properties. This project will develop a detailed
understanding of these uncertainties and apply them to the upcoming generation
of galaxy surveys. The methods used will be as follows: first, build theoretical
models encoding galaxy formation physics and test them by comparing to current
surveys and simulations. Next, use these models to compute the uncertainties
expected from future galaxy surveys. Finally, develop analysis methods to apply
to future survey data that will optimize the physics results. The primary
objective is an analytical framework to account for galaxy formation physics
when extracting information about dark energy and neutrinos from survey data.

Dr. Swanson will also develop and teach an enrichment course in cosmology for
Boston area high-school students through the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Educational Studies Program. She will collaborate with the CfA
Science Education Department to develop and assess the curriculum for the
course, which will focus on helping students break down commonly-held
misconceptions about astonomy and cosmology using inquiry-based techniques,
observational projects using the MicroObservatory online telescopes, and
computer simulations and visualizations. Dr. Swanson will make the curriculum
materials publicly available online as modules for physics and astronomy
teachers at high schools and colleges worldwide and also as an interactive
online course for anyone who is curious about the nature of our universe.