* 0901562
* Smart Engines: Fuel Flexible Engine Control using Adaptive Neural Network Critics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2013
* James Drallmeier, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2013
* USD 336,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low temperature combustion engines such as
homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) offer fuel flexibility with high
fuel efficiency and low emissions. If the type and composition of the fuel, such
as bio-fuel, is not known a-priori, a ?smart? engine has to be capable of
sensing heat release and adjusting combustion system parameters online for
minimized emissions and fuel consumption. This necessitates a more advanced
adaptive control schemes for the control of these types of complex non-affine
nonlinear systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this study is to
provide the next generation adaptive critic neural net controllers for complex
non-affine, nonlinear systems supported by a rigorous and repeatable design and
mathematical framework. The controller performance will be validated for the
HCCI engine for a range of bio-mass based fuel stocks using conventional and
novel input sensors for measuring cyclic heat release.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will advance the state of
the art in Adaptive Dynamic Programming for control by providing rigorous
mathematical analysis for convergence and stability, and performance guarantees
in the presence of approximation errors, actuator constraints and delays.
Moreover, by applying the theoretical results to an emerging control application
of fuel-flexible engines, this type of controllers will be implemented and
tested in hardware in the Co-PI's internal combustion engine
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Improved control of next
generation fuel-flexible engines and multi mode engines, such as plug-in
hybrids, is expected to improve fuel efficiency and reduce harmful emission,
thus directly impacting the environment and reducing dependence on foreign oil.
Research results will be integrated as part of undergraduate course and
laboratories. Dissemination plans include distribution of software through
websites, patents, journal and conference publications. The PIs have a track
record of hiring underrepresented minorities through MST?s Minority Engineering
Program, extending research opportunities to undergraduates via REU supplements
and interactions with EPSCOR states. International collaborations will be
pursued. Technology transfer to industrial members is planned through the NSF
I/UCRC Site on Intelligent Maintenance Systems where the PI is the Site
Director.&lt;br/&gt;