* 0901430
* Nonlinear equations of Monge-Ampere type
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cristian Gutierrez, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This project investigates nonlinear partial differential equations of Monge-
Ampere type (i.e., equations involving the Jacobian determinant of a map). A
large portion of the research is concerned with lens and reflector antenna
design. A lens is basically an optical surface that separates two materials with
different indices of refraction. Two types of situations are considered: the far
field problem, in which light or radiation needs to be received in a prescribed
set of directions; and the near field problem, in which a target or screen needs
to be illuminated (or radiated) in a prescribed way. In both cases, radiation
emanates from a source point. Since the phenomena of refraction and reflection
always occur simultaneously, when energy is refracted (or transmitted) there is
always a fraction of this energy that is lost in internal reflection. It is
important in the applications to optimize the energy refracted and so we are
interested in the development and treatment of models that take into account
this loss of energy. For the mathematical treatment of these problems, a
fundamental difference appears: far field problems can be cast in the frame of
optimal transportation (an area of mathematics dealing with the optimal
allocation of resources). By contrast, since near field problems are not
variational, they cannot be cast in those terms. This makes near field problems
more difficult. The problems in the project range from questions of existence
and uniqueness of solutions to various equations that model these problems to
the study of their geometric and regularity properties. They offer various
degrees of difficulty. Recent major breakthroughs for Monge-Ampere-type
equations make these problems mathematically sound and challenging. A large
portion of them have practical interest and, in addition, are aesthetically
beautiful. The ideas proposed for their solution will improve the theoretica
lunderstanding of fully nonlinear partial differential equations and will have
an impact on applications in geometric optics.

The research in this project arises in the mathematical description of numerous
optical, acoustic, and electromagnetic applications, as well as in global
positioning systems (GPS). If successful, it could be of great benefit for
engineering design and manufacturing. The project has connections, interactions,
and applications within several areas in mathematics and outside. In addition to
what was mentioned earlier, questions in mass transportation have applications
to differential and convex geometry, optimization, economics, and quality
control. The understanding of the properties of optimal maps also has possible
implications for numerical computations. The work will involve collaborations
with mathematicians in the US and abroad and will contribute to the training of
graduate students.