* 0901034
* Cooperative Tracking in Harsh Environments:  Statistical Framework and Network Experimentation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Moe Win, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 06/30/2013
* USD 330,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objectives of this research are to: (1) gain a fundamental understanding of
the theoretical and practical benefits of cooperation for self-tracking; and (2)
demonstrate the feasibility and real-world performance gains of cooperative
self-tracking in a practical network setting. The approach is to first derive
fundamental performance bounds for cooperative self-tracking networks. This is
followed by the development of practical self-tracking and distributed
algorithms that account for performance and complexity trade-offs. Finally, the
newly developed algorithms are implemented in a unique ultra wideband network
test bed.

The intellectual merit of this research includes the potential to advance the
understanding of key issues of location-aware networks. The project consists of
both theoretical and experimental components and is interdisciplinary. This
offers the potential to lead to novel methods and techniques to solve self-
tracking problems in a wider range of environments and under more stringent
requirements compared to what is currently available.

The potential broader impacts of this project include commercialization and
dissemination of this technology. The project has engaged with state government
agencies. The research results are integrated into graduate courses at MIT, as
well as in tutorials and short courses offered elsewhere. Furthermore, results
and measurement data are to be made publicly available via the Internet. To
advocate diversity and outreach, the project is used to host students from both
MIT's Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) and MIT's Summer
Research Program (MSRP).