* 0901083
* Nonlinear harmonic analysis and partial differential equations of Lane-Emden and Riccati type
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Phuc Nguyen, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 01/31/2013
* USD 110,000.00

Abstract (Nguyen, 0901083)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate several problems stemming
from a class of quasi-linear and fully nonlinear elliptic equations of Lane-
Emden and Riccati type with singular coefficients and measure data, and with
nonlinear source terms that involve both solutions and their derivatives.
Various methods from nonlinear potential theory, harmonic analysis, and the
theory of partial differential equations are proposed to obtain sharp a priori
estimates for solutions and their derivatives, to derive capacitary
inequalities, and to establish the boundedness of the related nonlinear singular
operators. As a consequence, complete characterizations of solvability will be
found in different explicit terms including geometric (capacitary) or potential
theoretic terms. Moreover, removable singularities of solutions and a more
general class of operators and nonlinearities related to subelliptic geometry
and nonstandard Sobolev spaces will also be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is closely related to central problems in nonlinear partial
differential equations that require hard analysis and major tools from different
branches of mathematics, such as harmonic analysis, nonlinear potential theory,
control theory, and differential geometry. Many of the ideas to be developed in
this project are new, and they promise to bring new results to bear on
applications to diverse problems in both pure and applied mathematics. These
applications involve the development of models to describe various phenomena
that are studied in physics and engineering, including heat transfer, mass
transfer, and fluid flow. The proposed research is tightly integrated with the
teaching of graduate students and the interaction of the principal investigator
with a network of researchers worldwide, which promotes the exchange of results
and ideas between diverse scientific communities.