* 0901139
* Harmonic Analysis and the Theory of Elliptic Measure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jill Pipher, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,307.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two parts to the research
program in this proposal. Part one concerns multi-parameter Fourier analysis,
the higher dimensional (or product) theory with origins in the theory of several
complex variables, convergence of multiple Fourier series and analysis on
symmetric spaces. Some of the modern questions proposed here are related to
singular integrals, Hardy spaces, averaging, bilinear operators, and reach into
probability theory through multi-parameter martingales, and higher dimensional
Brownian sheets. Part two of this proposal concerns the theory of second order
elliptic partial differential equations, in both divergence and non-divergence
form. The questions are mainly centered on the fine properties of the elliptic
measure associated with the solvability of boundary value problems and are posed
in two settings: when the operator itself has non-smooth coefficients, or for
smooth operators in domains whose boundary is less regular yet satisfies some
geometric conditions (Lipschitz, chord-arc, Reifenberg flat, for
example).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1811, Joseph Fourier proposed a mathematical
theory of heat which took the point of view that heat was a ``flow" and should
be described by differential equations. This was the starting point of the
theory now called Fourier analysis, a field which has an impact on every area of
mathematics and the physical sciences. In this proposal, we consider some basic
open problems related to such differential equations, and try to understand how
their solutions depend on boundary conditions. Solving these problems may lead
to a better understanding of how to obtain approximations to solutions (using
computational tools) when it is impossible to write down a formula which
describes them exactly. This grant will partially support graduate students and
undergraduates in this field by providing them the opportunity to do research in
this area (individually and in teams) and to travel to conferences where they
can present their own results.