* 0901256
* Workshop on Energy Efficiency via Better Materials and Manufacturing; June 18-19, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Yip-Wah Chung, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2009
* USD 52,677.00

This grant provides funding to organize a workshop on energy efficiency on June
18-19, 2009 just prior to the CMMI Grantee Conference and at the same site. The
objective of this workshop is to identify transformative research issues and
opportunities to make alternative energy sources viable and to improve energy
efficiency in transportation and electricity consumption through advanced
materials and manufacturing, thereby leading to the conservation of fossil fuels
and reduction of carbon dioxide emissions. The workshop will focus on three
aspects of energy efficiency: alternative energy sources, transportation
systems, and electricity consumption. There will be three technical sessions
presenting state-of-the-art issues, followed by break-out sessions. These break-
out sessions will brainstorm ideas on transformative research issues and
opportunities to make alternative energy sources viable and to improve the
efficiency of electricity consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major output of
this workshop will be a list of recommendations on future research directions in
these areas. These recommendations will be disseminated not only in the form of
a final report to the NSF, but will possibly be presented in professional
society meetings and appear in publications. The latter approach provides wider
dissemination of the information presented in this workshop and can more
effectively engage the larger scientific and engineering audience in the
proposed new research directions. &lt;br/&gt;