* 0901838
* Long-Range Internal Stresses in Plastically Deformed Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael Kassner, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 06/30/2014
* USD 249,594.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to fund a domestic
PhD candidate to definitively assess the existence of long-range internal
stresses (LRIS) in plastically deformed materials. Backstresses or LRIS in the
past have been suggested by many (but certainly not all) to exist in plastically
deformed crystalline materials. Elevated stresses can be present in regions of
elevated dislocation density or dislocation heterogeneities in the deformed
microstructures. The heterogeneities include edge dislocation dipole bundles
(veins) and the edge dipole walls of persistent slip bands (PSBs) in cyclically
deformed materials and cell and subgrain walls in monotonically deformed
materials. The existence of long-range internal stress is especially important
for the understanding of cyclic deformation and also monotonic de-formation.
Preliminary x-ray microbeam diffraction experiments that are able to deter-mine
the elastic strains within the cell interiors were performed by the principal
investi-gator using a synchrotron. These were accomplished using, oriented,
monotonically and cyclically (presaturation, i.e., no PSBs) deformed Cu single
crystals. The results suggest that small (17 to 29 % of the applied stress)
long-range internal stresses may be present in cell interiors. These LRIS vary
substantially from cell to cell as 0-50% the applied stress. This proposal
includes an attempt to measure elastic strains in the cell walls which has been
challenging due to the high defect density. This will help complete the
definitive analysis of LRIS in deformed materials. Finally, detailed
transmission electron micros-copy will be performed on the dislocation
substructure (Burger?s vector analysis and pre-cise spatial positioning of wall
dislocations), to assess through a dislocation dynamics code, a verification of
the experimental LRIS. The understanding of plastic deformation, in general, is
expected to be enhanced. We expect to be the first to definitively assess long-
range internal stresses in plastically deformed materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
project to uncover the secrets of the strength of materials using x-ray mi-
crobeams. The use of intense, submicron, x-ray beams at the Advanced Photon
Source in Illinois has led to the discovery that structural materials are under
significant, variable internal stresses of opposite direction on submicron
length scales corresponding to the dislocation substructure. This result has
profound implications for understanding the me-chanical strength and behavior of
materials. The presence of counterbalanced stresses within microscopic volumes
(or cells) in deformed materials was predicted more than two decades ago and has
been inferred from numerous indirect experiments. Yet, direct proof of their
existence has been elusive, as spatially-resolved measurements of the stress
mag-nitudes and distributions critical for testing theories and computer
modeling were not possible before the development of high-resolution x-ray
microbeams at synchrotron sources. The implications of this work are of direct
relevance to important practical prob-lems such as sheet metal forming (for
example, in automobile production) and metal fa-tigue, the latter being
responsible for most structural materials failures.&lt;br/&gt;