* 0901802
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Panagiotis Souganidis, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 508,000.00

Souganidis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of multi-scale phenomena
necessitates the use of random media (periodicity is a rather restrictive
structure for many applications) and requires the study of averaged (mesoscopic
and macroscopic) behaviors. For complex phenomena, it is also very common to
have only \statistical? (random) and not \exact? (deterministic) information. In
addition, incorporating the &lt;br/&gt;fluctuations of several physical
quantities leads to equations with \singular? (white noise type) dependence on
some of the variables. In this context, random homogenization and stochastic pde
become the natural mathematical objects. The randomness is associated with
singular dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness both giving
rise to challenging mathematical problems. Overcoming them requires the
development of new methods and techniques. Viscosity solutions of nonlinear
¯rst- and second-order pde have become a classical tool for the study of many
applications. It is therefore important to improve the understanding of their
qualitative properties. In biology, recent experiments at the molecular scale
have led to new sophisticated mathematical models. Novel tools and ideas are
needed to study these problems further and to identify all the relevant
regimes/scales of the parameters affecting the experimentally observed behavior.
The PI proposes to continue his program to develop methods to study nonlinear
deterministic and stochastic pde arising in continuum and statistical physics,
biology, engineering, etc.. The emphasis of the proposal is on (i) the
development of theories for weak (stochastic viscosity) solutions of fully
nonlinear, (degenerate) parabolic stochastic pde, and the homogenization of
nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic pde in spatiotemporal random media,
(ii) the study of problems related to viscosity solutions (rates of convergence,
averaging, large deviations in infinite dimensions, etc.), and (iii) the
analysis of models for motor and concentration effects in mathematical biology.
&lt;br/&gt;First- and second-order, stochastic pde and stochastic homogenization
arise in models for a wide variety of phenomena and applications including
turbulence, phase transitions and front propagation in random media with/out
random velocities, nucleations in physics, macroscopic limits of particle
systems, stochastic control theory, stochastic control with partial
observations, financial mathematics, etc.. The theory of stochastic viscosity
solutions is important. It allows for the study of a completely new class of
fully nonlinear stochastic pde. As the theory develops further, it is expected
that it will play a crucial role in applied areas by providing the necessary
&lt;br/&gt;tools to analyze previously intractable models. There has been
resurgence of interest in homogenization in random media. The novel tools
proposed to be developed are expected to become the standard methodology in the
field. Providing a unified (analytic) treatment, based on viscosity solutions,
to a class of large deviation problems in infinite dimensions will lead to a
better understanding of an important area with applications to particle systems,
random matrices, phase transitions, etc.. In mathematical biology, the proposed
work is expected to enhance the understanding of concrete phenomena like bio-
motor behavior and concentration effects. &lt;br/&gt;