* 0901433
* Robust Identification of a Class of Structured  Systems with  High Dimensional  Outputs and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Mario Sznaier, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 415,304.00

The objective of this research program is to develop a comprehensive framework
for robust identification of a class of multidimensional systems arising in
diverse domains ranging from image processing to nano-systems. Its
transformative impact and novelty reside in recasting problems that require
extracting information sparsely encoded in high dimensional data streams as
multidimensional systems identification problems, establishing a new connection
between dynamical systems theory, image processing and machine learning.

Intellectual Merit: Recent exponential growth in sensing capabilities poses a
serious challenge to identification theory. Simply put, existing techniques are
ill-equipped to deal with the overwhelming volume of data. The present proposal
seeks to develop a comprehensive robust modeling (identification, reduction,
validation) framework specifically tailored to address this challenge.
Advantages over existing techniques include the abilities to directly
accommodate structural constraints (such as periodicity), exploit correlations
in the data to accomplish substantial dimensionality reduction and exploit
recent results in optimization to furnish tractable solutions to problems that
challenge current techniques, due to poor scaling properties. Examples (known to
be generically NP-hard) are (i) robust identification of piecewise affine hybrid
systems, (ii) robust identification of Hammerstein/Wiener systems and (iii)
semi-blind (in)validation.

Broader Impact: Enhanced data collection and analysis capabilities can
profoundly impact society, with benefits ranging from safer, self aware
environments, to enhanced image-based therapies. A major impediment to realizing
this vision stems from the curse of dimensionality. The proposed research
exploits a hidden commonality --underlying dynamical models having a far simpler
representation than the dimension of the data-- to recast key problems, e.g.
data segmentation, reconstruction and classification, into a tractable form,
significantly advancing the state of the art in several domains. Examples
include (but are not limited to) biomedical image processing, building safety,
nano-systems and aging civil-infrastructure monitoring. Translation of these
results to society and the economy will proceed by actively engaging our
partners in bio-medical image processing and building security. The proposed
research also has the potential for significant cross--fertilization with other
branches of engineering and applied mathematics. An example is the connection
between nonlinear dimensionality reduction methods and manifold discovery (both
hallmarks of machine learning) and nonlinear identification.