* 0901659
* Ultra-Sensitive Electrometers for Nano-Fluidics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Gregory Snider, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2013
* USD 333,655.00

Abstract Nanofluidics is a promising area where the fields of Chemistry,
Biology, and Engineering all play a role. As the name implies, nanofluidics
involves nano-scale channels used to transport fluids. By scaling down the size
of the channels only a tiny amount of fluid is required to fill them, an
important quality when dealing with expensive reagents. Scaled channels also
enable concepts such as ?Lab on a Chip?, where nano channels transport reactants
and analytes to a number of pico-liter sized reaction chambers so that a number
of tests can be carried out quickly in a very small package. This proposal
presents a methodology to interface electronics to nanofluidics. The electronics
portion will provide ultra-sensitive electrometers placed in one wall of the
nanochannel. An electrometer senses charge, so it can be used to detect charge
change at the wall of the nanochannel or in the fluid near the wall. The surface
of the electrometer could be functionalized to provide specific binding of
reaction products, and the electrometer signal would then represent the density
of the bound product. The goal is to achieve single ion detection in the
channel. The intellectual merit of this proposal is that it addresses the lack
of a suitable electrical transducing element. Most fluidic experiments done
today use optical transduction based on fluorescence. Electrical transduction
would enable a simple interface to standard electronics, leading to reduction in
system size and cost. Singleelectron transistor electrometers are the most
sensitive known, but have yet to be applied to nanofluidics. The proposed
research is transformative in a number of ways. It will develop a process that
should be scalable and manufacturable, and it will extend CMP processing into
nanoscale dimensions. The integration of room temperature electrometers with
nanofluidic channels will enable a number of applications, perhaps even the
rapid sequencing of DNA. A key feature is the easy integration of these devices
with CMOS will form an excellent bridge between nanoelectronics and the enormous
base of CMOS infrastructure. The broader impact of the proposed project will be
in both scientific and educational impact. The scientific impact will come from
the research developing the theory and devices for silicon-based QCA. This
project will also make a significant outreach to middle school students in the
South Bend, Indiana area. South Bend public schools have a diverse student
population with a large number of students from groups underrepresented in the
areas of science and technology. The outreach program proposed will target
middle school students through classroom activities involving faculty and
graduate students, and field trips to bring students to the Notre Dame labs.
Middle school aged children are an excellent group for outreach since they are
advanced enough to understand science, but are still making choices about their
areas of interests. The outreach will benefit the middle schoolers by giving
them a first-hand taste of science in both the classroom and lab.