* 0901620
* Geometric analysis in Carnot groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jeremy Tyson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 251,301.00

The intellectual core of the proposal combines geometric measure theory,
geometric function theory and differential geometry in sub-Riemannian spaces and
abstract metric spaces. The proposal consists of three parts. Part I focuses on
sub-Riemannian geometric measure theory, specifically dimension comparison
theorems for Carnot-Caratheodory and Euclidean Hausdorff measure and dimension.
Applications include sharp dimension computations for nonlinear Euclidean
iterated function systems of polynomial type. Related projects concern
characteristic negligibility for hypersurfaces in Carnot groups. A long-term
goal is to classify constant mean curvature surfaces in jet space groups with an
eye to identifying candidate extremals for their isoperimetric inequalities.
Part II considers sub-Riemannian geometric function theory, specifically
Heisenberg analogs of the Tukia-Vaisala quasiconformal extension theorems and a
problem of Heinonen-Semmes. In Part III, the PI studies highly regular
surjections to metric spaces. This line of research originates in classical
point-set topology results of Peano, Lebesgue and Hahn-Mazurkiewicz and is also
influenced by recent work on Morse-Sard theory and rectifiability. The PI has
constructed highly regular surjections from Euclidean spaces of sufficiently
high dimension onto doubling geodesic spaces. Future problems to be considered
include borderline regularity, infinite-dimensional analogs and other regularity
classes (Holder and Sobolev maps). A problem of Gromov on density of Lipschitz
maps in Sobolev spaces with sub-Riemannian target will be studied. The proposed
research encompasses a range of topics within nonsmooth geometric analysis, yet
remains unified by a common framework.

Geometry studies the static structure of spaces of arbitrary complexity and
dimension, while analysis studies dynamic properties and functional
interrelations of such spaces. The adjective nonsmooth suggests non-Euclidean
settings: fractals, stratified (sub-Riemannian) manifolds, and other abstract
spaces. Sub-Riemannian geometry is the `geometry of constrained motion?: it
models physical situations where motion is subject to a priori geometric
constraints. It features in a remarkably broad spectrum of applications
including robotic motion, digital image reconstruction, computer vision,
neurobiology, and the mathematics of finance. Sub-Riemannian analysis involves
an intricate blend of smooth and nonsmooth techniques as these spaces admit both
smooth structure (in restricted directions) and fractal structure (in generic
directions). The proposal integrates research, teaching, service and outreach on
multiple levels. Graduate student training occurs via summer research programs,
teaching of graduate core and topics courses, and Ph.D. supervision. Educational
opportunities and outreach related to the research are proposed at the
undergraduate and secondary school levels. The PI?s collaborators are located
across the U.S. and Europe. Visits to and from these institutions by faculty,
postdocs and students will generate new opportunities for collaboration and
increase the visibility of the area. To this end, the PI will also continue to
organize conferences and workshops in sub-Riemannian geometry and analysis.