* 0901405
* Applications of descriptive set theory to functional analysis and topological dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Christian Rosendal, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 212,861.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI intends to work on three
different topics involving descriptive set theory and its applications in Banach
space theory and topological dynamics. Firstly, he intends to further elaborate
on the structure theory of large Polish group and, in particular, automorphism
groups of countable first order structures. The PI's main &lt;br/&gt;interest in
this domain is the existence of generic representations of countable discrete
groups in such automorphism groups and its uses in investigating the dynamics
and algebraic structure of the automorphism group. &lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the PI
will be working on the classical problem of J.P.R. Christensen &lt;br/&gt;of
whether any universally measurable homomorphism between Polish groups is
continuous. Again, this problem is tightly connected with the geometry and
dynamical properties of Polish groups and very likely to leads to new techniques
and concepts of value outside of the study of automatic continuity.
&lt;br/&gt;Finally, Rosendal will be continuing his collaboration with V.
Ferenczi on the &lt;br/&gt;rough classification of separable Banach spaces, a
programme initiated by W. T. Gowers in the course of the solution to the
homogeneous space problem. This programme heavily relies on Ramsey theoretical
and game theoretical methods from descriptive set theory and thus enriches both
descriptive set theory by developing new techniques and functional analysis by
contributing to one of the most central problems of Banach space theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there
has been a growing collaboration and sharing of ideas between researchers
working in dynamical systems and descriptive set theory. Initially, this was
largely fostered by work on Borel equivalence relations but has lately also come
to include topological dynamics. The principal objectives of descriptive set
theory consists in studying the definable subsets of the real line, showing that
these are much better behaved than arbitrary subsets. This has developed into a
large structure theory of such sets which gives a solid framework within which
most of mathematical analysis takes place, and as such, the use of descriptive
set theoretical techniques in parts of functional analysis is continuously
expanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;