* 0901994
* Dust Obscured Quasars: A Missing Link in the Formation and Evolution of Galaxies and Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Eilat Glikman, Glikman                 Eilat
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 249,000.00

Dr. Eilat Glikman is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Yale University.
Dr. Glikman will study the role of dust-obscured quasars in relation to the
overall&lt;br/&gt;quasar population. Dust-obscured quasars are a newly
discovered and thoroughly unexplored stage of quasar evolution and may represent
a missing link in the path from nascent active galactic nuclei seen buried in
merging ultraluminous infrared galaxies (ULIRGs) to quasars that show no signs
of disruption. Dr. Glikman will (1) conduct several new surveys for dust-
obscured quasars increasing the depth and area beyond existing surveys to
determine their fraction in the overall quasar population and study their
reddening properties as functions of luminosity and redshift and (2) use
integral-field spectroscopy to study their dynamics at subarcsecond
resolutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Glikman will also utilize her extensive
experience with outreach and mentorship in a multi-pronged education effort. She
will develop and teach a modern cosmology course geared towards advanced
undergraduate students. In addition, she will take advantage of the Yale-New
Haven Teachers Institute to pair with a local middle school science teacher to
conduct hands-on astronomy activities during the school year and in intensive
summer workshops. Dr. Glikman will also design a self-contained project from
within the scope of the her research and work directly with undergraduate
science students, with a focus on providing mentorship to women scientists. This
individualized approach of fostering stimulating collegial relationships between
women scientists emphasizes the importance of role models and mentors to improve
the confidence and success of women in the field of astronomy.