* 0901449
* Calculus of Variations and Hamilton-Jacobi Equations in the Wasserstein Space
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Truyen Nguyen, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 70,907.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study a class of
dynamical systems on the Wasserstein space of probability measures corresponding
to some fundamental systems of partial differential equations in fluid and
quantum mechanics. A nice feature of the Wasserstein space approach is its
ability to handle singular data and singular solutions. In addition, there is
also a possibility of handling discrete and continuous models with the same
formalism. The core of this program lies in the development of an appropriate
theory for calculus of variations and Hamilton-Jacobi equations in the
Wasserstein space. In this project, the principal investigator will investigate
the following topics: minimizing the action functional for certain physically
meaningful Lagrangians defined on the set of absolutely continuous paths in the
Wasserstein space of probability measures; existence and uniqueness of viscosity
solutions for Hamilton-Jacobi equations in the Wasserstein space; and
homogenization of these Hamilton-Jacobi equations. Some of the most challenging
aspects to these problems are the lack of local compactness in the space of
probability measures and the presence of strong singularities in the Lagrangians
and Hamiltonians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calculus of variations and Hamilton-
Jacobi equations play a central role in many areas of sciences including
physics, economics, and engineering. In particular, they are the main object of
study in classical mechanics. It is expected that the properties of solutions of
the variational problems and the Hamilton-Jacobi equations to be studied in this
project will provide a significant step in understanding the dynamics of some
infinite-dimensional dynamical systems arising in fluid and quantum mechanics.
The principal investigator's Wasserstein formalism approach is also expected to
give a unifying framework in which both classical and quantum behavior of
particles can be described. The proposed activity will provide a fruitful
interaction with some other disciplines of theoretical and applied mathematics
such as optimal mass transportation, hyperbolic systems of conservation laws,
probability theory, and infinite-dimensional optimal control theory.