* 0901232
* Symplectic Reflection Algebras and Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wee Liang Gan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 08/31/2013
* USD 111,215.00

This project is devoted to the study of symplectic reflection algebras and their
variants. Symplectic reflection algebras are relatively new objects in Lie
theory and we are only at the beginning stages of its representation theory. The
main focus of the proposed project will be on symplectic reflection algebras of
wreath product types, which include as a special case the rational Cherednik
algebras of type A. The symplectic reflection algebras of wreath product types
are closely related to Kleinian singularities and their resolutions. In
particular, representations of the symplectic reflection algebra are expected to
be closely related to sheaves on Hilbert scheme of points on the minimal
resolution of the associated Kleinian singularity. The symplectic reflection
algebra also provides quantization of the Hilbert scheme of points. A first goal
of the project is to develop systematically the representation theory of the
symplectic reflection algebras of wreath product type from a geometric point of
view. The second goal of the project is to explore applications of similar
algebras in noncommutative geometry. The PI hopes to unify and extend some of
the existing methods from rational Cherednik algebras and deformed preprojective
algebras of quivers to the wreath product case. The PI also hopes that the
methods developed for symplectic reflection algebras can be extended to other
algebras that arise from noncommutative deformations of surfaces. This will lead
to a more coherent theory that links representation theory to noncommutative
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic reflection algebras have already
provide us with several applications to combinatorics and noncommutative
geometry. This project will require techniques from representation theory and
algebraic geometry. It will hopefully bring all these branches in mathematics
closer together and enrich each other with new constructions and techniques. In
particular, wreath product generalizations appear in all these subjects, and
symplectic reflection algebras is a central tool to formalize and exploit this
connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;