* 0901016
* Nuclear Physics Research and Education with GlueX
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Richard Jones, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 01/31/2013
* USD 335,061.00

Researchers at the University of Connecticut are building key components for a
new particle beam to be installed at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, Virginia. The beam consists of the
same kind of particles that comprise ordinary light, called photons, except that
their wavelength is ten billion times shorter than that of visible light. Such
short wavelengths enable researchers to look into the interior of the nucleus
and search for new kinds of nuclear particles that are believed to exist in the
nuclear environment. The short-wavelength light beam is produced by passing a
beam of electrons from a particle accelerator through a diamond crystal. If the
diamond crystal is sufficiently perfect then the short-wavelength light it
produces is polarized when it emerges from the crystal. The polarization gives
experimenters enhanced selectivity in the search for new particles inside the
nucleus. A team of physicists residing at Jefferson Lab and about a dozen
universities, including both US and foreign partners, are responsible for the
design and construction of both the photon beam and the experimental apparatus
that uses it, and is known collectively as the GlueX
Collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the desired beam
intensity and polarization for the GlueX experiment, the Connecticut group faces
a challenge in fabricating and mounting diamonds with the required shape and
quality. Taking advantage of recent advances in diamond crystal growth within
the gem industry, and also the excellent diagnostic tools available at the
Cornell CHESS X-ray source, the group seeks to produce ultra-thin diamond
crystals of large area and mount them in such a way that they are stable when
exposed to an intense electron beam from the accelerator. The group is also
working together with partners to produce detectors to be used to measure the
precise wavelength of each of the photons produced in the crystal, and to
monitor the beam polarization during the experiment. All of this work is carried
out by students at the University of Connecticut, under the supervision of the
Principal Investigator. The team includes one graduate student and two or three
undergraduate students who are active on the project both during the academic
year, and more intensely, during the summer. One highlight of the group's
schedule during the month of July is to welcome 2-4 gifted high school students
from the UConn Mentor Connection program to work alongside the group leader and
other team members for three weeks on aspects of the project adapted to their
level of experience. These activities amplify the long-term impact of the
nuclear physics research program at the University of Connecticut, both in terms
of the enriched educational experiences that it provides to students across a
broad range of levels, and in the cutting-edge basic science that it
produces.&lt;br/&gt;