* 0901218
* Intelligent Optimal Mechanical Sensorless Control of Variable-Speed Wind Energy Systems Considering System Uncertainties
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Wei Qiao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2013
* USD 214,754.00

Intelligent Optimal Mechanical Sensorless Control of Variable-Speed Wind Energy
Systems Considering System Uncertainties&lt;br/&gt;(NSF Proposal ID:
0901218)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop intelligent optimal mechanical sensorless control for
variable-speed wind energy systems. The approach is to (1) develop a neural-
network-based, real-time wind speed and direction estimator and turbine shaft
speed estimator, (2) develop an adaptive critic design-based supervisory wind
turbine controller, (3) optimize the parameters of the estimators and controller
by evolutionary swarm intelligence algorithms, (4) perform a stability analysis
for the wind energy systems with the controller, and (5) verify the modeling and
control framework and methodology by simulations and hardware
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will
investigate in depth the use of bio-inspired design principles to handle highly
stochastic, uncertain, and complex processes, e.g., wind energy conversion, in
an intelligent way. Through modeling, control, stability analysis, simulation,
and hardware implementation, this project will advance our understanding of bio-
inspired modeling, control, and optimization technologies for improving the
availability of affordable, reliable, and sustainable electricity from
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This outcome of this project will
further exploit the benefits of wind power by reducing the cost and improving
the efficiency, dynamic performance, and reliability of wind energy systems.
These are essential to reaching the goal of supplying 20% of the nation?s
electricity by wind. New courses will be developed. Undergraduates and at least
one female graduate student will be supported to work on various tasks of this
project. Through the collaboration with the Nebraska Wind Applications Center?s
Wind for Schools Program, this project will engage rural K-12 school teachers
and students in energy education.