* 0901005
* Automata in Geometric Groups, Combinatorics, and Logic
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Michael Sipser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2010
* USD 132,000.00

This project studies automatic structures, in particular as they interact with
geometric group theory, combinatorics, and logic. Finite-state automata are
Turing machines with fixed finite bounds on resource use. Continuing a tradition
of studying that part of mathematics which can be performed effectively, the
field of automatic structures explores mathematical objects which can be
represented by automata. Questions about automatic structures may be grouped
into two themes: developing structural characterizations and studying
algorithmic consequences of such characterizations. Dr. Minnes has worked in
both of these areas, including proving both positive and negative results about
the existence of such characterizations. Through this NSF grant, she will work
towards answering these guiding questions in the context of less understood
classes of structures. For example, the fundamental groups associated with
certain manifolds have intimate connections with automata and some sequences
arising in symbolic dynamics and combinatorics may be seen as generated by
automata. The tools developed by the automatic structures community may lead to
a better structural understanding of these objects. In parallel, Dr. Minnes
seeks to develop the area of automatic model theory. Much work has been done in
understanding how the standard results of model theory change when restricted to
the framework of computable or polynomial-time objects. Preliminary work shows
interesting analogies in the automatic structures world and suggests the promise
of fruitful results.



With the increasing reliance of the modern world on computerized and networked
systems, the theoretical underpinnings of computational feasibility have gained
more immediate relevance. Starting in the 1950s, the Turing machine, an
idealized model of a computer with no bounds on memory use or computation time,
led to astonishing and foundational insight into what problems can or cannot be
solved by any algorithm. This NSF project focusses on a different model for the
computer, the finite automaton, which more closely captures online computation
and resource bounds. Dr. Minnes will study questions which relate finite
automata both to traditional topics of mathematical logic and to new
interactions with other fields of mathematics and computer science.