* 0901451
* IHCS: Improving Coverage and Connectivity in Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks through Relay, Cooperation, and Mobility
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 07/31/2013
* USD 339,519.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop algorithms for improving
coverage and connectivity in heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. The
approach involves a deterministic study of the impact of relay node placement on
connectivity and survivability, and a probabilistic study of the impact of node
cooperation and mobile relays on probabilistic coverage and intermittent
connectivity in large-scale sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research is two-fold. First, this research studies
relay node placement under realistic constraints and, thus, goes beyond prior
research that assumes that relay nodes can be stacked on top of other nodes and
that there are no "forbidden" areas. Both optimal and approximate solutions for
the placement of relay nodes meeting connectivity and survivability requirements
are developed. Second, this project exploits new techniques for using node
cooperation and mobile relays for improving probabilistic coverage and
intermittent connectivity. This research involves the potentially novel
integration of hybrid network components including sensor nodes, static relay
nodes, and data "mules."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact,
the project integrates research into educational experiences for students at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, especially students from underrepresented
groups. The research also has the potential to improve the capabilities of
sensor networks with a variety of important applications.