* 0901814
* Investigation of Unconventional Cantilevers for Applications in High Speed Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joel Therrien, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 339,706.00

The objective of this research is to investigate unconventional cantilever cross
sections for applications in high speed Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). High
speed AFM is of interest for quality control in nanomanufacturing. The
cantilevers will be made via polymer molding technology, with the plastic
converted via heat treating to silicon carbide. Methods for making defect free
cantilevers with geometries that are difficult if not impossible using the
standard manufacturing methods will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is an increased understanding of application
of preceramic polymers for use in making Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems
(MEMS). This work will expand the repertoire of cantilever geometries accessible
to MEMS researchers. In addition, it will elucidate the role of thermal
conversion conditions in controlling the formation of cracks in this class of
materials. These results can be applied to any number of applications for
preceramic polymers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is to enable the
wider use of high speed AFM for quality control in nanomanufacturing as well as
allowing detailed imaging of chemical and biological dynamical processes. The
combined performance advantages of higher resonant frequency (and thus higher
scanning speed) and the ability to make cantilevers using inexpensive molding
techniques would be of substantial benefit to the nanomanufacturing,
microelectronics, and biomedical industries. The demonstration of a method to
easily enable manufacturing of silicon carbide based MEMS would have a
significant impact on the competitiveness of the microelectronics industry
internationally. Finally, students involved in this project will gain exposure
to advanced MEMS fabrication techniques, as well as a unique range of expertise
at the intersection of electrical and plastics engineering, physics, chemistry,
and materials science. In particular, the development of new perspectives and
creative problem solving skills is integral to interdisciplinary research of
this nature and will foster student success.