* 0901779
* GOALI/COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH - Flexible Ferroelectric-Based Antenna Arrays For Conformal Radiometric Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Ashok Kumar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2014
* USD 505,667.00

The objective of this research is to investigate miniature radiometric sensors
that conform to a surface under test and are capable of thermal imaging to
varying depths via frequency adjustment. The approach is based on the use of
flexible microwave antennas within which integrated circuits are embedded to
detect thermal radiation in the microwave frequency range, and dynamically
adjust the sensor characteristics to account for variations in the properties of
the contacting surface, such as human skin. The sensors can be applied for
mobile monitoring of internal body temperature, wound healing, and other
physiological phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in advancements in antenna design, nanoscale ferroelectric devices
and radiometer design, enabling a transformative change in passive microwave
sensing. Specific advances targeted in this research include: conformable and
frequency-agile antennas; impedance-sensing integrated circuits with embedded
tuning networks; and a chip-scale radiometer that can be directly integrated
into the antenna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
include advancements in the general field of microwave sensor design, yielding
fundamentally new approaches for subsurface biomedical monitoring. Applications
extend beyond biomedical systems and include uses such as wireless sensors for
structural monitoring and communications devices. The industry partnerships will
enable the research team to broadly disseminate results beyond the academic and
research community. The project will also engage undergraduate students, while
leveraging ongoing university programs that attract underrepresented students to
engineering. A new senior/graduate-level project-based course that integrates
research outcomes, and includes microwave integrated circuit design and
fabrication, will be developed.