* 0901524
* Geometric and Combinatorial Viewpoints in Complex and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ignacio Uriarte-Tuero, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2012
* USD 108,359.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With regards to the intellectual content of the project, the aim of this
proposal is the study of interactions between quasiconformal (QC) mappings,
geometric analysis (in particular uniform rectifiability), Fourier analysis, and
geometric combinatorics. More specifically, the PI will pursue (1) Sharp
distortion examples for K-QC maps. (2) Sharp sufficient conditions for
removability of sets under bounded quasiregular (QR) maps (related to sharp QC
distortion theorems.) (3) Buffon needle probability (Favard length) for Cantor
sets (4) Questions involving uniformly rectifiable sets and harmonic measure.
(5) Problems on distance sets relating Fourier analysis and geometric
combinatorics. The unifying method to be employed is an underlying geometric-
combinatorial vision which often manifests itself through multiscale analysis
(i.e. the analysis of a problem on different scales.) This method will be
applied in the contexts of K-QC mappings (mappings sending an infinitesimal
circle/ball to an infinitesimal ellipse/ellipsoid with eccentricity controlled
by K), geometric measure theory (GMT, which analyzes sets and measures on them
-these are generalizations of length, area and volume-), harmonic analysis
(decomposing a signal into elementary pieces of wavelike character), and
potential theory (study of Coulombic potential and related topics.)

With regards to contextualizing the proposed research within a broader
mathematical and scientific framework, note that the mathematical objects
involved have found abundant applications in other disciplines, so the problems
proposed will advance knowledge in those areas and hence impact other areas of
mathematics, science, or engineering. More specifically, fractals (geometric
measure theory) appear naturally in electrodeposition and Diffusion Limited
Aggregation. The internal structure of lungs has a high fractal dimension (to
capture more oxygen.) Fourier analysis is often applied in signal and image
processing. Quasiconformal maps are solutions to problems in non-linear
elasticity, and have found applications in string theory. Uniform rectifiability
appears in minimizers of the Mumford-Shah functional (originally used for image
segmentation.) Geometric combinatorics is used for fair division and voting
problems in the social sciences, and for phylogenetic trees models in biology.
Distance sets are used in industry to study the dimensionality of data sets. In
terms of human resource development, the PI will continue preparing students for
the Putnam Competition, participating in the Math Club, and mentoring graduate
students informally in the context of graduate courses. Fractals and geometric
combinatorics are excellent areas for promoting teaching and training of
undergraduates and postdocs. The basic notions of multiscale analysis,
dimension, combinatorics, etc. are deep enough to convey some flavor of research
yet can be successfully explained in an elementary way. Research results will be
disseminated via participation in US and international meetings, which will
facilitate collaborations with both established and young researchers.