* 0901985
* Gravitational Wave Astronomy: A New Window on the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Ilya Mandel, Mandel                  Ilya
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2011
* USD 166,000.00

Dr. Ilya Mandel is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Northwestern
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The PI will develop
improved estimates for compact binary coalescence event rates for the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO); conversely, LIGO rates or
upper limits will be used to constrain the space of astrophysical parameters
describing binary evolution. Dr. Mandel will improve Markov Chain Monte Carlo
techniques in order to estimate binary parameters accurately from gravitational-
wave observations and to probe systematically the global structure of the
parameter space, including the location of possible degeneracies. The PI will
explore the use of LIGO intermediate-mass-ratio inspirals (and, eventually,
extreme-mass-ratio inspirals) to probe strong-field relativity, study massive
compact bodies, and test general relativity. With this goal in mind, the PI will
develop improved intermediate-mass-ratio inspiral waveforms and the methodology
for intermediate-mass-ratio inspiral detection and parameter estimation. The PI
will set up the framework to study the astrophysics of galactic nuclei through
intermediate- and extreme-mass-ratio inspiral observations, particularly those
with electromagnetic counterparts, and will develop rapid online data analysis
tools for this purpose.

Dr. Mandel will also develop a multimedia, web-based tutorial elucidating
gravitational-wave detection, data analysis, and the ensuing astrophysical
discovery. In addition to presenting the subject of gravitational-wave
astronomy, this tutorial will strive to explain the scientific method to the
general public and engage the participants in the excitement of scientific
discovery. This tutorial will be advertised to local high-school students and
will form the backbone of multimedia presentations for the public to be shown at
the Adler Planetarium in Chicago and the Boston Museum of Science.