* 0901942
* CAREER: Ultrasound Histotripsy System Development to Improve Cancer Treatment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2008,04/30/2012
* Timothy Bigelow, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2012
* USD 276,503.00

&lt;br/&gt;ECCS-0643860&lt;br/&gt;T. Bigelow, U of North
Dakota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career proposal focuses on developing
ultrasound histotripsy as a minimally invasive alternative to traditional cancer
treatment. Histotripsy uses high intensity acoustic waves to "liquefy" soft
tissue by the generation and violent collapse of cavitating microbubbles. Like
surgery, the tissue would be "removed" by the action of the sound waves and
bubbles, but unlike surgery the intervening and surrounding tissues will remain
unaffected by the procedure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed study will make substantial advances to the field of minimally invasive
surgery by designing a new ultrasound therapy system and by determining the
optimal ultrasound parameters for liquefying tissue using ultrasound
histotripsy. In addition, by conducting preliminary animal experiments, the
study will lay the ground work for ultimately extending the therapy to the
clinic. These advances are made possible by the unique collaborative
relationships between the College of Engineering and the College of Medicine at
the University of North Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: While
establishing a surgical ultrasound lab, students of all ages will be encouraged
to study engineering by inviting math and science teachers from small high
schools, rural schools, and tribal high schools in Minnesota and North Dakota to
actively participate in the research in the summer. The teachers will then
sponsor student bioengineering projects at their schools which will be presented
to middle school and grade school children maximizing the dissemination of the
knowledge to the children in the North Dakota/Minnesota region while encouraging
all of the students to consider engineering as a future career. In addition, a
biomedical engineering focus program and curriculum will be developed with the
hope of attracting more young women to study electrical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;