* 0901036
* SGER:  Financial Crisis: A Longitudinal Study of Public Response
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2009
* USD 168,968.00

The current financial challenges in the United States represent a unique
opportunity to study public risk perception and risk-related behaviors in the
midst of an on-going economic crisis that threatens the quality of life of a
wide spectrum of Americans. Few emergencies within the U.S. have affected so
many people. The current situation is a rich opportunity because it is occurring
real-time, and is highly dynamic, involving many players and sectors of our
economy. As a result, it allows a chance to compare financial threats with other
disasters such as terrorism. The public?s perceptions and risk-related behaviors
seem likely to change over time in response to media coverage and government and
private sector actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will examine how people
perceive and react to this crisis, what information they are attending to, whom
they trust (or do not trust), and how this crisis is affecting future plans. One
of the historical and central challenges of risk perception research has been
the difficulty of examining how people?s attitudes and behavior in real-time
emergencies change over time. The closest approximation is usually a series of
cross-sectional surveys over time conducted by national polling organizations.
This project will track a panel of respondents during this crisis at regular
intervals and over a period of months. Theoretical links will be made between
risk perception, social amplification of risk, the affect heuristic and
numeracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned study investigates perceived threats
from the financial crisis to jobs, savings, investments, retirement, future
opportunities and quality of life. It also examines issues of trust, perceived
control and predictability of the crisis?s consequences and emotions such as
fear, anger, worry and sadness. Additionally, the questionnaire addresses
reported behaviors people have taken, are taking, or plan to take in response to
what they are learning from a variety of information sources. The study will
examine the time people are devoting to acquire information about the crisis,
and from what sources. Other phenomena will also be followed during this period
such as the stock market, housing markets, media coverage, and pivotal events
(e.g. rescue plan, presidential debates, major bank failures) to look for
possible correlations of event occurrences with changes in public perceptions
and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Business leaders, financial advisors, and
administrators stand to directly benefit from a better understanding of the
effects of their policies and practices. Researchers in areas such as risk
assessment, risk communication, and risk perception will find the analysis of
social amplification of risk, the affect heuristic and numeracy useful for their
own investigations.