* 0901236
* Nanoscale Field Effect Diode-Based Memory and Electrostatic Protection Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Dimitrios Ioannou, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Anupama Kaul
* 07/31/2013
* USD 349,482.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."



Nano-scale Field Effect Diode-Based Memory and Electrostatic Protection Devices

The objective of this research is to design, fabricate and test Field-Effect-
Diode based memory cells which break through the area/performance trade-off of
conventional static and dynamic cells. The proposed research is in response to
the widely recognized need for urgent progress in memory technology, as
abundantly demonstrated by large numbers of dedicated sessions and invited talks
in many prestigious semiconductor conferences and workshops. As a secondary
objective, Field-Effect-Diodes will be explored for electrostatic discharge
protection applications.

The approach is to combine the strengths of the Thin-Capacitively-Coupled-
Thyristor with the strengths of the nanoscale Field-Effect-Diode and exploit the
inherent bi-stable storage mechanism (negative differential resistance).



The research involves demanding device physics and advanced nano-fabrication
technology, and is aimed at exploring the structure and design space of Multi-
Gate, Fin and Nanowire Silicon-on-Insulator Field-Effect-Diode, Thyristor-like
devices. For memory applications, leakage control and small cell size drive the
device design, whereas for electrostatic protection large forward breakdown
voltage must be achieved.

The research has the potential for transformational impact on memory cell design
through the introduction of radically different cells, which nevertheless remain
compatible with modern silicon technology, as the semiconductor industry enters
the "nano-scale" era. These cells and the new nano-fabrication technology will
add to the broader area of nanoelectronics, vital for the future technological
dominance of the USA. Research and undergraduate students (two females) will
join our team, and our results will form the basis for our new distance
education courses.