* 0901494
* RUI: Boundedness questions in arithmetic dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Benedetto, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 147,914.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This project concerns topics surrounding two key conjectures that have arisen in
recent years in the field of number-theoretic dynamics. The first conjecture,
stated by Morton and Silverman in 1994, predicts that there is some uniform
upper bound for the number of preperiodic points of a given dynamical system
that happen to be rational numbers. The second conjecture states that there is a
uniform lower bound for the canonical height of a non-preperiodic rational
point; in other words, roughly speaking, the non-preperiodicity of such a point
must become obvious after a bounded number of iterations of the dynamical
system. While easy to describe either by example or by formal statement, both
conjectures quickly lead to deep and subtle arithmetic problems. Over the past
decade or two, there has been great progress on such problems, and a substantial
amount of technical machinery, some due to the investigator, has been developed
to help answer them: advances in dynamics over local fields, capacity theory of
Julia sets, local canonical heights, and dynamical Green's functions. The
resulting theory has parallels both to the analytic study of complex dynamics
and to the arithmetic study of rational points on elliptic curves and other
algebraic varieties, and it has drawn interest from specialists in both fields.

At its heart, the focus of this project is a type of classical Diophantine
problem: to understand the set of rational number solutions to a naturally
arising set of polynomial equations. Such problems have been a major theme in
the study of number theory for thousands of years. More specifically, a central
goal of this project is to further our theoretical understanding of Diophantine
problems arising from a certain kind of dynamics: the iteration of a polynomial
or rational function. At the same time, because this dynamical subfield of
number theory is relatively young, many of its aspects are accessible to
undergraduates but still remain unsolved problems. Thus, as in an earlier
successful project, the investigator plans to supervise some students in an REU
summer research project to aid in their mathematical training. The REU will
include intense computer computations, especially of canonical heights and
preperiodic points, and any relevant data generated will be disseminated to the
research community via publications and the web.