* 0901425
* Collaborative Research: Wideband Cognitive Radio: Modeling, Algorithm and Testbed
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Husheng Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 185,765.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to address fundamental problems in
wide band cognitive radio, namely statistical information of wideband spectrum
and corresponding system design, from both theoretical and implementation
perspectives. A hardware test bed will demonstrate the proposed statistical
modeling and algorithms. The interdisciplinary nature of the research lends
itself to cross-disciplinary collaboration and education that can involve
researchers in electrical engineering, computer science, and math. The research
provides the basis for course projects in areas including wireless
communications and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the
potential to bring new results and outcomes to the cognitive radio research
community. The research has the potential to contribute fundamental models,
algorithms, and test beds for the study and realization of wideband cognitive
radio. It also has the potential to provide new methodologies and techniques for
fields like statistical modeling, signal processing, communication theory, and
hardware implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impacts,
the proposed research also encourages active participation from students of
underrepresented groups. The investigators have collaboration with the
University of Tennessee Knoxville chapter of the National Society of Black
Engineers (NSBE) and will periodically provide lectures to NSBE members. Two
high school students working in the one of the investigator's laboratory through
the Pre-college Research Program and will be involved into this project, which
can help to attract gifted high school students into engineering.