* 0901646
* Exploring Large-Scale Star-Forming Structures in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Matthew Povich, Povich                  Matthew        S
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Matthew Povich is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Pennsylvania
State University. Dr. Povich will investigate star formation on >100 pc size
scales in the Milky Way. In particular, the PI will identify and model the
properties of individual young stellar objects (YSOs) distributed throughout
giant molecular cloud complexes associated with prominent Galactic ionized
hydrogen (H II) regions. This work is made possible by the unprecedented, high-
resolution coverage of Galactic massive star formation regions and their
extended environments that is provided by the infrared (IR) Galactic-plane
legacy surveys performed using the Spitzer Space Telescope. The research goals
require multi-wavelength observations, including ground-based optical, near-IR,
and mm-wave facilities, plus data on H II regions from the Chandra X-ray
Observatory.

This research will lead to a new determination of the Galactic star formation
rate (SFR). While all previous SFR determinations in the Milky Way and other
galaxies rely upon indirect observational tracers of massive stars, the PI will
calibrate H II region tracers (far-IR and radio continuum luminosity) against
SFR measured from the direct detection of individual stars and YSOs. While most
detailed studies of Galactic H II regions include only the central regions of
the ionizing clusters, the PI will characterize distributed star formation
throughout large molecular clouds outside of H II regions. By holistically
exploring entire molecular cloud complexes, including associated H II regions,
the PI will address two persistent questions: (1) what fraction of star
formation occurs outside of massive clusters? and (2) how does star formation
propagate through molecular clouds?

Dr. Povich will also conduct research into improving the teaching of
introductory astronomy courses for non-science majors. The PI will work to
develop a learner-centered curriculum that incorporates real observational data
from large surveys like the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the Galactic Legacy
Infrared Mid-Plane Survey Extraordinaire (GLIMPSE). In addition, the PI will
participate in established public outreach programs at Penn State with the goal
to bring astronomy to rural populations.