* 0901742
* A Lightweight Event-Based Synthetic Vision System for Assisted-Living and Machine Vision Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Andreas Savvides, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to enable highly mobile computers and cellular phones with the image
interpretation capabilities of large bench-top computers. The approach combines
new event-based hardware and energy-efficient algorithms for the identification
of objects in an image stream. The algorithmic core of this research is a
lightweight implementation of a biologically-plausible engine for size and
position independent object recognition in images. The use of event-based
sensors and processing hardware has the potential to increase computational
throughput and synthetic vision efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, the proposed research is intended to give event-based
imaging devices the ability to extract specific information from visual streams.
The size- and position-independent algorithms implemented in hardware are an
enabling technology for efficient object recognition, and are necessary for the
advancement of event-based artificial vision platforms. The research targets the
design of event-driven processing hardware to extract object features with
lightweight digital circuitry and utilizes spatial and temporal redundancy to
increase the identification reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
potential broader impacts, this research has the potential to allow a cellular
phone to serve as a virtual cane for the blind, help assisted-living patients,
provide environmental awareness, and extend human senses. More broadly, this
research can be applied to artificial vision, robot vision, image sensor
networks, assisted-living systems, and monitoring systems. The project leverages
the biomimetic nature of the approach to train students, particularly women and
students from other underrepresented groups and to motivate them to pursue
careers in research and academia through seminars, classes, and projects.