* 0901487
* Connections Between Number Theory, Algebraic Geometry, and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Matthew Baker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2013
* USD 357,276.00

This proposal is concerned with the development of new connections between
arithmetic geometry, tropical geometry, Berkovich spaces, and combinatorics. The
intellectual merit of the proposal lies primarily in the cross-fertilization
between these different areas, and in the concrete applications being proposed.
For example, the PI proposes to use ideas coming from algebraic geometry to
provide new insight into the graph isomorphism problem, one of the most famous
unsolved problems in graph theory and computer science. The PI will also show
that harmonic morphisms, which play a prominent role in differential geometry
and potential theory, arise naturally in arithmetic geometry, tropical geometry,
and combinatorics. Applications will be given to a diverse array of subjects
including component groups of Neron models, tropical intersection theory, and
graph theory. Finally, the PI plans to develop new connections between
Berkovich's theory of analytic spaces and tropical geometry. This will enable
further development of the foundations of tropical geometry and potential theory
on Berkovich spaces, and will also provide a more conceptual understanding of
some recent results concerning tropical elliptic curves.

The broader impacts of the proposed work will include applications to problems
in the physical sciences, interaction with mathematicians in different fields,
and support for undergraduate and graduate research. For example, the PI's new
ideas on the graph isomorphism problem could potentially have applications to
chemistry, biology, and computer science. Accomplishing the various goals laid
out in this proposal will require the PI to interact with leading experts in the
fields of number theory, algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and dynamical
systems. The PI, who is currently supervising two graduate students and has been
intensely involved for many years with undergraduate research, plans to work
with students at all levels on research projects related to this proposal.

