* 0901068
* Harmonic Maass Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Boylan, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2013
* USD 121,000.00

Harmonic weak Maass forms are the subject of much current interest. &lt;br/&gt;A
harmonic weak Maass form of weight k is a smooth function of the
&lt;br/&gt;upper half-plane which transforms with respect to a subgroup of the
&lt;br/&gt;modular group, is annhilated by the hyperbolic Laplacian in weight k,
&lt;br/&gt;and has at most linear exponential growth at cusps. Such forms
decompose &lt;br/&gt;into holomorphic and non-holomorphic parts. Non-holomorphic
parts are &lt;br/&gt;related to period integrals of elliptic cusp forms. The
holomorphic parts, &lt;br/&gt;sometimes called mock modular forms, appear in a
variety of &lt;br/&gt;mathematical contexts. In the 1970s, Zagier showed that
the generating &lt;br/&gt;function for Hurwitz class numbers is a mock modular
form. More recently,&lt;br/&gt;Bringmann, Ono, and Zwegers showed that
Ramanujan's mock theta functions &lt;br/&gt;are mock modular forms. Subsequent
works applied the theory of harmonic &lt;br/&gt;weak Maass forms to geometry,
mathematical physics, and probability theory, and to &lt;br/&gt;topics more
closely allied to number theory such as partitions and q-series,
&lt;br/&gt;elliptic modular forms, traces of singular moduli, Borcherds
products, and modular &lt;br/&gt;L-functions. Motivated by these connections,
&lt;br/&gt;this proposal addresses questions concerning the holomorphic parts
&lt;br/&gt;of harmonic weak Maass forms. In particular, the PI intends to
study&lt;br/&gt;problems requiring interplay between harmonic weak Maass forms
and elliptic modular forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's research
interest is in number theory. The topics in this proposal originate in work of
the legendary mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan in the early twentieth century.
An important part of Ramanujan's legacy concerns the large quantity of aesthetic
formulas he discovered involving functions called q-series. Toward the end of
his life, he discovered a particular family of q-series which he called "mock
theta functions". Though these functions share many properties with modular
forms, a class of functions central to modern number theory, the mock theta
functions are not modular forms. Recent works of Bringmann, Ono, and Zwegers
finally settled the question, as to the precise relationship between the mock
theta functions and the theory of automorphic forms, a theory which subsumes the
theory of modular forms. This question had been outstanding for roughly eighty
years. We now know that a mock theta function is "part" or "half" of a certain
automorphic form called a harmonic weak Maass form. This discovery motivates the
study of a broader class of functions, called mock modular forms, which arise as
"parts" of harmonic weak Maass forms. These functions have applications not only
&lt;br/&gt;to number theory, but to other areas of mathematics such as geometry,
topology, and probability, and &lt;br/&gt;to mathematical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;