* 0901971
* Quaternion algebras, Shimura curves, and modular forms: Algorithms and arithmetic
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2011
* John Voight, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2011
* USD 74,775.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) will
advance the algorithmic theory of Shimura curves and quaternion algebras, with
applications for the computation of Hilbert modular forms and automorphic forms
on arithmetic Fuchsian groups. In continuation of joint work with Matthew
Greenberg, the PI will generalize the scope of an algorithm to compute the Hecke
module of Hilbert modular forms via the (degree 1) cohomology of a Shimura curve
and will build exhaustive tables of modular elliptic curves over totally real
fields. The PI will at the same time investigate the underlying algorithmic
problems for quaternion algebras from both the perspective of computational
complexity as well as practical implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical
unsolved problems often serve as the genesis for the formulation of a rich and
uni fied mathematical fabric. Diophantus of Alexandria first sought solutions to
algebraic equations in integers almost two thousand years ago. Today,
mathematicians recognize that geometric properties often govern the behavior of
arithmetic objects.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, computational tools provide a means
to test conjectures and can sometimes furnish partial solutions; at the same
time, theoretical advances fuel dramatic improvements in computation. The
theory, design, and implementation of algorithms in arithmetic geometry is a
burgeoning area, and there are many exciting applications of these methods to
diverse fields.