* 0901383
* Resonant Gap Nanoparticle Chains, with Application to Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2014
* USD 400,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;Metal dimer, slot-cavity, and nanoparticle chain optical
structures that operate based on resonant gap modes will be designed and
compared using numerical electromagnetic simulations, in order to arrive at
candidate designs for fabrication. Dielectric gratings with 2-10 nm line width
will be fabricated with high-resolution lithography, atomic layer deposition and
selective etching. Such gratings will be imprinted into metal films to form
smooth and narrow trenches, thereby achieving designed resonant slot and chain
waveguides. Fabricated structures will be tested using near-field and far-field
approaches as a function of wavelength, in order to evaluate field enhancement
and guiding performance. Raman measurements will be performed to determine the
enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles
with resonant gaps can provide large field enhancement for nonlinear optics and
spectroscopy. The fabrication techniques to be developed will achieve line
widths of a few nanometers, a length scale of tremendous interest yet not
accessible with standard top-down lithography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Two Ph.D. students will be supported, and this research will
constitute a substantial part of their theses. An undergraduate research student
will be invited to work on this project each year. Material from this research
will be used as demonstrations in entry-level graduate and senior-level
undergraduate classes taught by Webb and Qi, and incorporated, as appropriate,
into Purdue EPICS (engineering projects in community service), a design
experience for undergraduates. Simulation tools developed will be accessible
through the investigators Purdue web sites.