* 0901467
* The Combinatorics of Macdonald Polynomials and Related Objects
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* James Haglund, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 150,000.00

Principal Investigator: Haglund, James B. Proposal Number: DMS - 0901467
Institution: University of Pennsylvania Title: The Combinatorics of Macdonald
Polynomials and Related Objects

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

There are many examples in mathematics and science of polynomials which depend
on several variables, and which have important applications. In this project the
PI will investigate the combinatorics associated with some of the most useful of
these, Macdonald polynomials, which are multi-variate symmetric functions which
satisfy an orthogonality relation and play a central role in algebraic
combinatorics with applications to special functions, algebraic geometry, and
statistical mechanics. Their original definition was rather difficult and
indirect, but in 2004 the PI found a nice combinatorial formula for them, which
was proved in subsequent joint work between Haiman, Loehr and the PI. The PI and
others have been finding that the new combinatorics of Macdonald polynomials
often leads to new combinatorial formulas for related objects. For example, in
recent joint work with Luoto, Mason, and Van Willigenburg, the PI has been
investigating certain limiting cases of nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials known
as Demazure characters and Demazure atoms, which are connected to representation
theory. The PI and his collaborators have shown that some of the fundamental
relations satisfied by the important Schur function basis have refined versions
involving Demazure characters and atoms, involving constructs in the new
combinatorics of Macdonald polynomials. Another part of the project involves
conjectures the PI has recently formed which are multi-variate versions of
previous conjectures of the PI and others involving the zeros of rook and
matching polynomials. The PI is using computers combined with current
mathematical methods to make progress on these conjectures.

Polynomials in a single variable play a fundamental role in science and
mathematics, for example when modeling discrete data by a continuous function.
Certain families of polynomials known as orthogonal polynomials are especially
useful. Macdonald polynomials are a master family of orthogonal polynomials in
several variables which contain all sorts of previously studied families of
orthogonal polynomials and other useful polynomials as special cases. Macdonald
proved they exist, but gave no particularly simple description of them. The PI,
in a previous collaboration with Haiman and Loehr, proved a direct combinatorial
description of them. There are still many unsolved problems involving Macdonald
polynomials, and in this projectthe PI will continue to develop the
combinatorial side of the theory, with applications to a variety of polynomials
from various branches of mathematics. Another aspect of this proposal involves
values of the variables which make a given polynomial zero, which the PI is
investigating using computers and experimental methods.