* 0901363
* Reaction, Diffusion, and Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Andrej Zlatos, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 01/31/2011
* USD 146,146.00

The project focuses on analytical study of models of reaction processes taking
place in fluid flow. These models involve nonlinear partial differential
equations such as reaction-diffusion equations, which may be coupled to the
Navier-Stokes equations of fluid dynamics. The proposed research aims at
improving our understanding of the effects of fluid motion on combustion and has
two main goals. The first is a continuation of current work on passive
combustion in periodic media as well as development of new techniques applicable
to general disordered media. The questions to be addressed include the effect of
geometric properties of periodic flows on speed-up of propagation of reaction as
well as the phenomenon of quenching. We will also investigate propagation of
reaction in disordered media, in particular, the existence of traveling front
solutions and asymptotic approach of arbitrary solutions to these special ones.
The second main goal is the study of active combustion with direct feedback of
reaction on the fluid motion via the buoyancy force. Models incorporating such
feedback, particularly relevant in highly turbulent combustion regimes, involve
reaction-diffusion equations coupled to fluid dynamics equations and are
inherently very complex. We will focus our efforts on the existence and
stability of traveling fronts, bounds on the speed of propagation of reaction,
and gravity-induced mixing. In addition, we intend to apply the developed
techniques to the study of phase transitions in a related model of liquid
suspensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems addressed by the project involve
rich and subtle mathematics but also have an interdisciplinary character.
Reaction processes such as burning in internal combustion engines, nuclear
reactions in stars, forest fires, and production of ozone in the atmosphere are
ubiquitous in nature, science, and engineering. Motion of the underlying liquid
or gaseous medium often plays a crucial role by either speeding up reaction or
quenching it. The proposed research aims at a better mathematical understanding
of the effects of various properties of the resulting turbulent flows on
reactive processes. It is relevant to branches of science such as astrophysics,
biology, environmental science, and chemical engineering, and may provide useful
qualitative insights in real life phenomena. The principal investigator also
plans to teach an undergraduate-level course as part of the Research Experience
for Undergraduates summer program at the University of Chicago, as well as a
specialized graduate-level course in reaction-diffusion equations.