* 0901164
* Patching in algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* David Harbater, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 152,514.00

This proposal concerns the development and use of patching methods in algebra.
The Principal Investigator plans to use patching methods to obtain new results
in the theories of quadratic forms, central simple algebras, division algebras,
differential algebra, and Galois theory, building on his recent results in those
directions using patching. Concerning quadratic forms, he will work to
generalize his recent results on dimensions of anisotropic forms defined over
function fields, to cases where either the function field or the base field is
of higher dimension. He will also work to generalize his recent results on the
period-index problem for central simple algebras to the higher dimensional case.
These will involve the study and use of local-global principles. In the area of
division algebras, he will work to characterize the division algebra split
embedding problems that have solutions, and to extend this and his previous work
in this area to the cases of mixed and finite characteristics. In differential
algebra, he will work to solve split embedding problems for differential Galois
groups in characteristic zero, initially over complete discrete valuation
fields, and afterwards over algebraically closed fields and other large fields.
He will also study the structure of absolute Galois groups of fields using
patching, while drawing on his recent patching results on profinite groups that
are close to being free. In order to carry out these activities, he will work to
extend his patching methods further, building on his recent development of
patching over fields, and attempting to extend those techniques to higher
dimensional fields.

Patching methods originated in geometry and analysis, where they have long been
used to study spaces by examining them locally and seeing how the parts fit
together. The introduction of this approach into algebra is more recent, but has
made it possible to solve algebraic problems that had seemed intractable. The
Principal Investigator had introduced this method into Galois theory, which
studies which polynomial equations are solvable by examining the symmetries of
the roots. This led to solutions of the inverse Galois problem over various
classes of fields. The work planned in this proposal will extend recent work of
the Principal Investigator in carrying over patching methods to other parts of
algebra, and solving problems there. He has recently begun carrying out this
program, obtaining results on quadratic forms, division algebras, and other
topics, and the proposed work will go beyond this, extending the applicability
of the patching method and leading to results in several areas of algebra that
will go beyond what could previously be obtained using other methods. The
activities of this proposal will also have broader impacts in terms of education
and training, through the participation of graduate students in seminars and
other activities related to this proposal. The proposed activities also involve
mentoring and working jointly with junior mathematicians and members of
underrepresented groups, as well as enhancing the research infrastructure though
collaborations and workshops.

