* 0901213
* Control of Wind Generation for Inter-Area Oscillation Damping
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Subbaraya Yuvarajan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 06/30/2010
* USD 240,001.00

The objective of this research is to improve the damping of inter-area
oscillations in power systems by integrating damping controllers in grid-
connected doubly-fed induction-generator-based wind farms. The approach is to
employ two rotor control loops that allow independent modulation of active and
reactive powers while providing damping
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This project addresses the
problem of stability enhancements in power systems, given the increasing
presence of and unique challenges in wind farms. The focus lies in developing
robust damping controllers through a novel concept of real/reactive power
modulation in wind farms to help mitigate instability concerns in the overall
interconnected power system. The project will also help convey the benign
effects of stability enhancements if grid interconnected systems are equipped
with such controllers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
help reduce some of the barriers to grid integration of wind farms. If
successful, the research will facilitate penetration of large scale wind power
into the existing grid. Increased integration of wind resources will benefit
society by reducing fossil fuel dependence on electricity generation and thus
help build a sustainable energy infrastructure. The educational plan will
integrate research results with graduate courses on renewable systems modeling
/bulk power system dynamics and continue the recruitment of qualified female
students for graduate research. This project will help resolve some of the
skepticism surrounding the stability of grid interconnected power systems.
Overall, the activities will help promote and develop wind resources in the
midwest region and the nation at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;