* 0901137
* Designing Decentralized Controllers for Dynamical Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ali Saberi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2013
* USD 424,321.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on the design of
decentralized controller for dynamic networks. The objective is to investigate
the design for three application areas, virus spreading control, air traffic
flow management, and communication-agent algorithmic/control Methods will be
developed for decentralized controller design, that enable the controllers to
exploit the network topology and overcome constrains and variations in a fully
distributed way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work focuses on the design of high-
performance decentralized controller for dynamic networks. We propose two novel
methods, one based on the static linear time-invariant (LTI) controller case,
and the other on the dynamic LTI controller case. Optimization of a cost
function and use of dual optimization will be employed in the static design
approach to find a controller. A multi-derivative and multi-delay design
methodology for synthesizing dynamic LTI decentralized controller will be used
in the dynamic case. The proposed research work will advance the knowledge in
the area of control theory, and provide new techniques for the important problem
of decentralized control in the presence of system
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will introduce the
undergraduate students to control theory research. The educational objectives
include research training of undergraduate students through senior projects and
course development. The research results will be integrated in a core course
?Network Structure Dynamics, and Controls? (EE 503) at Washington State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;