* 0901055
* The Formation of Stars: From Clouds to Protostars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stella Offner, Offner                  Stella         S
* Fellowship Award
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Stella Offner is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Dr. Offner will: (1) perform simulated
observations of adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) hydrodynamic self-gravitating
turbulent simulations and compare these with the molecular-line information of
observed star-forming regions to formulate a three-dimensional understanding of
large-scale molecular cloud properties and structure; (2) study observed
protostellar properties by producing emergent spectral energy distributions of
high-resolution AMR simulations in order to examine disk morphology, dust
composition and gas temperatures; and (3) investigate how protostellar
multiplicity depends upon local physical and chemical conditions by performing
AMR multi-group radiative transfer simulations of turbulent clumps.

Dr. Offner will also conduct a program of science education and outreach to
encourage and excite young children, particularly girls and minorities, in
physics and astronomy. Dr. Offner will participate in the Science Club for Girls
and develop additional lessons involving simple, interactive science
experiments. Building on the successful K-12 education program Project ASTRO,
she will create additional physics-oriented lessons (a.k.a. Project Physics) to
highlight scientific principles in daily life. She will also encourage a
stronger community of women in astrophysics by organizing lunches with visiting
female scientists and social gatherings for undergraduates though senior
faculty.