* 0901296
* Implementation of Dielectric Metamaterials with Integrated Resonance Response
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,11/30/2009
* Elena Semouchkina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 11/30/2009
* USD 318,520.00

The objective of this research is to explore novel all-dielectric metamaterials
that can provide integrated resonance responses due to interaction between
resonating inclusions. The approach is to combine theoretical studies,
computational full-wave modeling of multi-element arrays, designing various
material architectures, and prototyping.

Intellectual Merit: The performance of metamaterials with negative refractive
index is mainly analyzed by using homogenization theory, which does not account
for the effects caused by resonance field spreading beyond resonator boundaries
and integration of multiple resonance responses due to resonance field
overlapping. This project aims to reveal the contribution and potential of
cooperative resonance phenomena and to develop advantageous all-dielectric
alternatives to existing metamaterials. Integration of knowledge from different
disciplines, employment of powerful simulation tools, and approbation of the
latest achievements in materials integration will provide deep insight into the
nature of wave processes in engineered structures with integrated resonances,
advance understanding of the refraction, cloaking and wave confinement effects,
and uncover unknown metamaterial properties.

Broader Impacts: Development of low-loss all-dielectric metamaterials with new
functionalities will trigger innovative solutions for radio frequency,
microwave, and photonic devices and systems. This work will impact
communication, imaging, medical, and homeland security equipment. Expected
advances will enrich research and education opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and will attract students to the complex field of
electromagnetics. Dissemination of new knowledge will be provided by its
incorporation into interdisciplinary courses and by publications and
presentations at national and international conferences including the newly
organized workshop ?Women in Electromagnetics.?