* 0901162
* Workshop: Group Travel Grant for Attending IARP Workshops and Meetings, held in Beijing, China in October 2009.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Tzyh-Jong Tarn, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

The International Advanced Robotics Project (IARP) is an international
organization, consisting of 14 countries and the European Union, devoted to
monitoring and promoting robotics related technology and utilization. The United
States helped to formulate this organization and has been an active member
participating in technology evaluations, workshops, and joint study missions.
Participation involves US technical experts traveling to various functions, and
interacting with their colleagues to discuss ongoing research and developing
technology relating to intelligent machines. This grant provides the mechanism
to insure that the selection process and procedure for selecting participants is
fair, efficient, organizationally viable.

OBJECTIVES AND METHODS TO BE EMPLOYED Since the IARP meetings are generally
technology specific, the selection of US participants must not only reflect the
person?s expertise but also his or her ability to communicate and interact with
other participants. The selection process will be performed by an ad hoc
committee drawn from the IEEE, Robotics and Automation Society. The traveler
will receive reimbursement for expenses but an honorarium will only be provided
in exceptional circumstances. This rule also applies to attendance at the IARP,
Joint Coordinating Forum (JCF) which is the management, planning, and policy
planning body. The representatives of member and observer countries attend this
meeting in one of the host countries. A detailed description of the host
country?s robotics program is an essential part of the agenda.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT OF THE PROPOSAL ACTIVITY The research area referred to as
robotics, more generally ?intelligent machines,? comprises fundamental questions
about machine vision, sensors, computer science, haptics, kinematics,
manipulation, communications and control, and other scientific and engineering
disciplines. These research areas, rich in intellectual merit, investigating
robotic applications in medicine and surgery, underwater exploration,
environmental characterization, human interaction, safety and security and
others. Recognizing the societal benefits to be gained by supporting the
development of intelligent machines, the governments of the seven industrialized
countries initiated the international advanced robotics program (IARP). Although
each of these countries has national priorities and interests in the application
of these machines, the basic science and technology has many common elements.
Forming a mechanism for information exchange, interaction, and cooperation would
benefit each country and the people of the world. The successful implementation
of the concept has led to additional countries, interested in robotics, joining
the organization and sharing the details of their national programs. Since only
countries with robotics programs can join the IARP, it differs from technical
organizations such as IEEE and others primarily interested in technology.

BROADER IMPACT RESULTING FROM PROPOSED ACTIVITY The broader impact of the
application of these intelligent machines is one of the primary focus points for
the countries of IARP. Although each country has its own priorities, IARP
studies provide planners with information about the direction that the research
is taking and the societal impact of robotics. IARP studies and workshop reports
are published in the public domain for the use of any interested party, private,
public, or industrial. The government entities supporting the technical and
scientific studies of IARP understand that sharing this information ultimately
benefits society everywhere.