* 0901563
* A cost effective migration path to a fully packet based hybrid fixed/mobile backhaul infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Roger Dorsinville, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Zhi Tian
* 07/31/2013
* USD 349,528.00

The objective of this research is to develop and demonstrate critical elements
necessary for the integration of passive optical network (PON) broadband access
technologies with "Fourth Generation" (4G) mobile wireless broadband access
technologies. The approach is to devise and analyze an Ethernet-based
multiservice network architecture that spans and integrates fiber-based PON and
4G wireless access technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to
intellectual merit, the proposed architecture seeks to integrate both PON and 4G
wireless access technologies in terms of unified control and management of both
wired and wireless access networks. This adds a number of challenging dimensions
to the integration problem. In contrast to mainstream centralized PON and radio
access network (RAN) architectures, the proposed converged access networking
scheme must support not only a fully distributed integrated PON-RAN
architecture, but also a unified control plane that manages and controls both
fixed optical and mobile radio network resources. This calls for new integrated
wireline and wireless radio control algorithms and procedures that operate in a
distributed manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader impact, the
proposed integrated networking approach has the potential to provide a
significantly more cost effective solution than existing technologies and
features that could lead to graceful transition, rapid acceptance, and near-term
deployment. Widely available, high data rate access to networks has important
societal benefits in bridging the "digital divide." The project's integrated
education and research program has the goal of enhancing recruitment and
outreach to various underrepresented communities at the City College of New York
and in the New York metropolitan area.