* 0901145
* Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Melvin Hochster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 750,696.00

Hochster proposes to continue investigating several long standing questions in
the theory of (primarily local) Noetherian rings and to explore the relationship
of these questions with the explosively developing theory of tight closure,
which was introduced by Hochster and Huneke. One main thrust is to explore
several notions of closure in rings that do not contain a field, such as
finitely generated algebras over the integers, with the hope of extending tight
closure theory to such rings, thereby solving many open questions. Approaches to
the problem of proving existence of big Cohen-Macaulay modules in mixed
characteristic are also given. A new theory of quasi-length and content related
to certain local cohomology modules will be studied. This theory has raised some
difficult, central problems, and is one of several methods proposed to attack
the long standing and important question of whether regular rings are direct
summands of their module-finite extensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research deals with commutative rings, which are &lt;br/&gt;abstract systems in
which one has what might be thought of as artificial numbers. One can add,
subtract, and multiply these artificial numbers: call them ring elements. The
integers and real numbers are examples, but there are many other examples,
including rings that contain only finitely many elements. In one example, one
has only 0 and 1, and 1+1 = 0 (like the properties of even and odd integers: odd
+ odd =even). In studying systems of many equations in many unknowns, one can
force the equations to hold in an abstract ring. The study of the properties of
this ring gives information about the solutions. One can also study instead a
sort of graph of the solutions, that exists in a high dimensional space. It is
of great benefit to go back and forth between these algebraic and geometric
points of view. A third method, which will be used frequently in the proposed
research, is to study solutions that are somewhat like integers (but more
general), but to do so while ignoring multiples of a prime number: elements are
considered equivalent if they differ by a multiple of this prime. Doing this for
many different prime numbers, possibly all prime numbers, can provide a huge
amount of information about the solutions of the equations. The proposed
research deals with a systematic method, called tight closure, for using this
idea, as well as its extensions into new
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;