* 0901230
* Root numbers of abelian varieties and related representation-theoretic questions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Maria Sabitova, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 10/31/2009
* USD 112,588.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

One of the main goals of this project is to investigate the signs in the
conjectural functional equations for L-functions attached to abelian varieties,
the so-called root numbers. Root numbers are important fundamental invariants
that arise in connection with several influential conjectures of number theory
and representation theory, such as Birch--Swinnerton-Dyer and parity
conjectures, conjectural functional equations for L-functions, and Langlands
program. In studying root numbers attached to abelian varieties over extensions
of the base field arise the so-called twists of the root numbers by Galois
representations, or twisted root numbers for short. Twisted root numbers
attached to elliptic curves have been studied extensively. The main objective of
this proposal is to extend the results obtained in that direction to abelian
varieties. The methods to be employed come from the combination of
representation theory with the theory of Serre and Tate of abelian varieties
with potential good reduction and the uniformization theory of abelian
varieties. Another part of the project is devoted to studying questions arising
naturally in the context of the stratification theory of reductive groups over
the field of formal Laurent series with complex coefficients. This theory
developed by Goresky, Kottwitz, and MacPherson is important in connection with
the affine Springer fibers studied by Kazhdan, Luzstig, Bezrukavnikov,
Spaltenstein and others.

The theory of L-functions is a generalization of the classical theory of the
well-known Riemann and Dedekind zeta-functions that originated in works by Hecke
and Hasse at the first half of the last century. As zeta-functions have been
used to study the distribution of prime numbers, L-functions were introduced to
study the distribution of prime ideals in number fields, i.e., finite extensions
of the field of rational numbers. One of the main themes in arithmetic algebraic
geometry is to study L-functions attached to algebraic varieties, in particular
to abelian varieties, which are higher-dimensional analogues of elliptic curves.
Inseparable from the theory of L-functions is the notion of a root number--the
sign in the conjectural functional equations for L-functions. The importance of
studying root numbers lies in the fact that according to several famous
conjectures in number theory they are believed to have deep connections to the
arithmetic of the subject in question; for example, they may predict the
existence of rational solutions to systems of algebraic equations or, in other
words, the existence of rational points. Studying rational points on algebraic
varieties in turn has its applications to cryptography: some public key
cryptosystems are based on rational points of elliptic curves. One of the goals
of this project is to study root numbers attached to abelian varieties.