* 0901128
* Bridgeland Moduli of Derived Objects on Algebraic Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Aaron Bertram, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2014
* USD 222,862.00

Coherent sheaves are the bread and butter of algebraic geometry. They are the
natural extension of vector bundles to a category that is closed under kernels
and cokernels. Their naturality and usefulness was first explored in Serre's
landmark paper (FAC). Traditionally, the coherent sheaves on a smooth projective
variety are broken down in terms of dimension of support and ``stability''
(Geometric Invariant Theory). However, recent work in string theory points to an
entire manifold of stability conditions on categories of complexes of vector
bundles (D-branes in the physics literature). These resemble perverse sheaves,
and like perverse sheaves seem to have extremely nice properties. In joint work
with Daniele Arcara, the PI put stability conditions on a rigorous mathematical
footing for all complex surfaces, and in the current proposal he will explore
the applications of this new theory to ``classical'' problems in algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is the study of the shapes of
solution sets of systems of polynomial equations in many variables. One crucial
tool in this study is the construction of invariants, i.e. auxiliary structures
that allow one to distinguish among the different shapes. Rather surprisingly,
string theorists have made very significant contributions to algebraic geometry
in recent years. In work relevant to this project, they have proposed the
existence of a ``stability manifold'' for ``D-branes,'' which seems to be a very
powerful new tool for both distinguishing different shapes and for answering
classical questions in algebraic geometry (e.g. How many variables does one need
in order to embed a particular shape?) The PI will develop this new tool,
building on his previous work explaining the two-dimensional case.