* 0901469
* Novel TiO2-based microphotonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Objective: As our demand pushes the limits of the internet, we are confronted
with the limitations of electronic circuitry. To address these demands, ultra-
fast all-optical technologies for switching and logic are emerging as a viable
alternative. We propose to investigate an unexplored material, TiO2, as a novel
platform capable of meeting these demands for high speed, highly integrated on-
chip photonic devices.

Intellectual Merit: Recent measurements of TiO2's optical nonlinearity are
similar in magnitude as highly nonlinear chalcogenide glass. Unlike most
materials for all-optical switching, our work with TiO2 will enable both visible
and IR operation. We will pioneer the structuring of this material and develop
building blocks necessary for advanced devices. To demonstrate TiO2's viability
as a nonlinear optical platform we will create micron sized nonlinear Sagnac
interferometers and quantifying their performance as all-optical switches.

Broader Aspects: Beyond the creation of miniaturized photonic devices, the
proposed work will contribute to the understanding of optical wave propagation
at the nanoscale and will permit advances in laser-induced breakdown
spectroscopy, optical memory read-out, and molecular electronics. This work will
contribute to the education and training of future multidisciplinary scientists
and engineers through research based education. Our work with local high
schools, NSF sponsored programs, and the high representation of women in our
research group will broaden participation of underrepresented groups. Our
extensive collaborations with academic and industrial partners will enhance
infrastructure for research. Finally, using the group's well-established program
integrating outreach and public education with research, this work will be
broadly disseminated to the general public.