* 0901094
* Competitive Distributed Control Methodologies for Small-Scale Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wayne Weaver, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* George Maracas
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,001.00

The objective of this research is to study the fundamental interactions and
influences that individual components of a power system have on each other and
the overall effect of these interactions on system performance. The approach
uses a game-theoretic model of the power system to develop a framework for a new
class of distributed control methods. In this new model, system components use
energy resources to compete for local and global objectives such as voltage,
current, power, or energy. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is of this work is
in its potential to improve control of interconnected power components. Control
has typically been one of two extremes: either completely localized control
(focused on local objectives) or a centralized control scheme requiring
extensive communications, infrastructure, and a single-point of failure. The
proposed approach considers how each different local objective interacts across
the system. This will result in an operating point that is a global balance of
local objectives. This work will determine how the fundamental interactions of
the components contribute to, or degrade from, the higher-level objectives of
the overall system, such as stability, survivability, and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will extend to electrical power
networks at all levels where more diverse sources and loads are being utilized,
and new technologies are being driven by an ever-increasing demand for
performance, stability, efficiency, and flexibility. This new approach to energy
control and management will strengthen education objectives by enhancing the
content of graduate and undergraduate classes, as well as adding meaningful
laboratory experiences.