* 0901560
* Workshop for new faculty and graduate students on Lattice-Ordered Groups and MV-Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Warren McGovern, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 20,400.00

Principal Investigator: McGovern, Warren Wm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0901560&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Bowling Green State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Workshop for new faculty and graduate
students on Lattice-Ordered Groups and MV-
Algebras&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at Bowling Green State University (Ohio, USA) will host a workshop on
lattice-ordered groups and MV-algebras June 8th through June 12th. The workshop
will provide a very important opportunity to new researchers (including graduate
students) to work with experts from the two fields. The workshop will be
followed by the 12th annual International Conference on Ordered Algebraic
Structures which will run from the 15th of June through the 19th of June. The
theory of lattice-ordered groups has a long history and has many applications to
other branches of mathematics: lattice theory, permutation groups, commutative
integral domains, vector lattices, positivity, algebraic K-theory, and general
topology. MV-algebras (or ?many-valued algebras?) were introduced in the 1950s
by C.C. Chang to form the algebraic semantics of Lukasiewicz many-valued logic.
The theory of MV-algebras has applications to logic, toric varieties, algebraic
K-theory, functional analysis, and C*-algebras. In 1986, D. Mundici proved that
the category of abelian lattice-ordered groups with strong order unit and their
unit-preserving homomorphisms is naturally equivalent to the category of MV-
algebras. In 2002 this result was extended to a natural equivalence between the
category of lattice-ordered groups with strong order unit and their unit-
preserving homomorphisms and the category of generalized MV-algebras (a.k.a.
pseudo MV-algebras).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop aims to inform its
participants on the recent breakthroughs of how the two branches of mathematics
interact with each other. It is hoped that the workshop will lead to further
developments and connections between the two fields. One of the main goals of
the workshop is to expose new faculty and graduate students, including members
of under represented groups, to the two branches of mathematics and have them
interact with experts in the fields. The participants will also be afforded the
opportunity to participate in the 12th annual International Conference on
Ordered Algebraic Structures which immediately follows the workshop. For more
information about the workshop, please see the following
webpage:&lt;br/&gt;http://www-math.bgsu.edu/~warrenb/Workshop/Workshop09.html