* 0901628
* Decompositions for multivariable Schur-class functions, Christoffel-Darboux type formulas, and related problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Hugo Woerdeman, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 475,578.00

Woerdeman

The proposal lies at the interface of multivariable complex analysis and
multivariable operator theory. The setting of study is the operator-valued Schur
class and its subclass, the Schur?Agler class. While the latter is more
understood due to Agler?s seminal work, the multivariable Schur class remains
largely unexplored. The proposed program is aimed to gain a novel insight into
the structure of multivariable Schur-class functions and higher-dimensional
analogs of the two-variable Christoffel?Darboux formula. The investigation is
motivated by its ultimate goals which would be to describe the class of
commuting tuples of contractions having unitary dilations, to obtain solvability
criteria for the Nevanlinna?Pick interpolation problem in the multivariable
Schur class, and to develop a theory of system realizations for this class of
functions. Tools to be employed include the machinery of scattering systems
(building momentum on PIs? recent work) and the technique of Schur complements
of multivariable Toeplitz operators (with a parallel development of fast
inversion/solver numerical algorithms for multivariable Toeplitz matrices). One
of the themes in this program is a best approximation geometric problem, tied to
an important special case of Paulsen?s conjecture on the best constant in the
multivariable operator-valued linear von Neumann inequality.

The project addresses several questions in the active area of multivariable
interpolation and factorization problems. These questions are of current
relevance to a variety of areas in science and engineering, which include, but
are not limited to, system and control theory, filter design, signal and image
processing, compressive sensing, and quantum computation. The main educational
component of the project is the supervision of graduate students and the
mentoring of undergraduates who will be supported by the Research Experiences
for Undergraduates program.

The results of the proposed research will be disseminated at several levels:
through publications and presentations at national and international
professional meetings, some of which will also be attended by researchers from
other fields, such as computer science, physics and engineering; via formal and
informal educational activities, including the weekly Analysis seminar at Drexel
University run by the PIs and attended by both faculty and students; via visit
exchanges with colleagues from other institutions for collaboration purposes;
via the PIs? web sites and preprint servers.