* 0901447
* 1-Motives, Equivariant Iwasawa Theory and Special Values of L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Cristian Popescu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 162,000.00

The theory of special values of global and p-adic L-functions is of central
importance in number theory. It establishes subtle links between the analytic
aspects of the theory and the arithmetic-algebraic-geometric aspects, shedding
new light on both and leading to striking solutions to outstanding open problems
in number theory. The PI has developed a conjectural program which generalizes
and refines the Gross-Rubin-Stark Conjectures and the Coates-Sinnott Conjectures
on special values of global L-functions at non-positive integers and generalizes
and refines the Main Conjecture in Iwasawa Theory and Gross's Conjectures on
special values of p-adic L-functions at non-positive integers. The PI will
employ techniques of equivariant Iwasawa Theory of 1-motives and the Iwasawa
theoretic analogues of their l-adic realizations, Weil-etale cohomology,
crystalline cohomology and the theory of t-motives to provide new evidence for
his conjectures. He will also attempt to establish links between his conjectural
program and those of Burns-Flach (on the Equivariant Tamagawa Number Conjecture
for Artin Motives) and Ritter-Weiss (on non-abelian equivariant versions of the
Main Conjecture in Iwasawa Theory). The PI will also study applications of his
conjectural program to the construction of explicit Euler Systems, explicit
generation of class-fields over an arbitrary global field (Hilbert's 10th
problem) and refined class-number formulas. The PI will offer graduate courses
and organize seminars and conferences bringing together students and experts in
the field of special values of L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An L-function
is a gadget of analytic (continuous) nature which encodes a tremendous amount of
arithmetic-algebraic-geometric (discrete) data of interest to experts working in
the fields of number theory and arithmetic-algebraic geometry, as well as
cryptographers, coding theorists, telecommunications engineers etc. The PIs
conjectural program builds upon classical conjectures due to Gross, Rubin, Stark
and Iwasawa among others and aims for determining (decoding) the discrete data
out of special values of L-functions at the integral points on the real axis.
The PI will employ techniques coming from various areas of mathematics,
especially number theory and arithmetic geometry to prove his conjectures in
several significant cases and to establish links between his conjectural program
and those of Burns-Flach and Ritter-Weiss. Aside from its many far reaching
applications to number theory and algebraic geometry (which will be explored by
the PI), this research project has significant potential impact upon practical
fields such as cryptography and coding theory.&lt;br/&gt;