* 0901116
* 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2009) to be held June 29-July 1, 2009 in Boston, MA.
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* William Karl, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

0901116 Karl

This project will support the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging (ISBI) to be held June 29-July 1, 2009, in Boston, MA This symposium is
the sixth in a series and is co-sponsored by two IEEE societies: the Signal
Processing Society (SPS) and the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Science
(EMBS). The ISBI is a forum for researchers particularly interested in the
computational and modeling aspects of biomedical imaging. Methodologies
emphasized in the forum could apply to multiple imaging modalities and to
imaging at varying scales. Topics for the forums include physical, biological
and statistical modeling of biological and anatomical structures, image
formation and reconstruction, computational image analysis, statistical image
analysis, visualization, and image quality assessment. The meeting aims to
facilitate cross-fertilization of methodologies between different imaging
modalities and scales, with applications ranging from the nano, molecular and
cellular levels through small-animal imaging and macroscopic to whole-body
clinical systems. This symposium will be of great educational benefit and be
inspiring to junior researchers and students across many fields.

