* 0901069
* GOALI:  Infrared Optical Microcavity Sensors for High-Sensitivity, High-Specificity Molecular Detection.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Shibin Jiang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 392,000.00

Infrared Optical Microcavity Sensors for High-Sensitivity, High-Specificity
Molecular Detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The goal of this
proposal is to develop novel optical sensors that have enough sensitivity for
single-molecule detection while also providing high selectivity without the need
for surface functionalization or labeling. Our strategy will consist in
developing optical microcavities operating in the infrared domain. Microcavities
with high Q-factors permit to confine light for a long time and build up high
intensity within the optical cavity. This allows the light signal to sample a
target molecule many more times and increases the detection sensitivity by
orders of magnitude down to the single molecule resolution. Current optical
resonator technologies are based on oxide glass materials which have an optical
transmission window limited to about 2 um. This preclude from accessing the
infrared domain between 2-16 um. In this project we will build on our long
experience with chalcogenide glasses to produce sensors based on fibers and
resonant microspheres with high transparency over the entire mid-IR region.
Here, we propose to build and test the first technique capable of achieving
single-molecule detection while intrinsically providing high-selectivity for
identification of target molecules. This research has the potential to induce a
major leap forward in sensor technology. If successful, this project will
provide a proof of concept for the first label-free, binding-agent-free optical
sensor with single-molecule sensitivity and high molecular
specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The high sensitivity sensors
developed in this project would have a direct societal impact. Detection of
trace quantities of chemicals such as explosives or bio-hazardous substances has
crucial implications for national security or bio-medical research. These fields
require sensors that have high-sensitivity and are sufficiently versatile to
identify a wide range of molecules. These sensors would also have many
implications in the fundamental study of molecular processes for bio-technology
and bio-medical research. Additionally, this research program will train
students from underrepresented groups in the field of engineering and will
directly involve undergraduate students in state-of-the-art research projects
and aim at attracting promising students toward graduate studies in the
Engineering Sciences. The proposed research will also be fully integrated into
an international PhD program with our collaborators at the University of Rennes
in France. Graduates students will perform course work and research activities
alternately in both institutes and will gain a double PhD diploma. This will
train our student to face the challenges of functioning in an international
setting and will uniquely prepare them for future carrier in which they are
increasingly likely to be exposed to international collaborations.