* 0901460
* Problems related to the infinity Laplacian operator, the weak KAM theory and singularities of solutions of Monge-Ampere equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Yifeng Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 332,871.00

Yu&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to continue his study of problems related to the
infinity Laplacian operator, the weak KAM theory and singularities of solutions
of the Monge-Ampere equation. (1) The infinity Laplacian operator arises from
minimizing the L-infinity norm of the gradient and a two person differential
game called ?tug-of-war?. The PI intends to solve several problems from the?tug-
of-war? game. One of the important questions is to see how we can use the game
theory interpretation to understand more about the infinity Laplacian equation,
a highly degenerate nonlinear elliptic equation. The PI also intends to
characterize asymptotic behaviors of principle eigenfunctions of p-Laplacian
operators as p goes to infinity. Other problems concern properties of classical
solutions of the infinity Lapalcian equation and uniqueness of absolute
minimizers from minimizing more general norms of the gradient. (2) The aim of
the weak KAM theory is to use pde approaches to study the Aubry-Mather theory.
Our major goal here is to find a variational method to identify the Aubry set.
(3) It was known that generalized solutions of Monge-Ampere equations from the
optimal mass transfer problems might have singularities. The PI plans to use
some tools developed with P. Cannarsa to explore the regularity of the set of
singularities. (1) Equations involving the infinity Laplacian operator are very
different from elliptic PDEs that people knew before. On one hand, they are
second order. On the other hand, the infinity Laplacian operator is so
degenerate that those equations sometimes behave as first order PDEs, for
example, their solutions even possess some sort of characteristics. Proposed
problems in this topic require new methods and ideas which will enhance people's
knowledge of elliptic PDEs. Beside its extreme mathematical interest, the
infinity Laplacian operator also has important applications in practical issues,
for example, to restore images with poor dynamical range, to determine the
optimal strategy in the tug-of-war game which is applicable to economic and
political modeling, etc. (2) Very little has been known about the structure of
the Aubry-Mather set when the dimension is bigger than two. The research
proposed in the weak KAM theory part may provide a numerical method to
approximate the Aubry set. (3) Monge-Ampere equations from optimal transfer
problems have interesting applications in meteorology. The semigeostrophic
equations from meteorology can be formulated as a coupled Monge-Ampere/transport
problem. The results about the set of singularities of generalized solutions of
the Monge-Ampere equation should help people understand how fronts arise in
large scale weather pattern.