* 0901260
* RUI: Understanding the Self-Assembly of Globular Proteins: Phase Behavior, Interactions, and Chirality
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Neer Asherie, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0901260 PI: Asherie, Neer ORG: Yeshiva University

Title: RUI: Understanding the Self-Assembly of Globular Proteins: Phase
Behavior, Interactions, and Chirality

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Protein self-assembly is not well understood; it is not
possible to predict what will happen to a homogeneous solution of a protein when
the conditions are changed. The long-term goal of the proposal is to make it
possible to predict the phase behavior of protein solutions and to learn to
control protein self-assembly. There are three immediate objectives: (1) To
determine the phase behavior of several globular proteins by light-scattering
methods. The PI expects to provide comprehensive experimental evidence for the
universal nature of protein phase behavior. (2) To construct realistic models
for protein interactions. The PI will construct computationally tractable models
with sufficient detail to capture the complexity of protein interactions. (3) To
investigate new ways to control protein self-assembly. The PI will pursue our
recent discovery that precipitant chirality can radically alter the
crystallization of globular proteins. The governing hypothesis behind this work
is that the phase behavior is controlled by a few parameters. One aim of the
proposed work is to provide experimental evidence for this hypothesis. That is,
there will be an attempt to determine the universal features of protein phase
behavior. The experimental findings will be used to construct simple microscopic
models for protein interactions that can describe the phase behavior. It will
then become possible to predict the phase behavior of a protein from a few
experimental measurements. The immediate impact of this work would be to greatly
simplify studies involving proteins. Crystallizing proteins for structure
determination would no longer depend so heavily on laborious trial and error,
but instead would be based on a more precise approach that uses the phase
diagram. This work will be done in the context of an RUI grant, involving
undergraduate students in all aspects of a project that advances the frontiers
of protein science.

BROADER IMPACTS: The research on globular protein phase transitions detailed in
this proposal will contribute towards long-term goals of establishing systematic
means of producing protein crystals for structural studies, of constructing
predictive theories of phase transitions in living cells and organisms, of
providing for rational design of processes of importance in the biotechnology
and food-processing industries, and of creating new and useful paradigms in
statistical physics. The PI is among the first faculty to be hired at Yeshiva
with a mandate to introduce a research component to the campus. His
effectiveness in this role is demonstrated by two publications in the past year
based on research done by undergraduates in his lab. He is developing new
courses in Introductory Physics for Biology Students and Premedical Students, an
intermediate level lecture/lab course in Waves and Optics for Science and
Engineering majors, and an advanced Biophysics reading/lab course using the
English tutorial approach. He is also faculty advisor to the Undergraduate
Student Research Presentation forum, a biweekly meeting at which undergraduates
present the results of their research projects. Finally, he is the organizer of
a periodic lecture series for general audiences that seeks to explain the work
behind the Nobel Prizes in Physics, Chemistry, Literature, Economics,
Physiology, Medicine, and Peace.

