* 0901576
* Physical Modeling of Low-K Dielectric Breakdown and the Estimation of Full Chip Lifetime
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Linda Milor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)"

State-of-the-art chips use low-k materials to form the insulator between
interconnect lines. The use of low-k materials reduces capacitance, which in
turn reduces the propagation delay between the transistor gates in a chip. To
reduce delay, each technology generation involves low-k materials with
progressively lower k values. These materials are formed by adding porosity and
have progressively degraded reliability characteristics. Understanding the
reliability of chips built with low-k materials is complicated, because
reliability is a function of the complete interconnect system, including the
low-k material, the cap layer, and the barrier. Hence, the materials cannot be
studied in isolation, and the interfaces among the materials play a major role
in breakdown. This research is developing a comprehensive understanding of
breakdown of porous low-k dielectrics through the development of simulation
models of breakdown and their calibration to empirical data. Backend dielectric
breakdown is complicated because of the role of interfaces and the large number
of defects and material irregularities in porous low-k materials. This work
studies dielectric breakdown at the microscopic level, in porous materials and
at interfaces (cap layer and barrier), and builds models of conduction through
materials and at interfaces under stress. Empirical calibration of models
involves new approaches to eliminate the impact of within and between structure
linewidth variation and of field enhancement at test structure tips. The models
are used to build a tool to analyze a full chip layout?s vulnerability to
backend dielectric breakdown. The resulting tool should significantly reduce
manufacturing risk and design respins.