* 0901970
* Education and Outreach through Optical Terahertz Science and Technology Workshop; Santa Barbara, California; March 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Frank Hegmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/28/2010
* USD 17,000.00

The recent development of terahertz (THz) technology based on optical light has
resulted in rapid growth and real world applications. Prototype terahertz
imaging systems have been installed in airports and post offices for security
inspections. Industries from ship building to forestry are applying THz light
for process monitoring. Biomolecular and biomedical research now experiment with
terahertz technology. To ensure U.S. leadership in this rapidly moving field, it
is essential that current science and engineering students become fluent in the
technology. The Optical Terahertz Science and Technology Workshop 2009 will
achieve this through: a day of tutorials by specialists; three days of research
presentations by world renowned investigators; and student poster presentations
to be critiqued by leaders in the field. Undergraduate education will be
impacted through a workshop on incorporating THz research into undergraduate
teaching. The resulting modules will inspire undergraduates to participate in
research that will give them the hands-on skills to pursue high tech careers and
contribute to innovation in the U.S. economy. Three NSF divisions have
contributed to supporting the attendance by graduate students and post docs at
this workshop: the Division of Materials Research, the Division of Chemistry,
and the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems.