* 0901328
* 2nd Mile High Conference on Nonassociative Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Michael Kinyon, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 02/28/2010
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract for NSF proposal #0901328

2nd Mile High Conference on Nonassociative Mathematics

---------

The development of an abstract mathematical theory is often tied to researchers'
ability to perform calculations within it. If the usual laws of arithmetics do
not hold in a theory, calculations tend to be difficult and often require the
aid of electronic computers. In nonassociative mathematics, neither the
commutative law nor the associative law are assumed to hold. Nonassociative
mathematics is a broad field that interacts with many traditional mathematical
disciplines. It includes the algebraic theories of quasigroups (nonassociative
groups) and Lie algebras, the combinatorial theory of Latin squares (with Sudoku
being a very special case), the geometric theories of nets and webs (that
originally arose from nomography), and applications of nonassociative algebra to
particle physics. Lately, there has been a resurgence of interest in
nonassociative mathematics. This is due partly to improved computational tools,
partly to the working out of many problems in associative mathematics, and
partly due to the self-organizing efforts by researchers working in the field.

The proposed 2nd Mile High Conference on Nonassociative Mathematics will be an
international conference on all aspects of nonassociative mathematics, with an
expected audience of 100 researchers. The meeting will take place at the
University of Denver, Denver, Colorado, June 21-27, 2009. The main goals of the
2nd Mile High Conference are as follows: (i) to establish a leading conference
on nonassociative mathematics world-wide; (ii) to bring together scientists from
all areas of nonassociative mathematics, thereby promoting cross-disciplinary
research; (iii) to make the conference accessible to graduate and post-doctoral
students while also providing a forum for these young researchers; (iv) to
encourage and support the participation of researchers from underrepresented and
underprivileged groups; (v) to assemble a list of the most important open
problems in the field and to facilitate its dissemination and maintenance.