* 0901434
* Topics in Operator Theory with Applications to Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Torsten Ehrhardt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 167,394.00

Abstract Erhrhardt This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The PI plans to investigate certain concrete problems in Operator Theory, mostly
centered around Toeplitz operators and matrices as well as their modifications
and generalizations (Toeplitz+Hankel, Wiener-Hopf-Hankel operators). The
asymptotics of the determinants of these objects is of particular interest and
is related to some 30-year conjectures, which have only been partially solved,
and when solved have led to new open problems. The tools for studying the
asymptotics of such determinants include asymptotic spectral theory, Banach
algebra techniques (non-commutative Gelfand theory), certain aspects of
Numerical Analysis (Stability Theory), and also Wiener-Hopf factorization
theory. The asymptotics of determinants is interest if one wants to study the
asymptotic eigenvalue distribution of, for instance, Toeplitz matrices (which is
one naive, but only partially solved problem). Another application are certain
problems in Random Matrix Theory. There a first type of problem concerns the
linear statistics for various random matrix ensembles in certain scaling limits.
A second class of problem is related to the asymptotics of so-called gap
probablities, again for various types of random matrices. It has turned out that
both the distribution function for the linear statistics as well as the gap
probabilities can be expressed in terms of the determinants of certain
operators, where the underlying operator depends on the matrix ensemble under
consideration. The focus of this research project is to use this link and apply
the techniques from operator theory to solve those problems in Random Matrix
Theory.

The proposal tries to connect two areas of Mathematics, Operator Theory and
Random Matrix Theory. Operator Theory studies the analytical properties of
certain mathematical objects and has a lot of hard and powerful tools available.
Random Matrix Theory is a field which has already many connections to other
branches of Mathematics. It has also an applied aspect in that its goal is to
model and explain complex systems with an inherent random behavior. Such systems
arise in models of Statistical Physics, but also in, for instance, Wireless
Communication. There are very ``basic'' problems in Random Matrix Theory, which
have not yet or only recently found their solution. It has turned out that some
of these questions can be formulated in terms of the asymptotics of certain
determinants. Operator Theory along with its sophisticated tools can be
considered as being capable of tackling and solving these questions. It is the
goal of the proposal to study in particular those problems in Operator Theory
that arise from Random Matrix Theory. This will hopefully solve some of the
basic questions there. On the other, the influence from Random Matrix Theory
will likely lead to the development of new and the considerable extension of
existing tools and methods in Operator Theory which are connected to asymptotic
determinant problems as well as spectral theory.