* 0901870
* High-speed three dimensional coherent nonlinear imaging with temporal-focus depth scanned holography
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Randy Bartels, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Coherent nonlinear laser microscopy (CNLM) such as third harmonic (THG) and
second harmonic (SHG) generation microscopes are widely used imaging tools.
However, their application to date has eluded systems requiring rapid image
acquisition. We propose to develop a method for rapidly acquiring three-
dimensional (3D) images formed by nonlinear microscopy by means of digital
holography coupled with rapid spatio-temporal scanning of the driving ultrafast
laser pulses.

Intellectual Merits: The proposed research will develop these capabilities which
can be used to study fast dynamics of many processes. Making use of recent
advances in spatio-temporal focusing, it will be possible to develop new forms
of very high speed 3D imaging with coherent nonlinear contrast mechanisms. We
will build an understanding of the capabilities of 3D nonlinear imaging and will
better understand how to optimize both transverse and longitudinal (axial)
resolution, while obtaining 3D information about an object.

Broader Impacts: This research will primarily focus on THG microscopy; but the
technique is applicable to other coherent nonlinear microscopes, such as second-
harmonic generation (SHG) and coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS).
Increased acquisition rates made possible with holographic microscopy will
permit the study of micro- to millisecond-timescale dynamics. Undergraduate
researchers will be involved in all aspects of this project focusing on research
areas of ultrafast and nonlinear optics, and microscopy. Research findings will
be incorporated into courses taught by the PI, particularly Ultrafast Optics and
Nonlinear Optics. In addition, the PI will continue revising and delivering his
"optics show" for K-2nd graders.