* 0901273
* Plesiochronous Communication for Silicon-Constrained High-Speed Serial Links
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Buckwalter, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 323,737.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
demonstrate energy efficient, mixed-signal silicon transceiver circuitry using
time-domain signal modulation for high-speed serial links. The approach is to
employ plesiochronous double-edge pulse-width modulation to achieve higher data
rates than traditional pulse amplitude modulation over a given interconnect. A
90-nanometer silicon mixed-signal transceiver circuit will be invented and
fabricated to verify the channel and source coding
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research investigates
optimal signaling subject to interconnect bandwidth and peak power constraints
imposed by highly scaled silicon integrated circuit processes. Performance
improvements will be achieved by combining both advances in CMOS circuit design
and communication theory to address the physical constraints of deep submicron
CMOS and the adverse effects of the transmission channel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project addresses energy savings in
server and computer communication. It is estimated that more than one gigaWatt
of power is required worldwide to power the high-speed serial links that
exchange data between microprocessors and memory and enable the benefits of
networking and computing for work, entertainment, and social interaction. The
outcomes of this research advance a global technology concern, and coincident
educational efforts will teach and train students about the interaction of
energy and technology and how circuit design addresses the need for low power
computation and communication. The project will train a Ph.D. student and
includes outreach activities to middle and high school students through active
mentorship.