* 0901545
* Problems in Distributed Control And Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2012
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Current interest in the control of distributed
systems of all types has led&lt;br/&gt;to a very rapid increase in the
application of graph theoretic ideas to problems of analyzing and synthesizing a
variety of desired behaviors such as swarming, rendezvousing, reaching a
consensus, as well as well as a variety of sensing and communication tasks
associated with search and rescue, environmental monitoring, security, etc.
While this in-depth assault on these problems using a combination of graph
theory and system theory is in its early stages, it is likely to significantly
expand in the years to come. One line of research which illustrates the combined
use of these concepts, is the recent theoretical work by a number of individuals
which successfully explains the heading synchronization phenomenon observed in
simulation by Vicsek, Reynolds and others more than a decade ago. Another is the
recent surge of interest in the deployment and management of sensor networks of
all types. In broad terms these are these are the areas within which we propose
to work. In particular we propose to address distributed sensing and control on
two fronts, both requiring the use both of traditional systems concepts and
graph theory. First we propose to explore various versions of dynamic gossiping
appropriate to a variety of applications in network management and cooperative,
coordinated control. Second we propose to look in detail at a variety of issues
concerned with the distanced-based localization of sensors in a large
distributed network. In the area of gossiping, we will seek to construct a
deterministic solution to the quantized gossiping problem. We will also attempt
to develop a convergence theory for nonhomogeneous products of ?row sum 1?
matrices with the aim of explaining {among other things} recent experimental
results concerned with accelerated gossiping. In the area of sensor localization
we will investigate the effects of measurement errors on the behavior of the
recently developed ?sweeps? algorithm for sequential localization. By appealing
to concepts developed in connection with the recently discovered {startling}
characterization of global rigidity by Gortler et. al., we hope to significantly
advance the newly devised divide and conquer approach to localizing a globally
rigid network via decomposition and merging of local solutions. We will study
the consequences of ?flip-ambiguities? in sensor localization and aim to derive
necessary and sufficient for networks with such ambiguities to be
localizable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning in
at least two different ways. First, graduate students involved in the project
will be expected to attend and present there results at technical meetings.
Second, project graduate students will contribute to and participate in a short
course on the topic which we envision organizing and giving towards the end of
the project. Two of the graduate students working on this project will be from
under represented groups. This project will enhance infrastructure for research
and education in at least two ways. First we expect to continue our cross-
disciplinary collaboration with our environmental biologist colleagues with whom
we?ve already been working for several years. Second, we expect to continue to
collaborate with our experimentalist colleagues at Yale and UPENN who are
building mobile sensor network test beds for trying out various control
algorithms. Much of our research has been and will continue to be in close
collaboration with B. D. O. Anderson and his group at Australian National
University in Canberra. We hope to continue to contribute to broadening
dissemination to enhance scientific and technological understanding by
organizing and running boni fide interdisciplinary technical gatherings like the
Block Island Workshop on Cooperative Control we co-organized and which took take
place in June, 2003. Planning for such a meeting on Block Island in June, 2009
is already underway. We also expect to give overview talks on the subject such
as the plenary presentation ?Multi-Agent Formations&lt;br/&gt;and Sensor
Networks? which we gave in December 2006 at the IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control in San Diego.