* 0901480
* CAREER: Integrating Research and Education to Advance the Use of Heat as a Tracer of Surface-Ground Water Interaction at Multiple Spatial and Temporal Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/19/2008,07/31/2014
* Laura Lautz, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 511,271.00

CAREER: Integrating Research and Education to Advance the Use of Heat as a
Tracer of Surface-Ground Water Interaction at Multiple Spatial and Temporal
Scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L. K. Lautz, State University of New York, College
of Environmental Science and Forestry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stream-groundwater
(SW-GW) interaction is a critical component of a variety of water quality and
quantity issues. It has proven difficult to accurately characterize SW-GW
interactions, particularly in streams, and they are often ignored due to the
challenges of spatial and temporal generalization of point-in-space or -time
measurements. There has been a renewed interest in the use of heat as a tracer
in hydrologic systems because heat transport has a number of advantages over
traditional methods of characterizing SW-GW interaction. Despite recent
technological and analytical developments in the application of heat as a tracer
in hydrologic systems, much remains to be learned. The major objective of this
proposal is to integrate research and teaching to advance the application of
heat transport theory to characterize water flux between streams and groundwater
and to relate those fluxes to changes in water quality over a variety of spatial
and temporal scales. Proposed work includes: (1) Linking field observations of
temperature with modeling to quantify SW-GW flux rates over different scales and
(2) linking SW-GW interaction to geochemical variability. Research innovations
in this proposal include scaling-up observations while maintaining fine-scale
spatial resolution by using fiber optic distributed temperature sensor
technology and thermal remote sensing. Innovations also include quantifying SW-
GW fluxes over a range of temporal and spatial scales and developing procedures
for integrating observations across scales into process-based models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed and tested through this proposal
will be of broad interest to a spectrum of researchers and professionals to
inform stream restoration, contaminant remediation, nutrient dynamics and solute
transport in streams. The results of this work will also have broad
applicability for collaborators from industry and from non-profit organizations.
This work will establish the foundation for a sustained and strengthened program
to integrate the study of heat as a tracer of SW-GW interaction with educational
opportunities for students enrolled in undergraduate, community college and
graduate programs across a number of institutions. Mentoring relationships
between undergraduate students, graduate students, faculty members, industry
professionals and representatives of non-profit agencies will be formally
developed to support the recruitment and success of underrepresented minority
groups, including Native Americans, and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Start Date:
March 1st, 2008&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;