* 0901435
* Theoretical Investigation of Optoelectronic Devices Based on the ZnO Material System
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Enrico Bellotti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique M. Dagenais
* 05/31/2013
* USD 311,360.00



Objectives - The objectives of this effort are to: &#8722; Develop a
comprehensive numerical simulation model for the ZnO material system to be used
for the design and optimization of electronics, optoelectronics and nano-
mechanical devices. &#8722; Design and assess the performance of technologically
relevant optoelectronics and photonics devices, in particular light emitters,
where the use of the ZnO material system can radically transform the design
process, device structure and performance. &#8722; Exploit the opportunities
provided by the nanostructures unique to this system to investigate novel
optoelectronics, photonics and nano-mechanical devices, in particular, sensors.

Intellectual Merit &#8722; The intellectual merit of this effort is the
enhancement of the modeling of ZnO and its compounds by laying the foundation
for a comprehensive understanding of the physics of this semiconductor material
system and providing state of the art numerical simulation techniques for device
design and optimization. The prediction of material and device properties of
other semiconductors using first principles numerical simulations will also be
significantly improved.

Broader impact &#8722; The broader impacts of this program could include
transforming the design and fabrication of ZnO based UV emitters, making them
very efficient and low cost. The efficiency of white light emitters for solid
state lighting would also significantly increase. The nanostructures unique to
this material system could make it possible to design light emitters and sensors
where mechanical, optical and electrical functions are integrated in the same
device. These new applications could have a significant impact on energy
management, bioengineering and environmental monitoring with important societal
benefits.