* 0901962
* Seasons of Change in the Arctic Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Tingjun Zhang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 862,974.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic system is strongly defined
by its seasonality. The extreme annual cycle of solar radiation, interactions
between the Arctic and lower latitudes, within-Arctic interactions between the
land, ocean, and atmosphere, and the energetics of freeze and thaw, combine to
lend a complexity and richness to Arctic seasonality not seen elsewhere on the
planet. This seasonality is changing. Summer sea ice extent is declining,
attended by strong autumn rises in air temperature over the Arctic Ocean. Active
layer freeze-up in Siberia is occurring later in the winter. These and other
emerging changes will become more prominent in coming decades, with impacts
promising to cascade through the physical, chemical, biological, and socio-
economic components of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
identify the dominant climate forcings, feedbacks, and component linkages
driving change in Arctic system seasonality, and they will shape the evolution
of the system through the 21st century. This will require consideration of
changes in global radiative forcing, energy and mass transports from lower
latitudes into the Arctic, and between the land, ocean, and atmosphere within
the Arctic, and how these influence the Arctic?s physical, chemical, and
biological processes. A framework of passive versus active controls will help to
organize the investigations. A passive control is the control by background
warming. An example is how Arctic warming will lead to shorter seasonal duration
of snow cover. An active control refers to altered seasonality driven by changes
in energy or mass transports into the Arctic from lower latitudes or within the
Arctic itself. An example is how reduced autumn sea-ice extent leads to warming
over the ocean, which then, through regional atmospheric transport, may lead to
warming over adjacent land. Changes in seasonality will likely often reflect
both passive and active controls. Diagnostics such as seasonal anomaly
structures, defined as the seasonal cycle of a state variable for a given year
or years relative to the long-term climatology, will be used to evaluate how
seasonality in different system elements has evolved through the instrumental
record. These observational analyses will guide modeling experiments to examine
the sensitivity of state variables to active and passive controls and how
changing seasonality will shape the future of the system.&lt;br/&gt;