* 0901124
* Topics in Interpolation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Bolotnikov, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 115,783.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Bolotnikov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is primarily concerned with boundary
interpolation problems for Schur-class functions (analytic self-maps of the unit
disk) and their various generalizations. The PI will establish necessary and
sufficient conditions for the existence of a Schur-class function with a
prescribed jet (finite or infinite) of values for boundary derivatives at a
given point on the unit circle. The main difficulty here is that in a generic
case, the data set does not satisfy positivity conditions which are needed to
apply the existing function- and operator-theoretic interpolation methods to
full extent. These methods will be supplemented and combined with explicit
constructions from geometric function theory. The project will also include
implementable algorithms for constructing rational Schur-class functions of the
minimally possible MacMillan degree with finitely many prescribed Taylor
coefficients at a given boundary point. The construction will be used to study
spectral theory of Fredholm operators in algebras generated by the shift
operator and the composition operator with a Schur-class symbol. Another
application will be found in complex dynamics: a similar construction carried
out for positive real functions will eventually produce a one-parametric
semigroup of composition operators with prescribed boundary behavior near the
boundary Denjoy-Wolff point. The scalar-valued single-variable results will be
extended in the following four directions: (1) to the multi-point case where the
jets of boundary derivatives for the unknown interpolant are prescribed at
finitely or countably many points on the unit circle; (2) to operator-valued
Schur-class functions, whose values are contractive operators mapping one
Hilbert space into another; (3) to meromorphic functions with the boundary
values essentially bounded by one on the unit circle; (4) to various
multivariable extensions of the Schur class including in particular, Schur-Agler
functions of the polydisk and contractive multipliers of the Drury-Arveson
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses the problems in the
norm-constrained interpolation theory which has traditional connections with
control theory, system theory, and signal and image processing. Besides
obtaining concrete results, the objective of this research is to advance the
understanding of the interaction of operator theory and complex function theory
in the present boundary framework. The multivariable case is still much less
studied and therefore, is of particular interest. To study this case, the
functional-model canonical realizations for Schur-Agler functions will be
constructed, which in turn will establish the bridge to multivariable system
theory as well as to model theory for various tuples of Hilbert space operators.
The results obtained in this project will be published in scientific journals
and reported at research conferences. The project contains several problems
reserved for undergraduate students who will be engaged in intensive research by
the PI.