* 0901095
* Modular Compactifications of Mg,n
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* David Smyth, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2012
* USD 122,771.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The moduli space of stable curves gives a beautiful compactification of the
moduli space of compact Riemann surfaces, and is one of the most studied objects
in algebraic geometry. The PI will investigate alternate compactifications, with
the long-term goal of constructing a modular interpretation for the canonical
model of the moduli space. The first objective is to give a systematic
classification of all classes of singular curves which are deformation-open and
satisfy the unique limit property - any such class gives rise to a modular
compactification. The second objective is to study these alternate
compactifications from the perspective of the minimal model program, factoring
the birational maps between them into divisorial contractions and flips, and
studying the numerical properties of the canonical class at every intermediate
stage.

Quite generally, the theory of moduli is concerned with the underlying
numerical parameters of a given class of geometric objects. For example, a
circle is determined by a single modulus (its radius), while a triangle has
three moduli (its three side lengths). Furthermore, the moduli associated to a
geometric object typically satisfy fundamental constraints. For example, the
fact that the sum of any two side-lengths of a triangle must be less than the
third constrains the possible moduli parameters of a triangle. For modern
geometry and physics, Riemann surfaces comprise one of the most important
classes of geometric objects - their moduli are complex numbers and the
relations constraining these moduli remain deeply mysterious. By viewing the
moduli parameters of a Riemann surface as solutions to a system of polynomial
equations, the PI will investigate these relations through the techniques of
higher-dimensional algebraic geometry.