* 0901442
* Interplay between Network Topology and Stability of Control Systems with Delays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Rifat Sipahi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2013
* USD 247,014.00

Interplay between Network Topology and Stability of Control Systems with Delays



Objective: Delays, ubiquitous in control systems, mainly arise from sensing,
actuation and decision-making activities; and the topology describes which
control systems are tied with each other via a network, as seen in coordination
of autonomous vehicles, tele-operation, manufacturing enterprise systems and
vehicular traffic flow dynamics. Through the same network, delays and topology
affect each other and combine together to determine the network stability. The
objective of this program is to explain the non-trivial connections between the
topologies of networks and the stability mechanisms of these networks in the
presence of multiple delays. Evident from the literature, there exists no
general stability treatment for control systems with multiple delays, and this
knowledge gap currently prevents the availability of explicit rules by which
networks and their controllers can be designed for improved stability.

Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit of this project is a new and
unrecognized mathematical approach for the stability theory of multiple delay
systems, which unlocks the aforementioned knowledge gap and will reveal thorough
understanding of the amounts of delays different network topologies can
withstand without loosing stability. The approach will lead to new rules with
which networks, by design of their topologies, coupling strengths and controller
gains, can be rendered more tolerant against delays. The new tools attained in
this project will also be tested in mechatronics experiments and will put light
on the transition of the new knowledge from small size networks to large size
ones. The transformative aspects of the proposal are seen in the non-traditional
approaches taken to enable (a) the stability analysis of multiple delay systems,
(b) the explicit formulations that reveal the intertwined relationships between
topology, delays and stability; (c) new paradigms for the parallel design of
network topologies and controllers in the presence of multiple delays.

Broader impacts: The broader impacts of the project are: (i) engineering
education via outreach activities targeted to an audience including minorities
and under-represented groups, and via advising undergraduate students in
capstone design projects; (ii) enhancing research infrastructures via national
and international collaborations; (iii) dissemination of results via a new
tutorial-level web-site that will be developed to teach the analysis of delay
systems; (iv) new results across disciplines including networked control
systems, vehicular traffic flow, operations research and biology.