* 0901784
* QMHP: Quantum-field theoretical modeling and simulation of many-body entanglement of excitons and photons in semiconductor structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Michael Leuenberger, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our proposed theoretical research is to model
and simulate the quantum many-body entanglement of excitons, photons, and
polaritons in semiconductor structures by means of new analytical and numerical
quantum-field theoretical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;We plan to investigate the entanglement among excitons produced
by ultrashort laser pulses and the mapping of this entanglement onto photons. We
plan to develop perturbative and non-perturbative theories that can account for
the entanglement of excitons and photons. As a perturbative method, we have
derived a new quantum-field theoretical diagrammatic technique to describe
polarization and many-body entanglement of excitons and photons in arbitrary
order of the electric field or the number of excitons and photons. Our
calculations take all electron and hole correlations into account, i.e. we do
not treat the excitons as bosons. As a non-perturbative method, we plan to
generalize the semiconductor Bloch equations (SBEs) in that we additionally
consider the time evolution of the two-particle correlation functions.
&lt;br/&gt;Since SBEs are formulated in terms of a density matrix, decoherence
due to Coulomb exchange, disorder, phonons, nuclear spins, etc. can be studied
in the same framework. Taking into account the entanglement of photons with
localized spins in e.g. quantum dots, we will develop a new method for quantum
teleportation and quantum computing based on many-body
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activity:&lt;br/&gt;It is our goal to
provide undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of analytical and
numerical quantum field theory with a personalized e-learning system that is
able to adapt to the individual needs of a student by means of a back-end
program code made of an artificial neural network. The front-end of our program
code will teach the students the basics of quantum many-body correlations and
entanglement by means of interactive visualization and game-play. Key
applications based on quantum teleportation and quantum computing will ignite
the curiosity of the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact:&lt;br/&gt;Our theoretical efforts aim at producing a global quantum
network over optical fibers and satellites, which requires a many-body theory
for the thorough description of many-body entanglement in our semiconductor
structures. Our research will create a need of scientists trained in quantum
many-body physics. Consequently, teaching graduate and undergraduate students
the basics of quantum many-body effects becomes essential. Our education program
is the basis for boosting research in this promising field with
multidisciplinary applications, such as quantum teleportation, quantum
communication, optical computers, optospintronics, and quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;