* 0901893
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Changes in Chert Acquisition Strategies during the Neolithic of Southwest Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Susan Harris, Harris                  Susan          K
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2011
* USD 71,212.00

0901893 Harris

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Susan K.
Harris to work with Dr. Nicholas J. Conard at the University of Tuebingen in
Germany.

This project is conducting an intensive analysis of artifacts from the only
excavated Neolithic chert quarry on the Swabian Alb of southwest Germany. During
the course of the Neolithic numerous key changes have been observed in the
social organization of peoples living in Central Europe. Among these changes are
increased regionalization, intensified resource use, and stratification of
social structure. Through the Neolithic the main source of tool stone for a
broad region of southern Germany was the Jurassic chert of the Swabian Alb
plateau. This project explores changes in raw material exploitation across three
Neolithic time periods, ca. 5000 ? 2200 B.C. Early Neolithic (Linearbandkeramik
or LBK, ca. 5500-4900 B.C.) people were the first farmers in Central Europe,
where they introduced cultivated cereals, domesticated cattle, sheep and pigs,
the region?s first sedentary villages, and distinctive ceramic vessels. During
the course of the Neolithic further significant changes occurred in the degree
of social integration and economy of peoples living in central Europe. Among the
more valuable commodities that archaeologists can see traded over long distances
was high-quality stone for making tools. As the first stone raw material source
to be excavated on the Swabian Alb of southwest Germany, the Asch ?Borgerhau?
site is vital to understanding the role of raw material acquisition, transport,
and trade within the Neolithic economy. Results of this investigation will
greatly increase the available data on chert acquisition for central Europe. As
a new and well-dated site, Asch ?Borgerhau? provides a valuable comparison to
other quarry sites outside of Baden-Württemberg. Within the region of southwest
Germany only settlement sites have been excavated, and on the Swabian Alb itself
the Neolithic remains almost completely unexplored. Therefore, the Asch
?Borgerhau? quarry site fills an important gap in our understanding of the
settlement patterns and economic organization of the region. This research will
further result in a comparative database for future research on chert quarrying
in the Neolithic.