* 0901582
* Quantified dynamics of nonlinear dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Justin Holmer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This project will study nonlinear dispersive equations, with particular emphasis
on the nonlinear Schroedinger equation, Korteweg-de Vries equation, and
nonlinear Klein-Gordon equation. New techniques have emerged for studying the
dynamics of solitons and finite-time blow-up solutions, such as local virial
estimates, new Lyapunov functionals, and concentration compactness machinery.
The principal investigator will seek to implement and develop these techniques
further in the investigation of several scientifically relevant problems. The
dynamics of solitary waves in the presence of an external potential or under the
influence of a time-dependent nonlinear coefficient for single and multiple
bright and dark solitons will be considered. The ability of a strong confining
potential in one direction to produce an effective reduction in dimensionality
will be explored. New criteria on initial data for predicting finite-time blow-
up of solutions will be developed, and the PI will seek to construct new types
of singular ring blow-up solutions recently observed numerically. Long-time
behavior of global solutions will also be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
equations studied in this project arise as important physical models. Solitons
appear as well-localized stable structures, while blow-up is associated with a
sharp focusing of a wave and ultimate break-down of the physical model. For
example, the nonlinear Schroedinger equation is the wave function for a
collection of ultracold atoms in a Bose-Einstein condensate. Since its Nobel-
prize winning realization in the laboratory in 1995, further experiments have
produced solitons and finite-time blow-up, and there is now a large body of
physics literature motivating many of the problems the principal investigator
intends to consider. The problems proposed bring together physicists, numerical
analysts, and pure mathematicians. They also serve as an excellent educational
tool, since they can be tailored to students at the undergraduate and graduate
level. To stimulate interest among such students, the principal investigator
will give talks in the undergraduate seminar and teach an advanced topics course
at Brown University. Web demonstrations of this research could be produced, for
example, through a summer undergraduate project funded by this grant.&lt;br/&gt;