* 0901570
* Rings of Algebraic Differential Operators in Mathematical Physics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yuri Berest, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2012
* USD 287,377.00

Berest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research lies at the intersection of
several areas of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and mathematical physics, including
geometric analysis,&lt;br/&gt;representation theory, noncommutative algebra and
algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;It is motivated by old (yet unsolved) problems in
the theory of partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations. One such problem (known
as the problem of lacunas)&lt;br/&gt;deals with propagation of waves without
diffusion, another with heat&lt;br/&gt;kernels on Riemannian manifolds with
finite asymptotics. Despite being&lt;br/&gt;analytic by their nature, these
problems exhibit a remarkable feature:&lt;br/&gt;they have algebraic solutions.
The earlier work of the PI and his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators links these classical
problems of analysis to various&lt;br/&gt;questions of algebraic geometry and
noncommutative algebra, concerning&lt;br/&gt;rings of differential operators on
algebraic varieties and their specific&lt;br/&gt;representations (projective
D-modules). One of the primary goals of this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is to
systematically study the properties of such modules,
their&lt;br/&gt;endomorphism rings and moduli spaces. The results obtained so
far (mostly&lt;br/&gt;in the case of curves) reveal many interesting connections
with &lt;br/&gt;noncommutative geometry, representation theory, combinatorics
and &lt;br/&gt;integrable systems. Another goal of the proposal is thus to
investigate &lt;br/&gt;some of these connections. In a different direction, the
PI intends to &lt;br/&gt;develop a new method for computing asymptotics of heat
kernels based on&lt;br/&gt;ideas of homotopical
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical problems addressed in this
project arise from the practical&lt;br/&gt;question: what happens when a short
signal (light or sound, say) is omitted&lt;br/&gt;from a point A, travels
through a medium and arrives at point B? There are&lt;br/&gt;many possibilities:
there could be focusing, diffraction, persistence of faint&lt;br/&gt;echoes, or
still a short `clean-cut' signal at B. This last possibility is
of&lt;br/&gt;particular interest, but it may occur only under very special
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;To describe these conditions in precise mathematical terms
is one of the goals&lt;br/&gt;of the proposal. The results sought in this
direction are fundamental for our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of wave phenomena and
may have applications in related physical&lt;br/&gt;sciences, including the
theory of electromagnetic and acoustic waves, space &lt;br/&gt;communication
technologies, magneto-hydrodynamics, crystal optics, etc. As &lt;br/&gt;a
broader impact, the PI expects that the interdisciplinary nature of this
&lt;br/&gt;work will stimulate communication and collaboration between experts
in the &lt;br/&gt;various areas involved.&lt;br/&gt;