* 0901883
* GOALI: Short-Range, Wireless Communications for Next-Generation Computing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Huaping Liu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 06/30/2013
* USD 539,999.00

The objective of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of
the benefits and limitations of using short-range, low-latency, wireless
communications in a conventional, multichip computing environment. Traditional
computing platforms, consisting of many integrated circuits on a single printed
circuit board, incorporate several types of wireline interconnects with varying
bandwidth and latency requirements. This research takes a holistic approach in
exploring the implications of using short-range wireless communication on
different levels of the computing system, from the circuits and communications
to the networking and system architecture. These implications have the potential
to pave the way to integrated designs and methodologies for incorporating
wireless capability in the inter-chip communication infrastructure of next
generation computing systems.

The intellectual merit of the research is the insight that the replacement of
conventional, lower bandwidth serial communications with a multi-point, low-
latency, wireless system will enable a number of computing system improvements,
such as low latency, fault tolerance, reconfigurable bandwidth provisioning, and
lower cost.

The broader impact of the research is the vertical involvement and co-design of
the entire computing system platform, from the wireless circuits utilized in
this system environment to the broadcast network protocols and system
architectural implications. Potential benefits of this research include
improving power consumption and fault tolerance in rack-mounted servers for
cloud computing, as well as reducing cost and increased functionality in
embedded applications such as future fourth generation cellular phones. With
support from the GOALI industry partner, this project improves participation by
students from underrepresented groups by active mentoring at the academic and
industry partner locations.