* 0901106
* Ergodic Ramsey Theory and Polynomial Dynamics on Nilmanifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 434,890.00

This project focuses on the problems of multiple recurrence and convergence in
ergodic theory, with emphasis on their mutually enriching connections with
dynamical systems on nilmanifolds. The problems considered may be viewed as far-
reaching extensions of classical results. At the same time, these problems lead
to strong applications of ergodic theory to combinatorics, number theory, and
algebra that are inaccessible, so far, by conventional methods. Some of the
polynomial results obtained by the principal investigators in recent years have
served as an impetus for further developments in the theory of multiple
recurrence. These developments provide better understanding of the phenomenon of
multiple recurrence along polynomials and bring new vistas of research to light.
Some of these avenues of research lead to interesting new connections with and
applications to the theory of prime numbers and finitary combinatorics. An
interesting and important direction of research opened up by the results of the
principal investigators is connected to the entrance of nilpotent groups into
the picture. Not only are most of the familiar results dealing with commutative
groups naturally extendible to the nilpotent setting, but it also turns out that
nilpotent dynamics allow one to get new information about convergence and
recurrence properties of abelian groups of measure-preserving transformations.
The related conjectures that underlie the project shed new light on the linkages
between nilpotent dynamics and important problems in ergodic theory,
combinatorics, and uniform distribution.

The problems and conjectures that are under investigation in this project
connect diverse areas of mathematics (ergodic theory, combinatorics, algebra,
number theory) and contribute to each. For example, in recent years the methods,
results, and ideas originating in the theory of "multiple recurrence" (some of
which are due to principal investigators) have engendered spectacular advances
in the study of prime numbers. Another interesting direction of research that
has emerged recently links ergodic theory of multiple recurrence with
combinatorics in the algebraic area of "finite fields." These developments have
connections with theoretical computer science. The goal of this project is to
obtain a better understanding of the regularity of the behavior of dynamical
systems sampled at moments of time corresponding to values of polynomial (and
more general) functions. While the project focuses on applications of this
phenomenon in the mathematical areas of combinatorics and number theory, it may
be of interest to physicists as well. Finally, it is worth mentioning that the
area of so-called ergodic Ramsey theory, with its diversity of problems,
techniques, and applications, is an excellent medium for attracting
undergraduates to mathematics and graduate students to an area of active
research.