* 0901207
* The Third International Conference on Foundations of Systems Biology in Engineering (FOSBE 2009)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Henson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 12/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

0901207&lt;br/&gt;Michael A Henson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
relatively new field of systems biology has emerged to establish a bridge
between molecular level information and systems level understanding. The novelty
of systems biology lies in the emphasis on analyzing complexity in networked
biological systems using integrative rather than reductionist approaches. By its
very nature, systems biology is a highly interdisciplinary field that requires
the effective integration of scientists and engineers with different technical
backgrounds and the interdisciplinary training of students to meet the rapidly
evolving needs of academia, industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Third International Conference on Foundations of Systems Biology in Engineering
(FOSBE 2009) sponsored by the CACHE Corporation will address emerging challenges
and opportunities in systems biology. FOSBE 2009 will take place August 9-12,
2009 at the Inverness Hotel and Conference Center in Denver, Colorado,
continuing the two-year cycle of the FOSBE conference series, with successful
conferences previously held in Santa Barbara, California (August, 2005) and
Stuttgart, Germany (September, 2007). It is believed that the FOSBE conference
series fills an important void within system biology conference offerings, with
considerably more emphasis on bioengineering approaches, interdisciplinary
education, and industrial applications than larger series such as the
International Conference on Systems Biology (ICSB). The primary objectives of
FOSBE 2009 will be to provide an in-depth review and critical assessment of the
current state-of the-art, to discuss current and future needs of research,
education and training, and to identify new directions, opportunities, and
challenges in systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FOSBE 2009 is expected to
have strong attendance from academia, industry, and government. The conference
setting will provide an ideal opportunity for systems biology researchers,
practitioners and policy makers to exchange ideas and establish collaborations.
A large group of graduate and post-doctoral students is expected to attend the
conference and present research results in the two poster sessions. A unique
feature of FOSBE 2009 will be a training workshop for graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, young professors and industrial researchers. The objective of
the day long workshop is to provide tutorial introductions to several important
areas of systems biology. One hour lectures will be given by eight leading
systems biology researchers and practitioners. The workshop will be held Sunday
morning and afternoon before the opening reception.