* 0901220
* Sums of Hermitian Operators and Connections to Connes' Embedding Problem; Hyperinvariant Subspaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Kenneth Dykema, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2013
* USD 245,223.00

Abstract Dykema

The PI will investigate two fundamental problems in the theory of operators that
are contained in II_1 factors. The first is Connes' embedding problem. Recent
work of Collins and Dykema has shown that this problem is equivalent to a
question about sums of operators in finite von Neumann algebras, and other
recent work of Bercovici, Collins, Dykema, Li and Timotin has positively
answered the first part of this question, showing that all Horn inequalities
hold in all finite von Neumann algebras. The second problem is the
hyperinvariant subspace problem. In particular, the PI will focus on the
remaining open part of this problem for elements of II_1-factors, namely, the
case of quasi-nilpotent operators in II_1-factors.

Operators on infinite dimensional Hilbert space are used in mathematical models
of quantum mechanics, and they are of significance in diverse areas of
mathematics. We will work on two fundamental problems in operator theory:
Connes' embedding problem and the hyperinvariant subspace problem. These concern
different aspects of the structure of operators on infinite dimensional Hilbert
spaces. We will focus on operators whose algebras possess traces. The first
problem is about how well such operators can be approximated (in their mixed
moments with respect to the trace) by operators on finite dimensional spaces. We
will attack this problem by examining eigenvalues of sums of operators. The
second problem is about the possibility of decomposing operators on infinite
dimensional space by restricting them to invariant subspaces. In some recent
progress, Haagerup and Schultz have proved the existence of such subspaces for a
large class of operators, and we will focus on some specific operators for which
this question is unresolved.