* 0901163
* Moduli of abelian varieties
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ching-Li Chai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2013
* USD 256,274.00

This research project on the moduli of abelian varieties contains three
components: the Hecke orbit problem in a positive characteristic p, CM lifting
of abelian varieties over finite fields and Hecke symmetry in the p-adic
topology. Here p denotes a prime number. The PI's previous sponsored research
has established the Hecke orbit conjecture for the Siegel modular varieties.
Several methods developed for the Hecke orbit problem have proved useful for
other question. Research on the Hecke symmetry, both in characteristic p and in
mixed characteristics (0,p), will likely lead to new tools and perhaps new
insight on the geometry of modular varieties. The effect of Hecke symmetry in
the p-adic topology has not been systematically studied before. Progress on the
expected non-density statement for the union of all Hecke translates of a lower-
dimensional subvariety will provide an affirmative answer to a question posed by
N. Katz on the existence of abelian varieties of dimension 3 or higher over the
field of all algebraic numbers which are not isogenous to any Jacobian variety.
A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a CM lifting up to
isogeny over a normal domain of characteristic 0 is known from prior sponsored
research. The focus in this part of the project is the existence of a CM lifting
up to isogeny over a not-necessarily normal local domain of characteristics
(0,p).

A projective algebraic variety is basically a subset of the projective space
defined by a system of homogeneous polynomial equations, with the surrounding
projective space stripped off and only the abstract mathematical structure left.
An abelian variety is a very special kind of projective algebraic variety such
that one can perform addition and substraction on it and the standard rules of
arithmetic are satisfied. A moduli space considered above is an algebraic
variety whose points parametrizes abelian varieties with a fixed dimension and
shape of symmetry. Such a moduli space does not have many symmetries of the
usual kind, those which to every point of the moduli space associate another
point of the moduli space. Instead there are many symmetries of another sort on
these moduli spaces, known as Hecke correspondences, which to every point of the
moduli space associates several points of the moduli space. A basic question
about Hecke symmetry is the following. Start with either one point or more
generally a subvariety of a moduli space, then spread it around using all Hecke
correspondences. Does the resulting subset almost fill the whole moduli space,
so that every point of the moduli space has many points of the spread-out subset
nearby and as close to it as one wants? This question is of interest mainly in
one of two situations: the polynomial equations are considered over a ring such
that either a prime number p times 1 is equal to 0, or over a ring which
contains the standard integers but elements divisible by a high power of p is
close to 0. The CM lifting question involves both kinds of rings above. Abelian
varieties are extensively used in modern number theory, and properties of the
moduli spaces over either kind of rings above are often of key importance for
application in number theory. The PI's prior sponsored research has made Hecke
symmetry a useful tool for number theory and algebraic geometry, producing short
new proofs of known theorems as well as results inaccessible by previous
methods. This project, when carried out, is likely to increase our knowledge
about geometry of the moduli spaces of abelian varieties and may generate
additional methods applicable to other areas of mathematics.



