* 0901439
* Adaptive, Reconfigurable, Self-Healing Solar Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bradley Lehman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2013
* USD 297,078.00

GOALI: Adaptive, Reconfigurable, Self-Healing Solar
Arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project proposes a fundamentally new
approach to solar photovoltaic (PV) array operation. We propose the ability for
a solar array to adaptively reconfigure its internal connections to reduce the
detrimental effects of shadows or damaged solar cells on the solar panels. A
switching matrix connects a solar adaptive bank to a fixed part of a solar PV
array, according to a model based control algorithm that increases the power
output of the solar PV array. Control algorithms are implemented in real-time.
Neural networks are used to learn shadow patterns, such as trees on rooftop
installations, to help adjust the solar cell reconfigurations. An experimental
reconfiguration PV system with resistive load is proposed to verify the new
approach to reconfigurations. Finally, a fundamentally new solar array structure
is proposed that is able to merge power electronic converters within solar
arrays, creating new classifications of renewable energy power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes several transformative concepts in scientific multi-
disciplinary research advancements, all of which represent fundamentally new
research approaches in renewable energy:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The notion of
real-time reconfigurable, self-healing adaptive solar arrays will be introduced
and developed and shown to improve solar PV array power output for several
important applications. Current state-of-the-art utilizes fixed connection solar
arrays only.&lt;br/&gt;2) New neural network learning models will be proposed to
model shading factors and to learn/classify types of shadows and solar cell
degradations. These can be used either for reconfiguration or for alarms to be
sent to the user of the solar PV array.&lt;br/&gt;3) New synergisms are proposed
that are able to merge features of switching power supplies with solar arrays to
create fundamentally new classifications of renewable energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will benefit society by developing methods to extract more power production out
of an inexhaustible, environmentally safe renewable energy. The solar array
reconfiguration schemes will aid to mitigate hot-spot effects within the solar
array, which are known to reduce life-expectancy of the arrays. Further, since
reconfiguration of solar arrays allows for improved power extraction of solar
arrays when they are shaded, it is possible to consider installations of solar
PV systems in locations that are usually ignored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure
high impact of the research results, formal technology transfer partnerships
have been formed with two industrial companies. Specifically, joint
university/industry lab experiments (at industry), solar array customer data
from industry, and joint graduate student advising help ensure that the problems
being studied are relevant and important. These relationships also permit the
simulation, modeling and design recommendations from this proposal to be broadly
disseminated to industrial solar energy applications. The results of the project
will further be disseminated as journal publications, conference presentations,
and possible patents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to involve students
from under-represented groups and will build solar energy demonstrations for
existing K-12 existing programs at Northeastern University. Specifically, the PI
will perform solar energy demonstrations in Northeastern University Engineering
Open Houses and at a local Middle School Science Night in the Boston area. A new
multi-disciplinary renewable energy course will also be designed, to be taken as
an elective by engineering undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;