* 0901370
* Constructive Algebraic Quantum Field Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Stephen Summers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 47,126.00

The proposer plans to develop operator algebraic and functional-analytic
techniques in order to construct models of relativistic quantum field theory
both on classical and on noncommutative four-dimensional Minkowski space. The
primary focus of the next two years of work will be to construct such models by
deforming a given model in a manner recently introduced by D. Buchholz and the
proposer. Among other things, this will necessitate the further development of
functional-analytic techniques to define multiple operator integrals yielding
suitable deformations of quantum field operators or of associated bounded
observables, to prove the essential self-adjointness of such integrals, and to
prove suitable commutativity properties of the self-adjoint extensions. This
would lead to associated von Neumann algebras of observables, whose modular
structure would be studied. In addition, will develop further techniques to
establish that certain intersections of such von Neumann algebras are
sufficiently large (or not), which would allow us to determine the availability
of sufficiently many local observables in the constructed models. Such progress
is likely to be useful in other applications of functional analysis besides the
one discussed here. Relativistic quantum field theory is the most successful
theory of elementary particle physics, which itself seeks to describe the
fundamental constituents of matter and their laws of interaction, but one of the
most serious gaps in our understanding of QFT has been the absence of
mathematically rigorously constructed models of nontrivial quantum fields on the
standard model of the four-dimensional Minkowski space. The proposed work will
provide such models, as well as further mathematical techniques for their
analysis and control. Moreover, these methods can also be transferred to quantum
field theories on curved spacetimes with a sufficiently large isometry group,
such as de Sitter space and anti-de Sitter space. Nontrivial quantum field
models on such space--times can then also be constructed. In addition, due to
the special nature of the deformation to be studied in this proposal, the
proposed work will also result in further rigorous quantum field models on
noncommutative Minkowski space, which is expected to be of relevance to the
quantization of gravity.