* 0902169
* Collaborative: How the Timing of Summer Precipitation Affects the Responses of Boreal Forest to Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Daniel Mann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 797,130.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
increasing evidence that ecological processes at high latitude are just as
sensitive to the timing of events as to their magnitudes. In the boreal forest,
moisture availability in summer affects both tree growth and the fire regime.
Summers are brief and seasonal transitions rapid, so even slight shifts in the
timing of precipitation patterns can have large impacts. One of the most
striking, seasonal phenomena in the Alaskan boreal forest is the onset of
frequent frontal storms in late summer. This event usually comes in mid-July but
is delayed into August or even September in some years. Summers when the rains
are delayed have a greater chance of being mega-fires seasons when &gt;1.6
million ha burn. This project will test the hypothesis that shifts in the
seasonality of warm-season precipitation could be a key driver of the boreal
forest?s responses to future climate changes. The effect of late-summer
precipitation on tree growth and fire in Alaska will be quantified in two ways:
First, by analyzing interactions between climate, fire, and tree growth
(specifically ring-width, ring density, and wood-isotope composition); second,
by analyzing fire-climate relationships using a new statistical approach.
Together, these results will improve parameterization of the forest model
ALFRESCO, which will then be used to test additional hypotheses about the
interconnections among future climates, tree growth, fire, and their collective
feedbacks to the global climate system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shifting
seasonality of water availability during the warm season may be of key
importance in determining how the global boreal forest responds to future
climate changes. The multidisciplinary research proposed here represents a new
approach to answering a novel question. No one has examined the impacts of
seasonal shifts in the timing and magnitude of warm-season precipitation on
vegetation distribution, tree growth, and fire regime in the boreal forest
before. This will be the first time that tree rings from deciduous species in
the boreal forest are used to describe past variations in summer rainfall
through measurements of ring-width, late-wood density, and wood isotopes. The
generalized boosting technique we propose using has not been previously applied
to climate-fire records. The results of these tree-ring and statistical analyses
will improve parameterization of the ALFRESCO forest model and allow us to
explore the interactions among components of this part of the Arctic system with
greater realism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;