* 0902885
* Parameterized Architecture-Level Thermal Modeling and Characterization for Multi-Core Microprocessor Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Yingbo Hua, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 259,544.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead Proposal#:
0902885&lt;br/&gt;Title: Parameterized Architecture-Level Thermal Modeling and
Characterization for Multi-Core Microprocessor Design&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sheldon
X.-D. Tan, Dept of Electrical Engineering, UC Riverside&lt;br/&gt;co-PI: Yingbo
Hua, Dept of Electrical Engineering, UC Riverside &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inst:
Department of Electrical Engineering&lt;br/&gt;CoPI Inst:University of
California at
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Multicore (also
known as so-called chip-multiprocessors (CMP)) architectures are the trend for
current and future microprocessor designs. They provide better performance via
thread-level parallelism, better power/thermal scaling, and easy design by
design reuse. However, power/thermal considerations are still the first-class
constraints for multicore microprocessor designs. Thermal-aware design space
explorations at core and architecture level for multicore microprocessors become
critical design issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to explore new
techniques of building compact parameterized, transient thermal models for
efficient thermal-aware design space explorations in multicore microprocessor
designs. &lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three thrusts: (1) Architecture-
level behavioral transient thermal modeling and characterization; (2)
Parameterized thermal modeling considering variable design parameters; (3)
Thermal model optimization and reduction. The proposed method is a top-down,
black-box approach, meaning that it does not require any knowledge of the
internal structures of the systems; This approach makes the proposed method very
general and flexible, which contrasts the existing approaches. The accuracy of
the models is ensured by the measured or precisely computed thermal-power
information from hardware. The parameterized models can accommodate different
design variable parameters for efficient design space
explorations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will add
significantly to the core knowledge of thermal modeling multicore design. It
will provide a new alternative way to complement existing architecture-level
thermal models for the architecture community. Since the PIs will work closely
with SRC, the proposed project will have immediate impacts on thermal-aware
multicore microprocessor design in industry. This grant will enable the PI to
hire more women and underrepresented minority students to contribute to the
greater diversity in America's science and technology workforce.