* 0902051
* Collaborative Research:Shifting Seasonality of Northern Forest Response to Arctic Environmental Change
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 05/31/2013
* USD 381,154.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an investigation of the response of
northern boreal forests to changes in arctic seasonality using an existing
circumpolar network of centennial to millennial-length tree-ring width and
density records that will be integrated with targeted field observations,
satellite data and modeling efforts. The sensitivity of northern forests to
arctic warming and related seasonality effects is likely to be highly complex,
involving shifts in the timing and dynamics of multiple factors that can
significantly impact tree growth. Researchers will assess network-based as well
as limited new tree-ring data from sites along a latitudinal gradient in
northeastern Alaska, one of the regions of greatest warming on the globe today.
Sites will be sampled along a south to north gradient spanning from areas of: 1.
interior boreal forest to 2. continuous treeline forest and 3. just north of
main treeline. These data will be used to identify the nature of forest response
to seasonal environmental changes across a temperature range that defines the
northern limit of growth for white spruce, a dominant arctic treeline species.
They will also determine if recent climate and forest growth changes appear
unique (possibly anthropogenic) relative to past natural variability.
Correlation, Kalman filter, spectral analyses and other techniques will allow
identification of any thresholds, time-dependent changes or nonlinear shifts in
growth linked to recent warming and changing climate seasonality. Ultra-high
resolution, inter- and intraseasonal tree growth data (ring width, maximum
latewood density as well as minimum density, early and latewood width,
quantifiable wood anatomical measurements) will be compared to monthly
temperature, precipitation, drought, soil moisture and radiation observations,
and, where available, weekly and daily records suitable for computing the length
of growing season and other seasonal parameters. A cambial growth model will
permit identification of those parameters that are having the greatest impact on
northern forest growth. Intraseasonal growth information will be applied to
parameterize the model and hindcast controls on growth variations into the past
using the tree-ring data. They will also compare the ?in situ? tree-ring data
with high-resolution satellite-derived vegetation observations that have
indicated growing season ?greening? and ?browning? in different regions of the
circumpolar arctic forest biome. This project will thus provide a means to test
the ability to coordinate remote sensing and ground-based ?in situ? observations
of boreal forest growth activity in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;