* 0902205
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Mobility and Attained Social Position
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Yin Yue, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

PI: Melvin L. Kohn Co-PI: Yin Yue

Institution: Johns Hopkins University

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Mobility and Attained Social
Position

Award Number:

Abstract: Focusing on rural-to-urban migrants, who were missed in most
sociological studies conducted in China, this research project will assess
theoretical interpretations of two fundamental social processes: social
mobility, and the relationship of position in the social structure to
personality. The following questions will be explored: Could the general social
mobility models developed in highly industrialized countries be applied directly
to the rural-to-urban migrants? What aspects should we reconsider and how should
we revise current models to understand the mobility process of rural-to-urban
migrants more comprehensively? Is it people?s current positions in the social
structure under current institutional setting or their initial positions in the
social structure that affects their personalities, or both? Will rural origin
have permanent effects on people?s later personality? What are the relationships
of social structure and personality for rural migrants to cities? Do such
relationships differ from those of people who have urban origins? To answer
these questions, comparative analyses will be conducted between the migrants and
other appropriate populations, using data of this study, data of China General
Social Survey, and the findings and data of an NSF-supported survey conducted by
Kohn and his collaborators in 2006. The data collection will be conducted in
Beijing, China. A combination of map-sampling and normal random sampling
procedures will be used to find these rural-to-urban migrants, and both
quantitative survey and intensive case study will be conducted. Results from
this research will be disseminated through conference papers and academic
publications. This proposed research will stimulate scholars? interest in doing
quantitative studies of rural-to-urban migrants who are generally
underrepresented in most surveys in China. It will offer scholars and
policymakers a chance to rethink the limitations of findings and conclusions
from studies that failed to include this segment of urban population. The
findings of this research may help scholars and policymakers better understand
the migrant population in urban China, and help them in making policies that can
overcome discrimination against rural migrants, which is recognized as one of
the most crucial social problems in transitional China.