* 0902027
* Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Gordon Emslie, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 12/31/2014
* USD 2,631,245.00

As lead institution of the Oklahoma State Alliance, Oklahoma State University
(OSU) requests a five-year continuation of its Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (OK-LSAMP) program for a fourth and final period
(FY09 ? 13). Alliance members are OSU, the University of Oklahoma (OU), the
University of Tulsa (TU); Langston University (LU), an Historically Black
College or University (HBCU); and seven regional universities: East Central
University (ECU), Northeastern State University (NSU), University of Central
Oklahoma (UCO), Northwestern Oklahoma State University (NWOSU), Southeastern
Oklahoma State University (SOSU), Southwestern Oklahoma State University
(SWOSU), Cameron University (CU). Most programs are coordinated through
multicultural/diversity offices on each campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal accords with NSF?s goal to increase the number of students completing
degree programs in STEM fields from historically underrepresented groups. In
Oklahoma, this population consists primarily of African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, and Native Americans. OSU has the largest Native American enrollment
in the United States. The Principal Investigator has more than 30 years
experience leading multicultural/diversity programs. OK-LSAMP has developed a
variety of innovative academic strategies over 14 years, resulting in a dramatic
increase in minority STEM undergraduate enrollment and success, and transition
to graduate study. Both OSU and OU have Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) programs in
place. The Alliance has a committed mentoring cadre of counselors, faculty,
staff and alumni. The OK- LSAMP?s main goal for this phase is to recruit and
graduate at least 25% more underrepresented minority undergraduates and graduate
students compared to 2007-08 numbers.&lt;br/&gt;Program activities will be to
recruit increasing numbers of students into STEM fields using enhanced
recruitment strategies; support students academically and professionally,
relying on strong mentoring networks and links to research opportunities such as
EPSCoR and Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs); prepare students for
global success, including Study Abroad, domestic international activities, and
Fulbright Exchanges; and to strengthen an infrastructure that supports student
success and professional development. An Advisory Board of minority STEM faculty
and staff provides culturally sensitive advice to program
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will result in increased
numbers of a wide range of minority groups in the STEM workforce of the United
States. The Alliance provides an important national model for promoting the
success of Native Americans ? one of the least represented groups in STEM
careers. Results of this research will be disseminated widely to inform
understanding of how to encourage and support minority STEM education. Building
on well-established relationships with local, state, and Indian Nation
authorities, OK-LSAMP can expand its impact into diverse communities. By drawing
on Oklahoma?s half century of international outreach experience, students will
have tremendous opportunities for global engagement ? an essential asset for
career and research success. This program will exert a transformative impact by
diversifying and internationalizing the scientific work force of the United
States, particularly with respect to Native Americans and other underrepresented
groups, and by ensuring that all aspects of America?s cultural and ethnic
heritage contribute to future leadership in STEM nationwide