* 0902952
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Global Change and the Terrestrial Paleoclimate Record from Eastern North America: 600,000 years BP to Present
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yongli Gao, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 136,411.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit: This grant will support the development of calibrated,
highly-resolved, and absolute-dated stable isotopic and trace-metal time series
from multiple speleothems preserved in multiple cave systems along a N-S
transect from East Tennessee, through southern West Virginia, to northeastern
West Virginia. Modern regional climate is demonstrably sensitive to sea-surface
variability of the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, and climate variability,
in particular the occurrence of drought and paleo-drought, has been linked to
large-scale oceanic and atmospheric patterns in the instrumental record (e.g.,
AMO, PDO/NPO) and in the paleo-record (e.g., Bond-scale cyclicity, 8200-year
event). In addition, the team will investigate the geochemical response on land
and in the ocean to climatic changes at the onset of the Younger Dryas, using a
fully coupled climate model including a carbon cycle. When integrated, the work
will yield a unique data product that evaluates the timing, magnitude, and
underlying causes for climatic change in the region for at least the last six
glacial/interglacial cycles. The specific deliverable for the speleothem-based
portion of the project is a well-dated composite time series that can be used to
assess the modes and timescales of climate variability, and, in the context of
proximal marine and more distal speleothem (e.g., China, Oman) and ice-core
records, evaluate the potential driving mechanisms responsible for climate
instability and mode-shifts. Time series from individual sites along the N-S
transect will also be compared in order to assess the importance of shifts in
climatic boundaries. Geochronological control (230Th ages) on 43 speleothems
from the study transect demonstrate that exceptional potential exists for
reconstructing regional climate change back through Marine Isotope Stage 15
(~600 kyr BP). The 230Th-dated time series will help define climate shifts on
timescales of human activity. Specifically, the integration of several highly-
resolved (multidecadal-scale) Holocene speleothem records from multiple sites
will 1) define the timing of, and 2) resolve the basis for abrupt climate change
(e.g., 8200-year event) during the past ten millennia. Furthermore, similar
studies of late Pleistocene speleothems will yield a more comprehensive
understanding of how specific climate modes evolved in the past when climate was
presumably similar to (e.g., MIS-5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15) or different from (MIS-2,
6, 8, 10, 12, 14) today. Interpretation of the late Quaternary climate history
will be strengthened using results from a proposed isotopic/geochemical
calibration study of cave drip waters (del-18O, del-13C, trace-metal), cave
environment (temperature, humidity, pCO2), and the atmospheric/hydrological
conditions above the cave. Results from the modeling-part of the project will
contribute to the understanding of geochemical feedbacks and possible amplifying
or stabilizing factors at times of rapid climate change, such as the Younger
Dryas. The proposed study addresses key initiatives of P2C2, including 1)
assessment of sensitivity and response to climate mode changes in a region with
demonstrable linkages to large-scale coupled climate systems, 2) assessment of
responses to abrupt and extreme climate events, and 3) data-model synthesis.
Broader Impacts: The proposed research will define the history of climate change
during the last ~600,000 years for the mid-Atlantic/Appalachian region of
eastern North America, a highly-populated region of national importance. The
project is designed to provide meaningful lab- and field-based
mentorship/traineeship opportunities that couple undergraduates with graduate-
level and faculty mentors across three universities. The PIs represent three
diverse research groups committed to recruitment of underrepresented groups,
including females and minorities.