* 0902199
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Dynamics of State Power and Militant Nationalism
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Jin Woong Kang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The study of socialist state power is one of the interdisciplinary studies which
humanities and social sciences have explored. I believe that my project will be
of significant general interest to political sociologists and social scientists
who specialize in state power. Sociologically, my research on North Korean
militant nationalism through in-depth interviews and ethnographic observation
with North Korean refugees can: (1) enable us to delve into North Korean
society, which has been regarded as unapproachable, through the qualitative
research method; (2) help us understand how the socialist state exerted its
power and how the citizens reacted to state power theoretically in terms of the
relationship between the state and civil society; (3) help us understand an
alternative perspective of socialist state power that is differentiated from the
traditional approach of totalitarianism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merits of this study are its contribution to theories of state power and socio-
cultural transformation through a study of the bottom-up politics of Stalinist
state socialism. A unique contribution is to explore citizens' everyday politics
which is represented by the state's militant nationalism. This study is
important for placing individuals' lives at the center of the analysis, and
highlighting the way in which their everyday practices are shaped and reshaped
within nationalist politics. The larger theoretical contribution of this
research is to suggest a new understanding of state power in terms of the
relationship between the state and society. This will allow us to consider a new
mechanism of state power in Stalinist state socialism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study also has several broader impacts. The findings
of this study will be disseminated not only in the academic community but also
among individuals and social organizations in and beyond the U.S. This study
will be of significant interest to individuals and social organizations which
engage in transitional socialist states and their social changes. These findings
may suggest a better understanding of the relationship between the state and
civil society in transitional socialist societies and provide insights for their
peaceful social changes. Therefore, this study may contribute to providing
insights for peaceful international politics.