* 0902805
* High-resolution, quantitative records of temperature and effective precipitation for the past 25kyr from Lake Qinghai
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 352,667.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau occupies
the highest elevation on the continental Earth and is renowned for its
extraordinary monsoonal climate. It is among the most sensitive regions to
global climate change. High resolution, quantitative and long term paleoclimate
records from this region are extremely valuable to our understanding of the
mechanisms controlling monsoon variability, both regionally and globally.
Existing records in the region are hampered by their short duration (e.g., tree
rings), multiple influencing factors (e.g., high-altitude ice cores, pollen,
lake carbonate del-18O), and qualitative nature (e.g., sediment lithofacies).
This grant will reconstruct decadal to centennial scale records of temperature
and effective precipitation for the past 25,000 years from the recently
recovered sediment cores of Lake Qinghai by the International Continental
Drilling Program. Lake Qinghai sediments are rare in that they contain alkenone
biomarkers, providing an opportunity for quantitative continental paleoclimate
research. This study uses alkenone distributions and compound-specific H isotope
ratios of terrestrial and aquatic biomarkers in Lake Qinghai sediments to
independently reconstruct temperature, salinity and hydrological balance. It
also isolates individual lignin phenols in lake sediments for radiocarbon dating
to obtain a robust chronology. The group hypothesize that the amplitude, timing,
abruptness and periodicity of temperature and precipitation changes around Lake
Qinghai for the past 25,000 yrs display exceptional sensitivity to key climate
forcing factors such as insolation, solar activities and greenhouse gases, and
show clear linkages to North Atlantic and tropical processes. Close
collaboration with modelers will permit transformative synthesis of this
comprehensive paleoclimate data set with modeling outcomes to unravel the
underlying driving mechanisms of climatic variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI was designated to be in charge of organic geochemical studies for Lake
Qinghai by an international group of reserchers. His work represents the United
States' participation in the Qinghai drilling project, which obtained high
quality paleoclimate records from a strategically important continental region.
This study promotes multidisciplinary approaches (organic geochemistry, isotope
geochemistry and paleoclimatology) to studying prominent climatic problems, and
allows cross-discipline training of students. The PI has demonstrated his
commitment to provide cutting edge research experience to undergraduate students
by supervising on several under-graduate senior theses per year. This project
facilitates participation of graduate students in teaching science in Providence
public schools and involvement of Providence school teachers in research through
the ongoing NSF GK-12 Education Program at Brown University.