* 0902354
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Role of Religion and Ethnicity in Business Networking
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Isaac Martin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0902354&lt;br/&gt;Isaac Martin&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen
Marker&lt;br/&gt;University of California San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What
role does religion play in the ethnic economy? According to research on ethnic
economies, ethnic solidarity can facilitate entrepreneurship by helping business
owners cut costs and expedite the search for goods, services, and employees.
Many researchers of ethnic economies have overlooked the role of religion in
business and assumed that ethnic solidarity is the most significant determinant
of beneficial network ties. Meanwhile it is likely that religion also plays an
influential role in the ethnic economy. Religious texts include discussions of
business ethics, and religious institutions facilitate solidarity through
worship services, group meetings, and social events. Research also suggests that
some religious tenets correlate with entrepreneurial success. With this study,
the co-investigator will place religion at center stage in the research of
ethnic economies by answering the following questions: How does religion
influence ethnic entrepreneurship? How does religious identity shape network
formation in the immigrant economy? When immigrants have crosscutting religious
and ethnic ties, what types of networks are they drawn to? For example, do Iraqi
Muslims tend to develop networks with other Muslims regardless of country of
origin, or with other Iraqis regardless of religion? The investigator will
conduct 120 interviews with Iraqi, Palestinian, and Lebanese entrepreneurs of
Muslim and Christian faiths, who own businesses in Metropolitan Detroit. Semi-
structured interviews will be used to collect data on each business owner?s
network members and on the role of religion and ethnicity in the life of the
business owner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to reform
theories of ethnic economies by demonstrating the important role of religion in
network formation. Religious diversity and the saliency of religion are
increasing, which makes these findings on the influence of religion in business
valuable to future studies both in the U.S. and abroad. Finally, this research
is significant not only because it focuses on Arab Americans, an
underrepresented group, but also because it highlights the rich ethnic and
religious diversity within a group that is commonly presented as monolithic.