* 0902399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intra-Neighborhood Dynamics and Neighborhood Change in Philadelphia (1880-2000)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Mary Pattillo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 8,765.00

SES-0902399&lt;br/&gt;Mary Pattillo&lt;br/&gt;Marcus
Hunter&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
project, a historical ethnographic revisit of W.E.B. DuBois' The Philadelphia
Negro (1899 [1996]), examines the socio-political and cultural factors that gave
rise to racial and socioeconomic change in Philadelphia generally and
specifically the 7th Ward, DuBois' primary field site. Using the 7th Ward -- one
of the oldest black urban neighborhoods and first neighborhood of any kind to be
studied extensively by an American sociologist -- as a case study, this study
focuses on answering the following question: How did the heterogeneity and
residential decisions of blacks in Philadelphia affect neighborhood change and
patterns of within-city migration from 1880 to 2000? While many scholars have
focused on national economic trends and policy decisions, this research focuses
on what black people were saying to each other and the decisions amongst
themselves as central to an understanding of urban neighborhood change.
Furthermore, while other studies consider one historical period of urban change
in a city, this research charts the effects of the black migration north and
internal divisions within Philadelphia?s black community and patterns of within-
city migration on neighborhood change over many historical periods. To uncover
the effects of the heterogeneity and residential practices of blacks on
neighborhood change, this research studies the socio-political history of the
7th Ward between two empirically driven time points derived from census data and
urban sociological literature: 1880, which marks the prominence of the 7th Ward
as a black residential neighborhood and begins a period of increased in-
migration rise of southern black migrants to Philadelphia and immediately
precedes DuBois' study, and 2000, which marks the disappearance of black
residents and follows the publication of the centennial edition of The
Philadelphia Negro (1996). The project uses archival data (e.g. census data,
local newspapers, institutional records, city and neighborhood maps, church
records and oral histories) and secondary data located in Philadelphia, Pa and
Washington D.C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research sheds light
on the lasting and latent effects of black migration both into and within
Philadelphia and cities of the like. While latent and lasting effects of social
phenomena, particularly those involving mass movement, are often opaque and
difficult to track, this research helps to clarify these effects and their
implications for the current and future spatial mobility of urban blacks.
Highlighting the impact of black migratory patterns and intra-racial divisions
this research promises to yield information pertinent to contemporary spatial
patterns and urban changes. This study will also be instructive for
understanding the potential effects of contemporary migration south by urban
blacks.