* 0902925
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Defining Racial Identity and Addressing Hunger Through Black Religious Food Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Hilda Kurtz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,835.00

The spaces and institutions where blacks discuss matters of concern to the black
community include black religious spaces, barbershops, and beauty salons among
others. Scholars who study these spaces refer to them collectively as "the black
counterpublic" -- a space where everyday talk occurs and black identity is
defined, negotiated, and often contested. This doctoral dissertation research
project will focus on black religious spaces and the racial identity formation,
linkages, and contestations that occur within the spaces of two food programs in
two seemingly distinct black religious organizations. The Nation of Islam owns
Muhammad Farms in the rural South Georgia town of Bronwood; its stated purpose
is to feed all black people in the United States. Wheat Street Baptist Church
operates a traditional emergency food program that primarily serves homeless
people and low-income residents in the Atlanta neighborhood of Auburn Avenue.
This project will expand scholarship on race and racialized public spaces by (1)
investigating the racial identity formation that occurs in black religious
spaces; (2) recognizing that religious spaces among blacks are not just
comprised of black Protestants but also include black nationalist religions; (3)
exploring how different black religious groups use community food outreach
programs to define black identity in identifiable spaces; and (4) exploring how
both differences and commonalities contribute to defining a racialized group of
people. The doctoral candidate will use a multi-method comparative investigation
of the two groups' food programs, conducting interviews, participant
observation, and archival research to examine how and in what context the
programs have developed as well as the manner in which volunteers view the day-
to-day actions and overall goals of their work with food. First-hand experiences
alongside other volunteers will help generate understanding of the spatial
configuration of the two food programs, and the implications for the groups'
development of racial identity and community coherence. The data collected will
be coded and textually analyzed using critical discourse analysis.

The results of this study will add to basic understanding about racial identity,
how questions of race and religion guide the work of food programs, and how
meanings of race and identity evolve and compete across different geographic
spaces. Scholars and leaders in the black community often have described the
social activism that exists in many black churches as an "unknown phenomenon"
that goes largely unnoticed by white society. The project is expected to shed
new light on but also complicate notions of race, place, and community.
Recognizing and investigating the important discussions and everyday talk that
occurs among blacks in these religious spaces is expected to reveal them to be
important sites for future geographic inquiry. In addition to providing new
scholarly insights about race, religion and food, the project should broadly
impact how black religious organizations are discussed in popular culture and
the media, particularly the misconceptions and simplification often assigned to
actions occurring in these spaces. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

