* 0902749
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Reconstructing North Pacific Climate Variability Using a Multi-Millennial Tree-Ring Resource for Glacier Bay, Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 99,227.00

Funding is provided to develop a multi-millennial tree-ring record of past
climate and glacier activity over the last 10,000 years for the North Pacific
Rim and northern North America by using existing tree-ring samples and new
samples from Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve. The scientific goal is to
develop a greater understanding of North Pacific climate variability to aid
efforts in predicting western North American climate on annual to multi-decadal
time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will pursue a series of
hypotheses to guide their research, namely: 1) the recent period of
anthropogenic change has been unique relative to the Holocene North Pacific
thermal history of the past several millennia; 2) multi-decadal and longer-term
North Pacific climate variability does not reflect a true dynamical mode, but
instead results from the interaction of different modes of variation (e.g. ~20
and 50 year cycles) that can combine to produce such shifts; 3) both internal
(North Pacific) and external (e.g. solar) forcings have significantly impacted
North Pacific climate over the past several millennia; 4) there is a millennial-
scale rhythm to North Pacific ocean-atmosphere climate variability; and 5)
robust linkages exist between North Pacific and tropical climate with regards to
regime shifts and other features, reflecting coupled atmosphere-ocean modes of
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve supporting
undergraduate and graduate students as well as providing new data on a region
considered to be a bellwether of changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;