* 0902132
* LSAMP
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Robert Prezant, Rutgers University Newark
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 06/30/2015
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Garden State-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (GS-LSAMP)
will bring together all of the major colleges and universities from the highly
urbanized northeastern part of New Jersey to double the number of graduates from
underrepresented minority groups in STEM disciplines in 5 years. The Alliance
members will use the ?best practices? of other LSAMP?s as well as innovative
techniques to best address the academic and social needs of the students and to
change the attitude of these students towards STEM careers. Three well-
documented causes of attrition in STEM fields at the university level will be
targeted: academic support, financial need and social support. The GS-LSAMP will
include Rutgers University-Newark (#1 nationally in diversity) in consortium
with Rutgers-New Brunswick, Montclair State University, Kean University, William
Paterson University, New Jersey City University (HSI), Fairleigh Dickinson
University, Bloomfield College, and Essex County College using an innovative
?hub and spoke? model with northern, central, and southern clusters. Each
cluster will develop independent and versatile sub-communities with critical
masses of students and faculty within the larger LSAMP community. The GS-LSAMP
will create a robust Collaborative Learning Community with outreach beyond the
Alliance to impact local community colleges and urban school districts through
the sharing of ?best practices? in teaching and learning in STEM fields. The GS-
LSAMP will also impact local high school and community college communities
through one-on-one interactions among GS-LSAMP Scholars and the students in
those institutions. A ?cybercommunity? will be created using innovative and
locally tested software and techniques. With the dense population and abundance
of opportunities to interact with the public, service learning will be an
important option for GS-LSAMP Scholars, as will internships/externships among
the many industries with STEM needs in the area. There will also be both real
and virtual international components.

Intellectual Merit: The ability of the project to create, through social and
academic networking, a collegial inter- and intra-Alliance environment for the
GS-LSAMP Scholars, professors and graduate students. Incoming students will
acculturate to college life in a Summer Bridge experience that includes
intensive academic workshops augmented by one-to-one tutoring, Academic Skills
Seminars, Career Development workshops, and personal development advising.
Academic support, including tutoring, advising and mentoring will continue
throughout the academic year. The GS-LSAMP Scholars will receive support and
encouragement to conduct research with STEM faculty and graduate students. They
will share their research with their GS-LSAMP peers in periodic meetings and
seminars, which will also provide face-to-face opportunities to build
friendships and support networks, that supplement the cyber social networking
community.

Broader Impact: The GARDEN-LSAMP has the potential to form a network of academic
and social support for young scholars interested in pursuing STEM degrees and
ultimately careers in STEM fields. The social networking software developed will
be made available to all LSAMP alliances. This network will enhance the
awareness of the opportunities for students who major in STEM disciplines and
will lead to an overall increase in the numbers of underrepresented New Jersey
students aspiring to STEM-related fields. The schools that are members of the
GS-LSAMP alliance will gain a more diverse group of students with high
graduation rates and successful post-graduate careers.