* 0902500
* P2C2: Dynamical Climate Reconstruction Using Paleoclimate Data and Ensemble State Estimation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2014
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2014
* USD 370,030.00

Funding is provided to develop quantitative methods that could aid in taking
isolated point measurements that are indirectly related to environmental
variables and maximizing their ability to characterize past climatic conditions.
This research strategy is analogous to the data assimilation approach of weather
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will use an
extension of the ensemble Kalman filter for assimilating the long-time averages
represented by proxy data. The Simplied Parametrization primitivE-Equation
DYnamics (SPEEDY) model will be used in this algorithm to assimilate ice-core
accumulation for the past 1,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial
influence of data for individual ice core records will be quantified, as will
the sensitivity of the recovered climate states to the averaging period of the
observations. The resulting estimates of the reconstructed climate states will
then be analyzed for decadal climate variability, including the leading modes of
variability as a function of time. Potential sites for future observations will
also be identified using an ensemble approach to paleoclimate network
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve strong bringing a
different quantitative perspective to the analysis of paleoclimate data and
providing support for graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;