* 0902230
* Formal Characterization and Analysis of Computation in Networks of Spiking Neurons
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Arunava Banerjee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 03/31/2011
* USD 199,894.00

The vast majority of neurons in the brain communicate with one another using
discrete impulses known as spikes. Modeling studies have demonstrated that
systems constituted of spiking neurons can have dynamics that are starkly
different from those of systems whose constituent units interact via
continuously varying quantities. This project is aimed at deciphering the core
dynamical and computational properties of networks of spiking neurons, a formal
understanding of which is necessary to comprehend how the brain, or any part
thereof, works.

A prerequisite for such a program is the choice of a mathematical model for
networks of spiking neurons that is at once biologically realistic and is
amenable to formal analysis. In prior work, Arunava Banerjee has formulated one
such model that is founded on the observation that a neuron is in essence a
device that transforms multiple input sequences of spikes arriving at its
various afferent synapses into an output sequence of spikes on its axon.
Building on this model, this project aims to answer a broad set of interrelated
questions concerning the nature of computation in feed-forward and recurrent
networks of spiking neurons.

For continuous input-output systems, the Volterra/Wiener approach to system
identification has led to a highly successful account of the levels of
complexity inherent to transforming functionals. This project will formulate and
analyze a corresponding framework that is applicable to feed-forward networks
whose inputs and outputs are both spike trains. Next, the relationship between
the input-output transformation of a feed-forward network and its information
transmission capacity, as well as the nature of the recoding of information,
will be analyzed. Networks driven by artificially generated realistic input
spike trains shall be used to address this issue. The educational aspect of the
project will focus on achieving two simultaneous objectives: attracting
undergraduate women with an interest in the Biological Sciences to the field of
Computer Science, and introducing senior undergraduate and beginning graduate
Computer Science students to the basic neurobiology of the brain.