* 0902097
* SGER:  Public Information and Peer-to-Peer Communication as Complementary Processes?:  Understanding How Public Information Officers Use Social Media During the Democratic National
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Jeannette Sutton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2009
* USD 37,973.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project investigates the
emergent processes being developed by public information officers as they make
use of disaster-relevant information available through new social media. Peer-
to-peer communication, through mobile and online technologies and the activities
of citizen journalists and other networked members of the public, have made
possible the ability of government officials to tap into public communications
in near-real time. Processes to facilitate information access, retrieval,
interpretation, verification, and validation are being defined as decision
makers and public servants recognize the potential value of new social media in
disaster response. To study these emergent processes, we will conduct field
observations within a Joint Information Center during the Democratic National
Convention, collect relevant documents such as Media Monitoring and Analysis
reports, and conduct face to face interviews with key informants who supported
DNC media monitoring activities or were actively engaged in policy and agenda
setting for new social media during the DNC response. Analysis following from
observations, interviews, and secondary document analysis will provide
theoretical developments in the areas of public policy, information and
communication technology-enabled warnings and risk communication for extreme
events, and contribute to knowledge on the nature of emergent practices around
the uses of new social media for crises and disaster.

Due to the groundswell of technology development, the increase in public
participation in new social media, and the resulting questions about effective,
and appropriate, ways to access and utilize information flowing peer-to-peer in
disaster, this research will have direct benefits to emergency managers and
public officials tasked with ensuring safety and security to the public at risk.
Investigation into these emergent processes will have direct effects on the
development of plans and policy for future disaster events among all levels of
government.