* 0902484
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Migrant Health Status in Migration Stream
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Maria de Jesus Diaz-Perez, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2011
* USD 7,500.00

Mexican immigrants who are new to the United States show remarkably high levels
of health. It has been hypothesized that the good health status of migrants is
the result of a selection process through which those who are better off tend to
move. By studying a well-defined migration stream, I will determine if men who
migrate to this country are actually healthier than their counterparts who
stayed in Mexico and test two different theories that might explain why
healthier people migrate. This study draws upon quantitative and qualitative
data and will be conducted in a male-only agricultural migration stream from
rural communities in central Mexico to the state of Colorado in the US. The Co-
PI will conduct semi-structured interviews with migrants, return-migrants,
migrant recruiters and contractors to understand the context of migration
decision-making and the role that health status might have on this decision. The
quantitative data will be collected through a cross-sectional survey that
includes selected health status indicators, migrant network characteristics, and
migration decision-making factors of Mexican adult male migrants (in the US) and
their counterparts who stay in their communities of origin (in Mexico). The
results of this dissertation will add to our knowledge of the health of
immigrants when they arrive and will also expand our understanding of social
processes that could be useful to study immigrant adaption. The contributions of
this study will be disseminated to the scientific community at several national
conferences both in Mexico and the US, as well as through scientific journal
articles. This research project will promote the participation of students in
Mexico and the US in a binational research experience.