* 0902147
* Superfluid Macroscopic Quantum Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2016
* Richard Packard, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 04/30/2016
* USD 850,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Superfluiid helium is an exotic state of matter
wherein normal sized samples of liquid exhibit some of the strange features of
the quantum world of atoms. This individual investigator award supports a
project focusing on the so-called Josephson effects. Superfluid helium is pushed
through an array of thousands of nanometer-sized holes drilled in a thin
partition. Unlike ordinary fluids that would simply flow through the holes at a
rate proportional to the pushing force, the superfluid moves to and fro within
the holes with, on the average, no liquid passing through the holes. The harder
one pushes, the faster the vibrations occur. If the apertures are smaller than a
characteristic length, basic theory explains why this oscillatory flow should
occur in a single aperture. However, it remains a mystery why this oscillatory
flow occurs in all the apertures in an array synchronously. It is also a mystery
why the vibrations occur even for hole sizes bigger than those predicted by
theory. The central goal of the project is to solve these mysteries and further,
to exploit the phenomena to create a new class of ultra-sensitive instruments
that will be useful in physics, earth studies and navigation. Not only will this
project train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in ideas at the
forefront of science, but the skills in instrumentation and nano-fabrication
that they will learn to carry out the experiments are in great demand in
industry and academia.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Superfluid Helium constrained within an array of
thousands of nano-apertures exhibits a variety of Josephson phenomena including
a sine-like current-phase relation as well as synchronous dissipative phase
slippage, occurring at the Josephson frequency. These features have been
exploited to show macroscopic quantum interference effects induced by rotation
and heat induced flow. The central goals of this individual investigator project
are twofold: 1. to understand the origin of the synchronicity across an array
and 2. to determine how to make arrays with characteristics most suitable for
use in quantum interferometers devoted to rotation sensing and probing novel
physical interactions. Initially an empirical approach will be pursued to
determine the characteristics of arrays with various aperture sizes and
patterns. These results will be compared to theory. Ultimately sensitive
superfluid interferometers to probe exotic physical effects such as an Aharonov-
Bohm phase shift in neutral matter will be developed. Along with knowledge at
the frontiers of science, PhD students and postdoctoral researchers will learn
techniques of nanofabrication, cryogenics, electronic instrumentation and
computer control.