* 0902386
* The Anatomy of Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) Climate Change in the Southern Hemisphere Mid-Latitudes:  Paleoecological Temperature Reconstructions from Terrestrial Archives
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,03/31/2013
* Marcus Vandergoes, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 03/31/2013
* USD 339,354.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to test if leading hypotheses about drivers of
global ice ages explain climate change in the Southern Hemisphere mid-latitudes.
The research establishes the timing, magnitude, and structure of southern mid-
latitude Last Glacial Maximum climate from two sites bordering the Southern
Alps, New Zealand, by reconstructing temperature changes from continuous,
isotopically dated, paleo-chironomid and pollen re-cords.

Hypotheses about what drives ice age climate change remain clouded with
ambiguities because the timing and magnitude of maximum ice age cooling (Last
Glacial Maximum, LGM) does not appear to match between the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres. Northern solar insolation is held responsible for driving Southern
Hemisphere climate changes even though the intensity and duration of southern
insolation is out of phase with that of the north. Apparent mismatches in the
timing of LGM climate changes between the hemispheres cannot be adequately
explained by northern insolation forcing alone. High resolution records of the
precise timing and magnitude of climate change in the mid-latitudes of the
Southern Hemisphere are strategic for understanding the forces driving global
glacial cycles and identifying interhemispheric leads and lags in the climate
system. Terrestrial archives (lake sediment) from southern New Zealand are ideal
for such research because the region is sensitive to subtle changes in the
circumpolar westerlies and supports distinct vegetation and chironomid (non-
biting midge fly) ecological zones. Pollen and chironomids from this region have
known relationships to temperature and can provide continuous, datable,
quantitative estimates of terrestrial temperature change. This research has two
primary goals: 1) to develop paleotemperature reconstructions for the western
and eastern margins of the Southern Alps from two lakes located outside LGM
moraine belts using pollen and chironomid temperature inference models, and 2)
to determine the precise timing and duration of LGM climate changes for this
location using detailed AMS radiocarbon dating. The project will provide a
comprehensive paleoclimate data set that will be directly applicable to testing
hypotheses about forcing mechanisms responsible for major climate changes.

The proposed research will provide training opportunities for four undergraduate
students per semester. It will develop and enhance collaborative ties between
the University of Maine and several New Zealand institutions. Benefits to
society include documenting the temporal and spatial extent and magnitude of
climatological phenomena to better understand the LGM climate of the southern
mid-latitudes and testing the viability of several hypotheses about mechanisms
that drive ice age change.