* 0902153
* Collaborative Research: Shifting seasonality of Arctic river hydrology alters key biotic linkages among aquatic systems
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Linda Deegan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,317,687.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine how the shifting
seasonality of arctic river hydrology alters key biotic linkages within and
among lake and stream components of watersheds and may alter the function of the
arctic system. Arctic grayling (Thymallus arcticus) is a quintessential,
circumpolar arctic species that provides a model system for understanding the
impacts of changing seasonality on arctic ecosystem function because an
interconnected and varied landscape (large tundra rivers, small streams and
lakes) is required to maintain their population viability. Changes to
environmental conditions that disrupt their migration will affect the system-
level function of aquatic ecosystems. Grayling serve as food for other biota,
including lake trout, birds and humans, and as top-down controls in stream
ecosystems suggesting that changes to their populations will have effects that
reverberate throughout the coupled river-lake system. The scale and pace of the
changes now impacting tundra lakes and streams imparts an urgency to understand
how they are linked and how they function as a system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will address 4 questions: 1) How are seasonality, rate and distance of
grayling migration affected by climate change? 2) Are the seasonality of life-
cycles, life-history and attributes of stream insect populations changing in
response to climate change? 3) How does changing seasonality of river discharge
interact with insect production to affect availability and transfer of stream
production to grayling? 4) What is the effect of climate driven disruption of
the migratory link on the structure and function of winter
refugia?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reseachers will examine the implications of
changing climate on key biotic linkages by: 1) retrospective studies of long-
term databases of stream flow and temperature and insect and fish productivity
and migration, 2) new work on controls on seasonality of migration, stream
productivity and trophic transfer and 3) new work on the feedbacks between
changing open water season and food webs in winter refugia. This will be
integrated into a systems-level model, using grayling as the ?currency?, to
evaluate the effects of altered linkages among system components on system level
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader intellectual merit of this project
lies in the integration of work from diverse fields (hydrology, animal
physiology, population biology and mathematical modeling) to understand the
roles of species in ecosystems. Improved understanding of the interdependence of
lake and stream productivity through biotic linkages will advance our general
understanding of landscape ecology, the role of animals in ecosystem dynamics,
life-history evolution and ecosystem management of fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;