* 0902698
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate-Induced Range Dynamics in Eastern U.S. Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Henri Grissino-Mayer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2011
* USD 11,871.00

Many ecological models of the structure and dynamics of species distributions
are based on the assumption that species are most abundant at the center of
their geographic range and least abundant at range margins. Moreover, it is
often assumed that species are more stressed and vulnerable to environmental
change at range margins. These assumptions are widely accepted but are based on
very little empirical evidence. Current models that seek to project shifts in
species ranges in response to climate change assume that species at their range
margins are limited primarily by climate. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project will test the validity of this assumption for trees growing
in the southern Appalachian Mountains by assessing the relationship between tree
growth, climate, disturbance, and species interactions near the center and
margins for several dominant tree species. Annually resolved dendroecological
data will be used to conduct comprehensive analyses of spatial and temporal
variability in tree-growth response and forest-stand dynamics over decades to
centuries. The overall goals of this research are to evaluate the impact of
climate and disturbance processes on the composition, structure, and dynamics of
Appalachian oak-pine forests and to determine if these impacts vary relative to
the position within geographic ranges. Forest inventory and tree-ring data
collected from sites located in national forests, national parks, and private
forest reserves throughout the central and southern Appalachian Mountains will
used to compare patterns of tree establishment, growth, and mortality near the
center and margins of several species ranges. These comparisons will provide
information regarding the factors that limit the geographic distribution of
these tree species and how the ranges of the tree species are likely to change
in response to climate and disturbance.

Analyzing the relative importance of climate and disturbance on vegetation
dynamics of these sites will increase basic understanding of the limits to
species distributions and inform conservation efforts aimed at predicting and
mitigating the response of tree species to climate change. Dramatic changes in
species distributions caused by climate change have been documented and are
projected to continue in response to rapid global warming. Climate change poses
numerous threats to ecosystem health, including loss of biodiversity, spread of
exotic species, and extinction of species. Mitigation of these threats requires
an understanding of the mechanisms that influence the structure and dynamics of
species ranges. This project will provide information concerning factors that
limit the geographical distribution of Appalachian tree species near their
southern range boundary and enable more accurate projections of species range
dynamics to be modeled. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.

