* 0902747
* CyberWatch: Creating the Next Generation of Cybersecurity Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Davina Pruitt-Mentle, Prince George's Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,531,900.00

In 2005, CyberWATCH was established as an ATE regional center for cybersecurity
education serving the Washington, DC, metropolitan area (Award DUE-0501828).
Following four successful years of operation, the current grant renews the
center for a second phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CyberWATCH consortium has
grown from 10 original core institutions in Maryland, Virginia, and the District
of Columbia to 26 members, including affiliates in Delaware, North Carolina,
Louisiana, New York, Massachusetts, and Washington State. CyberWATCH Phase II is
expanding academic resources to meet constantly changing industry needs;
strengthening the K-12 pipeline and increasing enrollments in Information
Security/Information Assurance (IS/IA) programs; expanding the consortium and
providing resources and support to new members; providing real-life or simulated
work experiences for students; addressing public awareness of cybersecurity;
promoting the IS/IA profession; and developing a revenue stream that will
sustain the consortium over the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While continuing
the successful efforts in curriculum, faculty, and student development that were
launched during Phase I, CyberWATCH Phase II is adding several innovative
programs. New initiatives include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* online model A.A.S.
and A.S. curricula, paired with appropriate faculty training, dissemination of
materials, a curriculum maintenance and update process, and mapping
updates;&lt;br/&gt;* specialized curriculum tracks in digital forensics, network
security, database management security, and secure programming;&lt;br/&gt;*
curricula and case studies that utilize the center's digital forensics
lab;&lt;br/&gt;* faculty self-assessment instruments, which allow faculty to
assess their skills in IS/IA in the context of the CyberWATCH curriculum and
identify training to fill gaps;&lt;br/&gt;* a clearinghouse of guest
speakers;&lt;br/&gt;* a mentoring program that pairs industry professionals with
students;&lt;br/&gt;* a high school-to-college articulation program focusing on
IS/IA;&lt;br/&gt;* additional curriculum modules and case studies that fill in
gaps in the existing 85 modules and their alignment with CyberWATCH
courses;&lt;br/&gt;* an enhanced K-12 cybersecurity education program, including
summer camps for high school students, 1-2 day programs for middle school girls,
after-school enrichment programs for elementary students, and a 1-2 week program
for STEM teachers;&lt;br/&gt;* specialized security training for the personnel
who are responsible for maintaining IT infrastructure in K-12
schools;&lt;br/&gt;* a CyberWATCH presence in Second Life, which will allow
students and faculty to participate in virtual classes, workshops, conferences,
and training scenarios;&lt;br/&gt;* an annual online job fair and a program to
prepare students for interviews; and&lt;br/&gt;* additional activities promoting
cybersecurity awareness, education, and careers to the public.&lt;br/&gt;