* 0902919
* Research Starter Grant:  Integrated Protein Design for Non-natural Electron-Transfer Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Corey Wilson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Life is inextricably linked to a process called
electron-transfer (ET). ET reactions are central to bioenergetic processes, such
as hydrogen production, photosynthesis, and cellular respiration. ET in living
organisms is analogous to an electrical current that powers a household
appliance in that there must be a source of electrons (an outlet) and a pathway
for the current to follow in order to supply energy to the electrical device so
that it is able to function. The ability to understand and control biological
machinery - i.e., the source and pathways - involved in the process of electron-
transfer will allow the development of microscopic electronic devices that could
be used to benefit society. Contrary to the general understanding of electron-
transfer (ET) in naturally occurring phenomena, the express design of protein-
based ET systems - i.e., elements that will facilitate the production of higher-
order devices for biomedical and bio-industrial applications - presents a
significant challenge. To resolve this deficiency, it is hypothesized that a
central theoretical approach (classical ET theory) must be integrated with
existing protein design procedures to create ET systems with tailored functions.
The overarching goal of this research is to expand the understanding of general
features of electron-transfer in biological systems as well as to generate the
fundamental framework for the design of ET-functional biomolecules. To
accomplish this, a combination of experimental and computational approaches,
informed by theory, will be employed. This integrated multi-disciplinary
framework will be used to produce singular synthetic material capable of
interacting with naturally occurring functional elements and non-natural
materials alike. This dynamic range of interactions will facilitate an array of
novel and useful interfaces capable of meaningful communication and logical
operations at the molecular level. Likewise, the ability to produce viable
bioelectronics will advance the understanding of fundamental life processes and
expand the use of designed biomolecules as the building blocks of higher-level
functional devices (e.g., biomaterial-based electronic circuitry, biofuel cells
that use natural substances in the body to generate energy to power implantable
devices, and advanced prosthetics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;This research project will facilitate the development of
successful scientific peers by providing a helpful, encouraging, and productive
research environment in which research methods and scientific output can be
critically evaluated in a supportive and constructive manner. This project will
also strongly encourage and support the participation of underrepresented
graduate, undergraduate, and career high school students in research. Aspiring
scientists that participate in this program will benefit from the very unique
opportunity to receive equal training in experimental and computational
approaches. Moreover, this research will enhance our current infrastructure for
research and education through (i) extensive collaborations and (ii) integration
of this research into the Yale undergraduate and graduate curricula via new
interdisciplinary course modules.