* 0902166
* 2008 RustBelt RNA meeting being held October 17-18, 2008 in Mt. Sterling, OH
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/2008,09/30/2009
* Girish Shukla, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 09/30/2009
* USD 7,205.00

&lt;br/&gt;The 2008 Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) will be held October 17-18, 2008,
in the Lodge at Deer Creek State Park &amp; Resort in Mt. Sterling, OH. The RRM
is the major Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. The 2007 RRM was
attended by 170 participants including principal investigators (PIs),
postdoctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate students from both research
intensive and primarily undergraduate institutions in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana,
Illinois, Kentucky, and Pennsylvania, as well as farther away (Delaware and New
Jersey). Based on attendance in previous years, approximately 170 participants
are expected in 2008. The RRM was created in 1999 to address the need of RNA
researchers in the Midwest for a regional meeting that includes not only faculty
but also postdoctoral fellows and students (trainees). Originally, the venue was
chosen to be easily accessible to researchers in an area bounded by Cleveland,
Columbus, and Pittsburgh. Due to the success and popularity of the RRM, this
area has been broadened to include Indiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and
adjoining states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual objective of the RRM is
to provide an inexpensive, high caliber, interdisciplinary meeting for RNA
researchers in the Midwest. The field of RNA structure, function, and processing
is growing at a rapid pace and RNA has been shown to be intimately involved in
many important biological phenomena such as carcinogenesis and development, in
addition to its obvious prominent role in transcription and translation. At the
same time, the methods used to study RNA are becoming more and more diverse
ranging from synthetic and physical chemistry over biochemistry, genetics, and
biophysical approaches all the way to computational methods. Consequently,
research groups need a forum where they can hear and discuss new results and
techniques in all areas of RNA research that can result in furthering an
individual lab?s aims. The size and organization of the meeting has proven to be
an excellent environment for active discussions between research groups,
including those between PIs and between PIs and trainees, as well as between
trainees themselves. Such interactions are more difficult at larger national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of the RRM is its role in
the intellectual and professional development of trainee and junior faculty. The
RRM encourages participation by graduate and undergraduate students from
institutions ranging from large research -intensive universities to small,
primarily undergraduate colleges. With its strong emphasis on trainee
participation, the RRM is especially helpful in strengthening the speaking and
presentation skills of trainees,who account for the vast majority ( ~ 90%) of
both poster and oral presentations. In addition, the RRM is an excellent forum
for junior PIs to showcase their emerging research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;