* 0902479
* The Theory of Magnetic Reconnection Onset: Three Dimensional and Diamagnetic Effects
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Paul Cassak, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will examine the
role of three-dimensional and diamagnetic effects on the onset of magnetic
reconnection in weakly collisional plasmas. Reconnection is a fundamental plasma
process that converts magnetic energy into particle and flow energy in sawtooth
crashes in fusion devices, solar flares, and magnetospheric substorms, making it
important for topics ranging from sustainable energy to space weather. While
much has been learned, fundamental questions remain unanswered, such as why
reconnection often begins explosively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this proposal is to develop a quantitative understanding of three-dimensional
and diamagnetic effects on reconnection onset. The two parts to this project
interweave large-scale two-fluid simulations, comparisons with laboratory data,
and development of analytical theory. The condition for reconnection onset in
three-dimensions is studied using simulations and comparisons with VTF data
under collaboration with Prof. J. Egedal of MIT. Diamagnetic effects are studied
using simulations and analytic theory. Predictions for the sawtooth crash will
be made and compared to DIII-D tokamak data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity promotes training and learning through the funding of two graduate
students, which will help to establish a faculty-run research group dedicated to
theory and simulations of space and laboratory plasmas in the Department of
Physics at West Virginia University. The outreach portion will produce materials
for the WVU Tomchin Planetarium for use in presentations to the general public
and school groups for outreach and recruiting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of Physics of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and by
Atmospheric Sciences Division of the Geosciences Directorate