* 0902085
* Experimental Investigation of Ion Heating Due to Magnetohydrodynamic Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Earl Scime, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 562,569.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns a laboratory investigation
of ion heating processes that are hypothesized to occur in the acceleration
region of the fast solar wind. The experiments proposed here will continue
studies of modifications to the ion velocity distribution function that occur
when Alfvén waves propagate into region of strong Alfvén speed gradients;
measure changes in Alfvén wave dispersion and continue to look for evidence of
reflection and ducting in regions of strong Alfvén speed gradients; determine if
ion heating occurs during a turbulent cascade to high k waves at super-
cyclotronic frequencies, in single specie and multi-ion species plasmas;
investigate parametric decay of shear Alfvén waves at large transverse density
gradients; explore the propagation of driven fast MHD waves in regions with
large density gradients and look for nonlinear interactions between shear and
compressional Alfvén waves with spontaneously excited MHD fast waves in the
density gradient region; and compare experimental results to computational codes
and analytic theories that include the effects of strong gradients. The
experiments will be performed in a space-relevant, laboratory plasma with
sufficient diagnostic capability to investigate the evolution of the ion
velocity space distribution function of majority and minority ions as they
interact with propagating Alfvén waves, to measure the detailed properties of
the Alfvén waves in the plasma, and to non-invasively detect and measure the
wave number spectrum of perpendicularly propagating waves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research involves the training of new graduate
students in plasma physics, improvement of the percentage of women and
underrepresented groups obtaining advanced degrees in physics, involvement of
undergraduates in cutting-edge scientific research, and the active engagement of
K-12 students and teachers in science and math activities through a robotics-
based outreach program. The international collaboration built into the proposed
project will provide young scientists an opportunity to develop international
collaborations and gain experience working in international teams and
institutions - thereby preparing the next generation of scientists for
productive research careers in a future that is likely to involve considerable
international collaboration in science