* 0902019
* Biocomplexity of Hydrological Service Payments and Watershed Sustainability in Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Heidi Asbjornsen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/2012
* USD 38,500.00

OISE-0902019 PI: Heidi Asbjornsen

This U.S.-Mexico Planning Visit Proposal will establish the collaborative
linkages and experimental design for research on the biocomplexity of Mexico?s
Payments for Hydrological Services (PHS) programs and the implications for
watershed sustainability. A key goal of the planning visit is to develop
collaborations between researchers from multiple U.S. and Mexican research
institutions, including Iowa State University, Institute of Ecology in Veracruz,
National Autonomous University of Mexico, Auburn University, Michigan
Technological University, and SENDAS, a Mexican NGO. The U.S. team will include
seven U.S. researchers and two U.S. graduate students. The host for the planning
visit is Dr. Robert Manson from the Institute of Ecology, in Xalapa, Mexico. The
international team will develop interdisciplinary research focused on the
following two central objectives:

1. To quantify the effects of PHS policies on potential key indicators of
watershed sustainability for each dimension of coupled social-ecological systems
for replicated watersheds located in three contrasting geographic-cultural
regions in Mexico. 2. To develop a sustainability index for assessing the
aggregate impact of PHS policies on coupled social-ecological systems across the
study watersheds.

The results of research developed from this planning visit may contribute
significantly to the fundamental knowledge of how economic incentives targeting
hydrological services are coupled to human actions to directly influence
watershed sustainability and quality of life. The development and testing of
aggregated watershed sustainability indices will be particularly valuable in
linking science with policy and thus will likely have broad impacts through
applications in the improvement and design of future PHS programs. Other
important broad impacts include the strengthening of international collaboration
between U.S. and Mexico and the training of students in interdisciplinary-
international research. This award is jointly funded by the Division of
Environmental Biology and the Office of International Science and Engineering of
the National Science Foundation.













