* 0902906
* Engineering Quantum Electro-Mechanical Systems Using Open-Loop Control
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kurt Jacobs, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 210,000.00

The goal of this project is to determine the ability of time-dependent control
to engineer nonlinear dynamics in, and nonlinear probes for, mesoscopic quantum
resonators. To achieve this the techniques of optimal control theory will be
used to obtain control protocols for the purpose of engineering nonlinearities
in, and nonlinear interactions with, nano-mechanical and superconducting
resonators. The possibility of implementing a SWAP operation between a resonator
and a register of superconducting qubits will also be investigated. The above
protocols have applications in quantum-state preparation, information processing
and metrology. The time-scales required by these protocols, and their robustness
properties in the presence of noise, will be investigated. Optimal control
theory will also be employed to search for protocols with desired robustness
properties.

The broader impact of this award includes undergraduate involvement in research
and student training in high-performance computing. The project includes support
for a summer studentship for an undergraduate to contribute to the research of
the project in the second two years. UMass is the most diverse campus in New
England, with a large fraction of minorities. The project will therefore provide
research opportunities to this diverse group. The research will involve high
performance computing and will thus provide training in this area for both
graduate and undergraduate students.