* 0902969
* EFRI-CBE: Biological, Chemical, and Mechanical Surface Cues for Cell Migration, Proliferation, and Differentiation: An Integrated Approach to Regeneration of New Tissues
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2015
* Cato Laurencin, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,968,758.00

PI name: C.T. Laurencin &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Virginia Main
Campus &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0736002 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EFRI-CBE:
Biological, Chemical, and Mechanical Surface Cues for Cell Migration,
Proliferation, and Differentiation: An Integrated Approach to Regeneration of
New Tissues&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;This project will enhance the scientific understanding of the role of
nanoscale cues on cell adhesion and differentiation. As illustrated in the
testbeds, this new understanding of these cues can be applied towards the
construction of three-dimensional polymer scaffolds for the repair of complex
tissues such as ligament and nerve, tissues that require a greater degree of
precision for adequate healing and regeneration. The motivation is to focus
specifically on matrices for ligament and nerve repair stem from vital clinical
need and in this way will be of significant impact on the NSF effort in Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation. Many individuals suffering from
musculoskeletal connective tissue and nerve injury live painful disabled lives.
The design, synthesis, and evaluation of novel synthetic constructs engineered
to precise specifications through innovative methodologies represent the next
generation of nanoscale tissue engineering. These emerging technologies are
ideally-suited to the regeneration of those tissues that depend on their complex
structure for complete functional restoration, and thus far have proven an
insurmountable challenge to repair due to their inherent complexity. Additional
strength of this proposal comes from the previous accomplishments of its
interdisciplinary team by integrating experts in polymer chemistry, materials
science, computational modeling, and stem cell biology and utilizing each of
these tools toward one unified objective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will have a significant impact on the field of nanotechnology and tissue
regeneration. Inherent in the mission of the assembled team will be to ensure
that this impact is felt not only in the research community but also in
teaching, training, and education. Of particular focus is the inclusion of
underrepresented minorities in the scope of its impact. By encompassing
scientific and educational goals one hopes to achieve this. The Principal
Investigator's laboratory has trained over 80 minority students at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels over the past several years, with
attention to minority recruitment, training, and
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;