* 0902633
* Quantitative paleorainfall reconstruction from the Chinese Loess Plateau using 10Be and magnetic susceptibility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Li Cheng, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,734.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant improves our understanding
of the hydrologic variability associated with the Asian Monsoon system in
response to precessional forcing. The work generates quantitative paleorainfall
reconstructions from sediments collected from the Chinese Loess Plateau region
using new methods. These records provide a quantitative measure of the strength
of the Asian Monsoon in a form that can be used by climate models (e.g. rainfall
in mm/yr). The work focuses on the periods 80-145 kaBP and Marine Isotope Stage
11 (340-420 kaBP). Between 80-145kaBP monsoon intensity appears to have been
strongly influenced by insolation forcing at precessional periods as a result of
high eccentricity. During MIS 11, precessional forcing of climate is likely to
have been reduced because of low eccentricity. Stable isotope records from
Chinese speleothems confirm the presence of abrupt and substantial changes in
precipitation between 80-145 kaBP that are highly correlated with changes in low
latitude northern hemisphere summer insolation. While these stalagmite records
provide well-dated high-resolution records that are clearly related to regional
hydrologic changes, translating these records into a form that is easily
imported into climate models is more difficult because temperature, water/rock
interactions, fractionation effects during moisture transport or during
speleothem precipitation, as well as moisture source effects all can influence
the stable isotopes recorded in a stalagmite. Quantitative paleorainfall records
are generated and used to derive an 80-ka long rainfall record from the Loess
Plateau. Precipitation amount on the Loess Plateau is highly correlated with the
speleothem del-18O records from Dongge and Hulu caves in S.E. China, which are
widely regarded as a robust record of Asian Monsoon intensity.&lt;br/&gt;This
study is being conducted in collaboration with the State Key Laboratory of Loess
and Quaternary Geology, Institute of Earth Environment, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, in Xi'An China. They will provide logistical support for the fieldwork
and magnetic susceptibility measurements. 240 samples will be measured for 10Be
and magnetic susceptibility at circa 500 year resolution, with higher sample
resolution across boundaries showing a high rate of change of precipitation. OSL
dating will be used to generate an age model which, where possible, will be fine
tuned by correlation with U/Th dated speleothem isotope records. 10Be sample
preparation and accelerator mass spectrometer measurements will be made at the
NSF-Arizona AMS facility at the University of Arizona. Part of the work will be
conducted by a graduate student at the University of Arizona, as part of a PhD
project, providing educational and training opportunities for this student. By
providing high-resolution paleoclimate records in a format easily incorporated
into climate models, the broader impacts of this proposal help define how
precessional forcing influences the Asian Monsoon intensity, leading to a better
understanding of the causes of abrupt climate change. These results may also
help deconvolve the competing influences that control speleothem del-18O
records.