* 0902337
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Globalization and the Political Economy of Food Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Rebecca Schewe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 9,980.00

SES-0902337 Leann Tigges Rebecca Schewe University of Wisconsin - Madison

Over the past several decades, there has been a shift in development discourse
and policy away from models of state-owned industries and high levels of
government intervention in the market towards privatized, free-market ideals.
Within this context of neoliberalism, market-based regulatory schemes and third-
party certifications - many with an explicitly environmental focus - have become
prominent. In particular, global agrofood markets are now policed by a variety
of organic standards and certifiers, retailer-driven certifications, voluntary
best-practice standards, and other non-governmental regulatory schemes. These
standards are highly variable in their structures, levels of compliance, and
market recognition, as well as their impacts on everyday environmental
management of farms. Through an extended case study of the extremely neoliberal
and globalized New Zealand dairy industry, this dissertation seeks to extend
existing theories of roll-out neoliberalization, reregulation, and the corporate
environmental food regime to address the variation of these private regulatory
schemes. The co-PI will spend twelve months doing field work throughout New
Zealand and conduct in-depth semi-structured interviews with a three-wave
stratified sample of farmers as well as dairy processors and certification
agents. This original qualitative data will be combined with an existing
representative longitudinal survey of New Zealand dairy producers. These data
will be used to answer four research questions: 1) how do producers and
processors decide in which private regulatory schemes to participate? 2) how do
producers and processors decide which environmental management practices to use?
3) how do producers and processors experience enforcement of private regulatory
schemes? 4) what is the level of compliance with the preferred environmental
management practices of private regulatory schemes? By asking producers and
processors to articulate their lived experiences across several different
private regulatory standards, this dissertation seeks to explain significant
processes at both the producer and regulation level.

Recent public health scares such as spinach contaminated with E. Coli and milk
powders contaminated with toxic Melamine have led to growing concern about the
state of the global agrofood system and the role of government and private
regulation. This massive public health crisis and failure of the agrofood system
has led to justifiable calls for closer regulation and policing of the
production and processing of milk products. Within the context of free-market
ideology and neoliberalism now dominating the global political economy, the
possibility of market-based standards and certifications has been at the center
of much of the public discussion of the crisis. Beyond the agrofood system,
private standards such as "fair trade" and "carbon-neutral" certifications are
playing an increasing role in the marketplace. While retailers and consumers
have largely embraced these non-government forms of regulation, relatively
little is known about the social realities of private regulations. By analyzing
the lived experience of a variety of private regulatory schemes as well as
compliance with those certifications, this research can provide critical
insights into this growing form of regulation. The research holds relevance for
actors from a variety of different social positions including activists,
businesses and producers, consumers, and government representatives.