* 0902164
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/25/2008,05/31/2010
* Panagiotis Souganidis, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2010
* USD 56,485.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and
Applications&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract of Proposed
Research&lt;br/&gt;Panagiotis E Souganidis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One of the most
challenging problems in applied sciences is the modeling of phenomena with many
degrees of freedom (scales), which are expected to have some averaged
(macroscopic), perhaps random, behavior. The multi-scales and complexity of the
problems in nature often necessitate the use of random media. In many
applications, it is also common to have only ``statistical'' (random) and not
``exact'' (deterministic) information. In addition, the modeling of the
fluctuations of the physically relative quantities leads to equations with
``singular'' (white noise type) dependence on some of the variables. In this
context, random homogenization and stochastic partial differential equations
become the natural mathematical objects. The randomness is associated with
singular dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness, two facts
that give rise to challenging mathematical problems. Overcoming them requires
the development of new methods and techniques. In biology, recent experiments at
the molecular scale have led to new sophisticated mathematical models. Novel
tools and ideas are needed to study these problems further and to identify all
the relevant regimes/scales of the parameters, which affect the experimentally
observed behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to continue his program
to develop methods to study nonlinear deterministic (parabolic/elliptic and
hyperbolic) deterministic and stochastic partial differential equations arising
in models in areas such as continuum and statistical physics, biology,
engineering, etc. The emphasis of the proposal is on the development of theories
for &lt;br/&gt;(i) weak (stochastic viscosity) solutions of fully nonlinear,
(degenerate) parabolic&lt;br/&gt;stochastic pde, &lt;br/&gt;(ii) the
homogenization of nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic pde in spatio-
temporal random media, &lt;br/&gt;(iii) the study of properties (regularity,
error estimates) of viscosity solutions, and (iv) the analysis of some models in
mathematical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;