* 0902175
* Collaborative Research: Seasonality of circumpolar tundra - ocean and atmosphere controls and effects on energy and carbon budgets
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Uma Bhatt, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 369,016.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Changes in the magnitude and seasonality of Arctic summer
vegetation production over the past several decades have been documented. These
changes will likely accelerate and have consequences for the entire Arctic
terrestrial system, in particular energy and element budgets, and will also feed
back to marine and atmospheric systems. This project will characterize the
seasonal linkages between the land surface greenness and a suite of land,
atmosphere, and ocean characteristics, focusing on the Beringia/Beaufort Sea,
where there have been strong positive increases in the Normalized Difference
Vegetation Index (NDVI) over the past 25 years, and the west-central Arctic
Eurasia region , where the NDVI trends have been slightly negative. The
following questions will be addressed: (1) What are the spatial and temporal
variabilities in the seasonality of various arctic system components (sea-ice
concentration and thickness, ocean and land surface temperatures, ocean heat
fluxes, snow cover, and vegetation as specified by the NDVI? Specifically, how
do these vary zonally and meridionally in the circumpolar Arctic? (2) What role
do the atmosphere and ocean circulation patterns play in controlling the
seasonality of land temperatures and vegetation production? (3) How do changes
in the seasonality of these arctic system components affect vegetation growth
and carbon sequestration? Using both satellite and in situ data sets, this
project will document the seasonal (daily to monthly timescales) of the tundra
and marine climate systems at a regional scale throughout the Arctic. Reanalysis
data sets will be employed to describe local circulation characteristics. A pan-
arctic ice-ocean model will be used to describe ocean circulation patterns
relevant for tundra vegetation, with the application of statistical analyses to
investigate mechanisms of ocean-atmosphere-land relationships. A vegetation
change model (ArcVeg) will analyze the consequences of land temperature changes
for carbon production along climate, disturbance, and soil gradients. This model
will be enhanced for seasonality studies, including transition to a daily time
step, and will allow the examination of effects of seasonality changes on the
carbon accumulated by different functional plant types and into different plant
tissue types.