* 0902402
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing millennial-scale trends and variability in western Pacific convection and hydrology from large lakes on Sulawesi, central Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Anders Noren, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 59,256.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports research on late
Pleistocene and Holocene convective and hydrologic variability in Indonesia
through the recovery and analysis of new sediment cores from two large lakes on
the island of Sulawesi. This research builds upon seismic reflection surveys of
these lakes that document thick piles of sediment accumulating at rates ideal
for paleoclimate studies, and upon geochemical and isotopic analyses of existing
short cores that indicate substantial changes in regional convection and
hydrology during the past ca. 400 years. This group will recover new sediment
cores from these lakes, and conduct multiproxy analyses to reconstruct
convective and hydrologic variability during the late Pleistocene and Holocene.
This work will provide fundamentally important new insights into the history of
Indonesian convection and hydrology, changes in the ITCZ, and long-term changes
in tropical Pacific zonal gradients in during the late Pleistocene and
Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The research is in two key areas: 1)
The regional responses of coupled climate systems such as the ITCZ and ENSO
during past climate changes, and 2) The regional impact of past abrupt changes
in climate. Interannual variability in Indonesian rainfall and hydrology are
linked to variations in ENSO. Understanding the role of long-term changes in
natural modes of variability such as ENSO in abrupt climate change is a critical
question, yet existing records disagree substantially on the response of western
Pacific hydrology to abrupt climate changes. Records of climate from these lakes
will provide fundamentally important data to evaluate centennial- to millennial-
scale trends and variability in tropical western Pacific convection and
hydrology, and interactions between the mean state of the tropical Pacific, the
regional monsoons, and the strength and position of the ITCZ during past climate
changes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed research activities will
provide a new record of climate variability from a densely inhabited, rapidly
developing region where food production has been quantitatively linked to ENSO-
driven rainfall variability. Lakes Matano and Towuti have been proposed as
important sites for continental drilling to obtain long paleoenvironmental
records from the tropical Pacific, and our fieldwork will provide new sediment
cores and seismic reflection data to the scientific community from these
scientifically valuable but understudied great lakes. The proposed research will
promote interdisciplinary training and learning through involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in an effort to expand our fundamental
knowledge of climate variability in an important region. The project will also
enhance infrastructure for research and education by strengthening intellectual
and research collaborations between the PIs, Indonesian, Canadian scientists and
institutions, and industry, and through support of infrastructure at Brown
University and the University of Minnesota.