* 0902138
* Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research Symposium: An Interdisciplinary and International Forum for Future Leaders in Polymeric Materials, March 22-26, 2009, Salt Lake City, UT
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2009
* USD 3,200.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technical Merit: Advances in polymeric materials continue to
catalyze our nation's future critical technologies ranging from charged polymers
in biomedical devices and water purification membranes to conducting polymers
for sensors and alternate energy solutions. Multifunctional polymeric materials
require our fundamental understanding at length scales ranging from nanometers
to centimeters. Our constant attention to fundamental structure-property-
performance relationships is critical for our continues success and societal
impact, and research strategies demand an interdisciplinary and teamed vision
for both rapid and integrated solutions. It is this interdisciplinary strategy
that will enable new discoveries in polymer science and engineering. This
research proposal will allow our future leaders, who ae currently graduate
students from leading universities across the United Staes, to assemble in a
unique international forum of polymer science and engineering. Oral
presentations and interactive poster sessions will address key research areas
including theory and molecular modeling, polymer design and synthetic strategy,
polymer characterization using state-of-the-art techniques, engineering of
polymer-based devices, and fundamental understanding of the interface of polymer
chemistry, physics, biology and engineering. Moreover, this forum will encourage
scientific network building and raise the awareness of the necessiry for
interdisciplinary research to younger polymer scientists and engineers. The
symposium will occur at the 2009 spring national meeting of the American
Chemical Society in Salt Lake City, Utah. The proposed NSF funding will permit
the attendance of some of our leading graduate students, ensure diverse
participation, and showcase the importance of interdisciplinary research for
solving some of the more complex questions that face our scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: University and commercial
laboratories immediately recognize the importance of interdisciplinary research;
however, the opportunities for university students to truly experience an
interdisciplinary meeting of science and engineering remain limited. For
example, many younger students are not provided with the opportunity for an oral
presentation at an international meeting. Recent attention from the Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) organization has enabled the formation of Graduate
Research Seminars (GRS) in polymeric materials; however, attendance is often
limited due to their unique pedagogy and more thematically focused programs. An
encompassing symposium entitled "Excellence in Graduate Polymer Research" will
provide an open forum for international scientists and engineers to cultivate an
international spirit of collaboration. The forum will serve to recognize leading
graduate student researchers and provide a mechanismf or reasearch partnerships
to evolve in a grass-roots fashion. The symposium will offer an educational
experienc where students will be able to benchmark their research strategies and
presentation skills, and participants will raise their awareness of emerging
themes at new boundaries of polymer science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;