* 0902426
* HCC: Digital Tribal Government: The Tribal Finance Information Clearinghouse (TFIC)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Gavin Clarkson, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2011
* USD 386,207.00

As separate sovereign governments, Indian tribes, just like state and local
governments, have an obligation to improve the lives of their citizens. However,
tribal governments are much more limited in their ability to access capital.
Many tribal communities are often burdened with extremely low socio-economic
factors, including low educational achievement, high unemployment, high poverty,
and low per capita income. Upwards of $50 billion of unmet capital needs go
unfunded each year in Indian Country, in large part due to impediments to tribal
access to the capital markets. There are numerous reasons tribes are at a
disadvantage, but one little studied is information asymmetry. Relatively poor
market awareness is both a cause of tribal underdevelopment and an impediment to
any solution. Because most tribes confront information asymmetries for any debt
financing strategy they might consider, an empirical study of successful
information sharing and integration strategies for tax-exempt bonds will help
identify suitable strategies to induce sharing in other domains where tribes
operate at an informational disadvantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on
preliminary work (IIS 0534905), this Tribal Finance Information Clearinghouse
(TFIC) project will make three unique contributions to information science.
First it will collect, aggregate, analyze, and disseminate new digital content
consisting of access to market-actionable data on tribal tax-exempt bonds that
is not currently available. Second, it will generate data about the factors that
impede or induce contributions of private information to a collective
information good. (Broadly, insight into how to design information systems that
resolve the social dilemmas of information collaboration is an increasingly
important.) Finally, the TFIC will be an exercise in informational empowerment.
By presenting original financial data as part of a larger infrastructure that
includes updated content regarding regulatory, legal, and legislative changes,
industry news, and a forum to contribute lessons learned, the TFIC will add
significant informational value to transactional data. The TFIC will also
support multidisciplinary research on the design and use of information
technologies and the resulting impact on government institutions and
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Without empirical data
about tribal interactions with capital markets, many research questions remain
unanswerable. With this project, for the first time, these may be answerable as
the TFIC will offer researchers and policy-makers an unparalleled opportunity to
analyze a complete data set related to a significant minority group and to
determine whether information asymmetries, legal regulations, or other variables
impact capital markets access for tribes. Not only will the outcomes directly
impact Native Americans, but the results may be generalizable to other minority
enterprises that also face impeded market access. The relatively small number of
actors (i.e., 88 tribal issuers since 2001) with durable presence in the data
makes study of capital access questions more manageable than might be the case
with non-tribal entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TFIC may also impact the
marketplace itself, given that a recent study of non-tribal tax-exempt bonds
found that the "most critical consequence" of information asymmetry is higher
borrowing costs, but that "alleviating information asymmetry" reliably
eliminates the risk premium and reduces borrowing costs, particularly for new or
infrequent issuers such as tribes.