* 0902714
* A 350,000 - Year History of Rainfall and Temperature in Tropical East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 454,632.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports analyses of two
cores recovered in 2005 from the floor of Lake Malawi, in Africa. These cores
contain approximately 350,000 years of temperature and rainfall proxies from the
central basin of Lake Malawi. Initial results from the Lake Malawi Drilling
Project have thus far provided: (1) surprising new insights into the recurrence
and intensity of drought in East Africa for the past 150,000 years, (2) a
preliminary estimate of past lake ecosystem dynamics, (3) compelling evidence
for a tie between the climate in this part of the African tropics with the
bipolar see-saw, and (4) a thermal history of the region that extends back
75,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
questions: 1. To what extent do temperature and rainfall follow insolation
forcing of either hemisphere? 2. What is the relationship between temperature
and humidity shifts in the Malawi basin and concentrations of atmospheric CO2
and CH4? 3. What is the nature of millennial-scale variation in temperature and
rainfall in the Malawi basin over the past ~500,000 years? 4. To what extent do
temperature and rainfall in the Malawi basin respond to the sea-surface
temperature regime of the tropical Pacific and Indian Oceans?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project obtains estimates of past rainfall from
analyses of the del-D record derived from long-chain fatty acids and of the
del-13C record preserved in the long-chain n-alkanes of terrestrial vegetation
preserved in Lake Malawi sediment. Estimates of past temperature are based on a
paleotemperature proxy for the marine environment called TEX86. This approach
has provided promising results from previous work on both Lake Malawi and Lake
Tanganyika in East Africa. The group continues to improve on the age model of
the long Malawi drill core, focusing on U/Th dating of carbonate nodules that
are found at a few, carbonate-rich intervals in the core. These dates are
supplemented with precessional tuning of the carbonate abundance
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The climate history of tropical Africa portends a
future of recurring severe and long-lasting drought that will have enormous
impact on human welfare in the region. The data that will be provided from this
research will be invaluable for comparison to marine sediment and speleothem
records from the tropics that span the past few hundred thousand years, and for
testing the accuracy of climate models that are necessary to improve long-term
weather forecasts for this heavily populated portion of the African continent.
The project involves graduate and undergraduate students in laboratory analyses
and in all aspects of interpretation and dissemination of results, through
graduate thesis research and undergraduate research opportunities.