* 0902818
* Collaborative research: Understanding the physics of the Bering Strait through paleoceanography and modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Joseph Ortiz, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2014
* USD 187,969.00

Ortiz 0902818&lt;br/&gt;Kent State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are
provided to support two related foci of this project ? analytical studies of
ocean circulation and paleo-oceanographic estimation of transport variability.
The PI will analyze diffuse spectral reflectance and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF)
data as proxies for sediment provenance, and grain size variation in samples
taken from both sides of the Bering Strait (BST) as a proxy for paleo-current
strength. In parallel, the analytical focus of the co-PI will be to develop a
time-dependent version of the steady state models of flow through BST that he
has previously developed. Together, they will then compare periods of high and
low global wind fields with weak or strong Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) to periods of strong or weak flows at the BST. They already
have one excellent example for the success of such an approach. About 5000 years
ago the Southern Ocean winds weakened significantly and, simultaneously
(geologically speaking) the flow through the BST increased and the AMOC
weakened, in an excellent conceptual agreement with their preliminary analytics.
Their cross-discipline collaboration will benefit physical oceanography by
providing ?natural experiments? that are otherwise unavailable, and benefit
paleo-oceanography by providing dynamical explanations for the past
oceanographic changes observed in proxy data.&lt;br/&gt;