* 0902956
* GEM: Inner Radiation Belt Data Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Timothy Guild, Aerospace Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 06/30/2013
* USD 315,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine how short-
term dynamics influences the long-term behavior of Earth's inner radiation belt
(Van Allen belt). An existing physics based inner radiation belt model developed
under a previous NSF Space Weather award will be the starting point of the
analysis. Fifteen (15) years of in-situ observations of solar proton trapping
and geomagnetic storm-associated losses will be incorporated into the into model
of the inner belt using data assimilation techniques. This will comprehensively
determine the trapping and loss signatures of the particles as functions of
energy, pitch angle, radial distance from the Earth, and geomagnetic and solar
wind parameters. Multivariate statistical techniques will be applied to this
solar-cycle reanalysis to understand how short-term, inner belt space weather
leads to long-term, inner belt climate. This combination of simulations,
observations, and data-assimilation statistical techniques has never been
applied to the inner belt to answer climatological questions. The project will
capitalize on recent scientific progress made in the modeling of the inner belt
and will address the primary radiation environment hazard for the satellite
design community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solar-cycle reanalysis of the inner
belt will feed directly into the on-going development of more accurate radiation
specification models, addressing the top priority radiation environment need of
the spacecraft engineering community. This unique connection between research
and operations also develops partnerships between communities and across
disciplines, and ensures broad dissemination of the results.