* 0902165
* SGER:  Surface and Boundary-Layer Profiling during OASIS using the CU Tethered Balloon Platform
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 05/31/2010
* USD 98,554.00

This project will deploy two kinds of tethered balloons to collect vertical
profile data in support of the Ocean-Atmosphere-Sea Ice-Snowpack Interactions in
Polar Regions (OASIS) project in lieu of constructing a 40m walk-up tower. OASIS
will be in the field near Barrow, Alaska in winter/spring 2009. A small, i.e.
12-foot diameter balloon, will be deployed for measuring meteorological
parameters and ozone profiles 2-3 times per day between the surface and ~600 m
altitude. A second experiment, using a larger and stronger lift, i.e. 20-foot-
diameter balloon, will raise three sampling lines to heights of ~120, 80, and 40
m. Air pulled from these inlets will be analyzed for trace gases with monitors
located in instrument shelters on the ground. Measurements from the stationary
balloon inlets will include nitrogen oxides (NOx), as well as nonmethane
hydrocarbons (NMHC), and peroxyacyl nitrates (e.g. PAN), yielding the first high
resolution, simultaneous, and continuous NOx, NMHC and PAN vertical profiles
from a polar research site. The balloon meteorological data will reveal the
boundary layer mixing conditions; this information will allow evaluation and
further interpretation of surface measurements. The tethered balloon data will
be of extremely high value for input and validation of chemical modeling to be
done in the context of OASIS. A particular emphasis will be to elucidate the
radical chemistry that leads to ozone and mercury depletion events in the
coastal arctic environment. Furthermore, this research ties into the question of
how atmospheric chemical processing is connected to ecological impacts, and how
climate change will feedback on these interactions. OASIS will entail a
multitude of new surface exchange and atmospheric measurements in an
international collaborative effort during International Polar Year. Data and
findings from this work will be readily shared among all OASIS scientists for
broader dissemination of the research implications. Analytical developments
within this project will be beneficial for future atmospheric research
applications. This experiment will bring together scientists, including
students, from the University of Colorado and National Center for Atmospheric
Research, as well as from other OASIS-participating research institutions. One
CU graduate student will be supported from this grant and participate in the
field work. Balloon operations attract a lot of public attention and are
particularly fascinating for school children. Students and teachers from Barrow
schools will be invited to the balloon site for a tour of the balloon experiment
and its scientific purpose. This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research due
to the very short timeline to put the vertical profile equipment in place to
meet the research requirements of OASIS and as a novel approach to collecting
atmospheric measurements of this kind.