* 0902753
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Drought in Western North America during the Holocene
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph Ortiz, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 235,416.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant produces paleoclimate
datasets recording the timing, duration, frequency and magnitude of aridity
cycles on a network of paired open and closed micritic basins along the western
cordillera of North America from the Pacific NW to the Canadian Arctic. The
project employs hydrologic and stable isotope mass balance models to provide
quantitative estimates of precipitation and relative humidity changes. The
project explores how the temporal-geographic patterns of aridity changed during
the Holocene and uses advanced data processing techniques to test hypotheses
concerning the periodicities in the paleoclimate archives. These results are
used to infer the nature of potential modes of Pacific Ocean variability and to
document how they have changed over time. The project tests hypotheses
concerning the causes and magnitude of climate variability in the study region
during the Holocene. The project also synthesizes data from the literature with
ongoing work in Tropical South America to investigate large-scale Pacific Ocean
forcing over a range of timescales. Synthesis of these records will result in a
better understanding of the Pacific climate system and improved predictability
for aridity cycles in western North America. &lt;br/&gt;Lake levels along the
western cordillera have been relatively stable during the past ~6ka creating
high resolution archives during the period of time targeted for most intense
study. During the early Holocene megadroughts significantly lowered water levels
regionally thereby limiting the resolution to multi-decadal to century scale
prior ~6ka. Geochronology is provided by 137Cs, 210Pb, 14C, tephra chronology
and geomagnetic correlation. The same methods are applied at all study sites to
simplify data interpretation and increase robustness of findings. Multiproxy
studies will include stable isotopes, grayscale, diffuse spectral reflectance,
XRF, magnetic measurements, and organic and inorganic carbon by loss on
ignition. The group collaborates with the University of British Columbia, who
use chironomid assemblages to reconstruct paleotemperatures. The multi-
millennial hydrologic record with sub-decadal resolution is then compared with
high resolution coupled ocean atmosphere GCM simulations currently being
conducted by a collaborator at Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;The work is relevant
to western North America where populations are rapidly expanding and water
resources are stressed. The relatively sparse preinstrumental climate records
for this region indicate that it is highly sensitive to Pacific Ocean
variability and to the interaction between the PDO and AMO. A deeper
understanding of the past behavior of these modes of variability is needed to
improve predictive capabilities. The goal is to investigate climatic change at a
time-resolution relevant to human society, and answer questions such as: How
have the intensity and periodicity of droughts and pluvials changed during the
Holocene? What is the spatial pattern of aridity cycles in western North America
during this period? What boundary conditions and forcing factors are related to
extreme droughts and pluvials?