* 0902748
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Property Rights and Social Mobilization Along an Amazonian Highway
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Altha Cravey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 5,000.00

The Brazilian government plans to pave the Santarem-Cuiaba highway (BR 163), the
only road that traverses the Brazilian Amazon from south to north. This decision
has reignited competition for property rights in a region known for its
ambiguous land-tenure system and long history of violent conflict over land and
resources. The impetus to pave the road is to facilitate the transport of soy
harvests from the south of Brazil to the Amazon River for export. In response to
the promised paving initiatives, industrial soy farmers have moved into this
region and are now competing with smallholders, commercial loggers, and ranchers
for the best land near the road. The Brazilian government has attempted to quell
land conflict and facilitate sustainable development along the road in this
"frontier" region by redrawing property lines through land reform, creating a
new mosaic of conservation and resource extraction areas, and surveying rural
property boundaries. Conflict over property rights along the road persists,
however. This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the ways
that these efforts to impose a formal land-tenure system interact with practices
of claiming land and defining property on the ground. Through policy analysis,
archival research, participatory mapping and ethnography, the doctoral candidate
will examine the perspectives of actors from multiple interest groups involved
in land conflict in order to understand how these different actors understand
property rights and attempt to mobilize for and legitimize their claims to
land.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debates about road building in the Amazon have tended
to focus on the relationship between roads and deforestation, calling for
improved governance in order to ameliorate the environmental effects of road
building. This research endeavors to broaden this discussion to address the
complex social and political issues that can be obscured by a narrow focus on
road building's environmental effects. By exploring the complex system of
governance that emerges through the intersection of formal law and actions of
multiple actors with different interests, power relationships and regional
imaginaries, the findings of this research are expected to demonstrate that the
Amazon frontier is not simply a lawless place whose issues can be resolved
through better legislation and monitoring. By exploring complex systems of
governance in place and how they work, this study will contribute to debates
about the relationship between formal state structures and informal economic,
social, and political practices. The project's results also will help to explain
why efforts to address land-tenure issues in the region repeatedly fail, and
they will shed light on the types of measures that might begin to alleviate the
uneven effects of land conflict. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.