* 0902197
* Regional and Global Impacts of Tropical Deforestation Under Increasing CO2 Concentrations on Mutliscale Eco-Hydro-Climatological Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Roni Avissar, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2015
* USD 869,791.00

Numerical experiments of tropical deforestation with general circulation models
(GCMs) and Regional Climate Models (RCMs) show the importance of land-cover
teleconnections in the climate system but ignore multiscale feedbacks of
regional-global and Eco-Hydro-Climatological (EHC) processes. In parallel to
these scientific investigations, the evaluation and improvement of the Ocean-
Land-Atmosphere Model (OLAM) has continued. Unlike typical GCMs, OLAM is
uniquely designed to simulate multiscale interactions with its unstructured grid
that can change resolution in any part of the global domain, as well as its
fully interactive vegetation dynamics parameterization. Both features are
essential for understanding the intricate processes that govern land-atmosphere
interactions (including vegetation dynamics, clouds, precipitation and radiative
processes) in a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
understand and quantify the global EHC changes under a changing climate driven
by increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration and deforestation of
tropical regions. Specifically, the investigators use OLAM to address two main
issues: (i) What are the impacts of evolving deforestation in the Amazon basin
on the multiscale EHC processes and feedbacks (including fires and other
ecosystem disturbances), can we explain them and quantify them? (ii) Are these
impacts affected by climate change (triggered by increasing atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide)? In the numerical experiments to be conducted
for this investigation, deforestation patterns will be derived from socio-
economical scenarios of the Amazon basin development, and the carbon dioxide
scenarios adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will contribute to the evaluation and
improvement of OLAM, which will help advance future climate research and
operational weather prediction. It will be disseminated though seminars,
lectures, teaching, and standard forums of publication. OLAM fulfills the
criteria of a "community" model as it is freely available and supported. A post-
doc will be trained and supported.