* 0902063
* Bruhat and balanced graphs, manifolds, partitions and affine permutations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Richard Ehrenborg, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 156,625.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This proposal is composed of five broad research topics in algebraic, geometric
and topological combinatorics. The first project is to expand results about the
strong Bruhat graph of Coxeter systems to the more general setting of balanced
graphs. The PI has recently extended Billera and Brenti's work on the cd-index
of Bruhat graphs to balanced graphs and showed the Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials,
an important topological and representation theoretic invariant, also extend to
this setting. The second project is a study of the face incidence data of
regular subdivisions of manifolds via the cd-index. The PI will investigate
manifold analogues of classical results for convex polytopes, including to
determine inequalities for the coefficients of the cd-index, to develop a theory
of regular manifold arrangements in the spirit of Zaslavsky's seminal work on
hyperplane arrangements, and to extend Stanley's notion of spherical
shellability to manifolds. Motivated by Wachs' work on the d-divisible partition
lattice, the third project is to examine the restricted partition lattice from
the standpoint of poset homology, shellability and representation theory. The
fourth project is a classical enumerative study of Dowling analogues of the
Stirling numbers of the second kind and the Bell numbers. The fifth project is
to investigate combinatorial permutation statistics, such as excedances,
descents and the major index, for the group of affine permutations.

Combinatorics is inherently an interdisciplinary field of study linking many
areas of mathematics and the sciences. This proposal further expands the range
of combinatorics. For example, the Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials are a deep
invariant originally defined in topology. In this project they will be analyzed
from a combinatorial perspective to further enhance our understanding of them.
Theories that apply to polytopes, which are sphere-like objects, will be
extended to other manifolds which have more complicated topological structure.
Developing our topological perspective is important since a large part of
modern-day physics is focused on studying the topology of space. Deepening our
understanding of permutation statistics and basic combinatorial enumeration may
help us to analyze and recognize patterns in vast genome data, as well as to
improve communications, including the internet.