* 0902235
* Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with NEMO-3 and Super-NEMO Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Karol Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2013
* USD 447,027.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). It will provide funding for this group to continue their
contributions to searching for the neutrinoless double beta decay. The
observation of neutrino oscillations has shown that neutrinos have mass. This is
the first direct evidence of physics beyond the Standard Model. This discovery
has renewed and strengthened the interest in neutrinoless double beta decay
experiments which provide the only practical way to determine whether neutrinos
are Majorana (i.e., they are identical with their own antiparticles) or Dirac
particles. Such experiments also have the potential to determine the absolute
scale of the neutrino mass and help resolve the neutrino mass hierarchy
question. The answers to these fundamental problems may also prove important for
understanding the fundamental forces of Nature and the evolution of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the next three years, the group will
participate in the NEMO-3 experiment with data analysis and collaborate on the
design of the new SuperNEMO experiment. NEMO-3 is located in the Modane
Underground Laboratory in the Frejus Tunnel under the French-Italian Alps, and
is currently one of the most sensitive searches for neutrinoless double beta
decays. Their simulation package based on GEANT-4 has become the main photon
transport software used by the Collaboration. It enables better understanding of
the NEMO-3 data and is extensively used to optimize the SuperNEMO design. With
about 100 kg of 82Se (or 150Nd), SuperNEMO will be competitive with, and
complementary to, the other largest planned experiments in this area worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the program includes collaboration
with the Warsaw University group and by employing UT undergraduates achieving a
broader impact of the project by educating and training students in state-of-
the-art science.&lt;br/&gt;