* 0902554
* SGER:  Search for Earliest Metazoans
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* L. Paul Knauth, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 02/28/2011
* USD 21,332.00

Search for Earliest Metazoans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L Paul
Knauth&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly discovered
latest Precambrian pond sediments deposited in Western Australia Precambrian
will be explored for body fossils and trace fossils of metazoans that may have
existed prior to the Cambrian explosion of life in the sea. Controversial
molecular clock results suggest that metazoans evolved in the Late Precambrian,
but exhaustive searches of Precambrian marine sedimentary rocks have not yielded
evidence of abundant and diversified metazoans. Dissolved oxygen may have been
too low in the seas until salinity was lowered by deposition of enormous salt
deposits in the late Precambrian. The possibility arises that metazoans were
extensively evolved as soft-bodied organisms in lower salinity non-marine
environments and moved subsequently into the sea to create the species diversity
characteristic of the Cambrian Explosion. Lake sediments are rapidly eroded off
continents, and no previous late Precambrian examples are known to test these
ideas. &lt;br/&gt; The Australian pond sediments were discovered during field
work for other purposes and have not been mapped or studied. They fill isolated
depressions on an ancient solution surface (paleokarst) developed on the
Proterozoic Eliot Range Dolomite. They are immediately overlain by non-marine
sands and latest Precambrian glacial tillite. They include cycles of laminated
carbonate interbedded with shales. The carbonates contain replacement chert and
insoluble residues of phosphatic material known to preserve even the smallest
metazoan fossils in younger strata. The SGER grant will support field work to
identify and map the best pond deposits, search for trace fossils, and obtain an
extensive collection of the freshest material for thin sections and subsequent
SEM and microscopic examination of insoluble residues. Stanley Awramik
(University of California, Santa Barbara) and ASU student Hope Johnston will
participate in the field work and lab investigations.&lt;br/&gt; Evidence of
metazoans in these rocks would indicate that the great metazoan expansion of
life was a result of previously evolved lineages moving into the sea rather than
some environmental or biological change that allowed them to originate in the
sea in a very short interval of time. Current efforts to understand what
possible environmental or biological changes allowed an explosion of life would
transform to a new effort to understand the antiquity and evolution of life in
the non-marine environments which are so infrequently preserved in the geologic
record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;