* 0902277
* Integration of Compound Semiconductors on Flexible Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Terry Alford, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 711,999.00

Technical. This project addresses fundamental materials science
synthesis/processing research associated with the integration of high-speed
electronics and highly functional sensors on flexible substrates. The primary
approach is to explore ion-cutting as a means to transfer single crystalline
III-V semiconductor layers onto flexible substrates. Current flexible
electronics processes focus on deposited amorphous and/or polycrystalline Si on
polymer substrates. Due to the limited tem-perature tolerance of polymers, the
carrier mobility of these deposited layers is low and often un-acceptable for
many applications even after subsequent laser annealing. The transfer research
will focus on, but will not be limited to, the ion cutting technique. A major
challenge is understanding ion damage, and how to reduce it in transferred
layers. In this joint proposal, UCSD will focus on processing while ASU will
focus on characterization. Anticipated benefits of the collaboration include:
discovery of the fundamental mechanisms by which single crystalline III-V
materials can be transferred to flexible substrates; and establishment of
knowledge and expertise in the funda-mental mechanisms associated with
synthesis/processing and characterization of devices fabri-cated from ion cut
and layer transfer of semiconductor thin films. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-
tronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance. The approach
is expected to have a significant impact on understanding and enabling future
high mobility and optoelectronic devices on flexible substrates. Research will
be integrated into class lectures and undergraduate research. The undergraduate
students working on this project will be encouraged to participate in annual
undergraduate research conferences: EUREKA at UCSD and Fulton Series at ASU.
Wafer integration concepts will be introduced to students enrolled in the
Freshman Seminar series entitled 'The Technological World' and students from the
Preuss School, a public school (grades 6-12) located on the UCSD campus, will be
invited to attend the seminar Series. An established collaboration with the Los
Alamos National Laboratory, based on the complementary nature of the facilities
at both institutions, and past fruitful efforts will be continued. An
established col-laboration with African researchers supported by the USAMI,
Princeton University will also be continued. Personnel will visit and work with
US graduate students on day-to-day research ac-tivities. Additionally, graduate
students will be involved in Science is Fun educational outreach with the City
of Phoenix Head Start teachers to develop a bilingual, inquiry based curriculum
for students and parents. This project will also develop age appropriate
scientific demonstrations modules (Collecting Light with Photoconductors and I
Like My Days and My Electronics Flexible) based on the benchmarks established by
the American Association for the Advancement of Science.