* 0902232
* CAREER: Semiparametric and Non-Parametric Models for Correlated Data
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,12/31/2009
* Annie Qu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2009
* USD 123,923.00

CAREER: Semiparametric and nonparametric models for correlated data

Abstract:

This research project is aimed at developing statistical theory and practical
methodology for complex high dimensional correlated data where the full
parametric likelihood function of the model is difficult to specify or
intractable, and partial data information is not accurate or is missing. The PI
and her collaborators will develop efficient and robust estimation procedures by
incorporating correlation structures into the models where high dimensional
nuisance parameters are present, and develop inference functions for hypothesis
testing with low computational intensity. Part of research goals for the 5-year
plan are: to provide an explicit maximum number of contaminated clusters allowed
to maintain the consistency of the estimator using quadratic inference
functions; to develop unbiased and efficient estimating functions if missing
responses are missing at random, and inference functions for testing the model
assumption; to develop an efficient esimator using a nonparametric regression
spline with relatively low demand on computation, and introduce a goodness-of-
fit test with a chi-squared property for testing whether coefficients in
nonparametric regression are time-varying or time invariant; and, to develop
semi-nonparametric models for cell cycle microarray data to incorporate both
temporal correlation within genes and correlation between biologically related
genes.

This research will have significant impact and many applications in biomedical
research, econometrics, environmental studies, oceanography, social science and
public health where correlated data arise often. The outlined research projects
help to tackle fundamental questions in statistical science and will stimulate
interest from a large group of scientists. It also makes connections between
theory and methods developed in econometrics, statistics and biostatistics. The
proposed research will benefit biomedical research to help combat life
threatening diseases such as AIDS and cancer, and will make contributions to
identifying cell cycle regulated genes more accurately. It will integrate
current states of knowledge of proposed research areas substantially into
educational activities through development of new courses on nonparametric
methods and microarray data analysis. It will advance undergraduate and graduate
students' learning and training in semiparametric and nonparametric methods.
Furthermore, it will broaden opportunities and enable the participation of all
citizens from various disciplines, including underrepresented minorities and
international partnerships.