* 0902828
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Community Engagement and Land-Use Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* John Logan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of this project is to identify the social processes through which
communities exert leverage over urban development and the construction of
tourism destinations. It specifically investigates how local residents engage
with land-use regulations and assert distinctive cultural frameworks in efforts
to exercise their interests. The research employs qualitative case studies of
three contested tourism-development sites in the state of Hawaii in which
community members successfully halted or slowed projects, or obtained
significant concessions from developers. For analytical contrast, a fourth site
will be examined in which community efforts to influence the development of a
large coastal resort complex were largely unsuccessful. Data will be gathered
from public records, newspapers, personal interviews, and existing video
footage. The primacy of tourism-driven urbanization in Hawaii makes it a useful
case for generating theory. Hawaii's unusually dense and robust land-use
regulatory system also make it an important study site for revealing the social
struggles surrounding urban growth regulation. Finally, this project aims to
bring concepts from cultural sociology to bear on debates at the intersection of
urban politics and urban sociology. This research will generate several broader
impacts, including providing an empirical basis to inform policy debates in
Hawaii and beyond through the first systematic investigation of Hawaii's unique
land-use regulatory system since 1980. Results will be shared with multi-
disciplinary audiences through conference presentations, community group
meetings, and direct distribution of chapters to community leaders and public
officials. This project will help community organizers, researchers, and policy-
makers better understand the stakes and social struggles involved in tourism and
urban development. Research results may also provide practical lessons to
planners and public officials about how to incorporate community concerns into
tourism-development.

