* 0902813
* GEM:  Phase Space Density Gradient of Energetic Electrons at Geosynchronous Orbit During Sharp Solar Wind Pressure Enhancements
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Xinlin Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 05/31/2012
* USD 154,025.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of the Geospace
Environment Modeling (GEM) Focus Group on Space Radiation Climatology is to
investigate the relationships between interplanetary conditions and trapped
radiation belt particles and how these relationships change on long time scales
(over a solar cycle) and apply this knowledge to the development of inner
magnetospheric components of a Geospace General Circulation Model (GGCM). It is
known that magnetic storms vary with solar wind conditions and that
magnetospheric energetic particles have their largest variations during magnetic
storms. However, the origin of radiation belt particles is still not fully
understood and that has made it difficult to understand the physical mechanisms
controlling the variability of these particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The radial
profile of the phase space density (PSD) of the radiation belt electrons for the
first and second adiabatic invariants can provide insight of the source and the
acceleration mechanisms. However, such a PSD radial profile is often difficult
to obtain, mainly because of the lack of multipoint measurements and reliable
magnetic field models with temporal scales on the order of 10 minutes, the drift
period of a 1 MeV electron near geosynchronous orbit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a two year research effort to determine the location of the energetic
particle heating region by measuring the radial gradient of the PSD of energetic
electrons and ions at and beyond geosynchronous orbit prior to and immediately
after sharp solar wind pressure enhancements. From these measurements one can
obtain the PSD at different radial distances prior to the solar wind pressure
enhancements. Test-particle simulations will be performed to validate the PSD
analysis and provide an estimate of the actual position of the particles before
the arrival of the solar wind pressure enhancement. Sharp solar wind pressure
enhancements, which can be due to interplanetary shocks and high speed solar
wind streams, occur throughout the solar cycle. A statistical survey over a long
term (approximately 1.5 solar cycles) will reveal any solar cycle and seasonal
dependencies of the radial gradient.