* 0902119
* Methods in the Representation Theory of Local Rings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Graham Leuschke, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 181,129.00

This award supports a program for advancement in the representation theory of
commutative Noetherian local rings. The study of maximal Cohen--Macaulay modules
over such rings has grown out of the theory of representations of Artin
algebras, which has developed sophisticated theoretical techniques for
classifying and characterizing module theories of non-commutative Artinian
rings. Classical problems from the non-commutative theory can often be stated
directly in the commutative higher-dimensional framework, and this framework
comes equipped with its own unique problems, specialized machinery, and deep,
powerful connections with algebraic geometry. The interplay between the two
areas has been exceptionally productive for both. However, many of the most
powerful tools of the Artinian arsenal are essentially noncommutative, in that
they produce noncommutative rings even from commutative input, restricting their
use in commutative algebra. Recent theoretical advances in non-commutative
algebraic geometry have begun to provide methods, including the notion of a non-
commutative resolution of singularities, similar to those provided by classical
algebraic geometry. Describing these non-commutative resolutions in terms of
tools from the Artinian theory will allow the powerful tools of that area to be
brought to bear on fundamental conjectures about the maximal Cohen--Macaulay
modules over Cohen--Macaulay local rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lies
at the intersection of the areas of commutative and non-commutative algebra,
combinatorics, and algebraic geometry. The classical aim of commutative algebra
is to describe the solution sets of systems of polynomial equations by
associating to them algebraic gadgets known as rings. Non-commutative algebra,
on the other hand, has developed theory for associating rings to directed
graphs, also called quivers. The synergy among these topics has enriched all
four subjects, and has led to applications in such varied fields as robotics,
statistics, cryptography, and particularly theoretical physics, where non-
commutative methods are central to such subjects as quantum mechanics, string
theory and the study of fundamental particles.&lt;br/&gt;