* 0902276
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  United States and Canada Unionization Divergence
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Kim Voss, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

SES-0902276 Kim Voss Barry Eidlin University of California, Berkeley

Why, after tracking each other closely from the 1800s through the mid-1960s, did
Canadian and U.S. unionization rates diverge so dramatically in the following
decades? Canadian unionization rates are now more than twice as high as in the
U.S. The problem is even more puzzling when one considers that Canadian and U.S.
workers share many of the same unions, and work for many of the same employers,
which operate in very similar economic environments. Prior research on the U.S.
and Canada unionization divergence has either too narrowly focused on proximate
causes without seeking to understand their historical and institutional context,
or too broadly identified essential differences in political cultures without
specifying mechanisms linking cultural differences with institutional
configurations and policy outcomes. This project examines the historical
conditions surrounding labor policy formation and development in both countries,
with a special emphasis on variations in the relative permeability of state
institutions. The central research hypothesis is that more permeable state
institutions in the U.S. allowed labor to have their policy goals incorporated
into state policy more easily than their Canadian counterparts, but at the
expense of creating a labor policy that was more politically contested and less
institutionally stable over time. In contrast, the greater impermeability of
Canadian state institutions forced unions to fight for labor policy reform from
the outside. While this made it more difficult initially for Canadian unions to
achieve their policy goals, once labor's political pressure brought protective
labor legislation within the purview of state action, the same institutional
impermeability had the effect of shielding Canadian labor?s gains, creating a
policy regime that was less politically contested and more institutionally
stable.

Given established links between union strength and outcomes such as welfare
policies, political landscapes, and socio-economic inequality, this research
into the causes of diverging union strength can deepen our understanding of
forces driving a much broader set of social indicators. At a more theoretical
and scientific level, this study uses the empirical case of U.S. and Canadian
unionization divergence to offer important insights into still poorly understood
processes of institutional formation and development. Additionally, thanks to
labor unions? unique position as organizations that operate both within and
outside state institutions, this study allows us to develop a more sophisticated
understanding of the complex interplay between state institutions, social
mobilization, and government action. Finally, at a methodological level, this
study highlights the importance of incorporating temporal analysis as a critical
means understanding cross-national institutional differences.