* 0902284
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Song Learning in Duetting Birds
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Christopher Templeton, Templeton               Christopher    N
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2012
* USD 137,032.00

0902284 Templeton

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr.
Christopher N. Templeton to work with Dr. Peter J. B. Slater at St. Andrews
University in the UK.

Song duetting is a complex acoustic display involving the production of
coordinated, temporally precise songs by two different animals. Although rare at
northern latitudes, duetting is quite common in birds outside of the temperate
zone, with at least 220 species singing duets, and it is clear that this method
of communicating is extremely important to the ecology and natural history of
tropical birds. Despite intense interest in understanding the function of song
duets, this study is the first to examine the mechanisms by which young birds
learn to produce these complex vocalizations. The present study examines the
ontogeny of song learning in Happy Wrens (Thryothorus felix) using a combination
of experimental field and laboratory studies. 1) behavioral observations: 2)
radio telemetry 3) song recording 4) playback studies: 5) laboratory learning
experiment: Last, a highly controlled laboratory experiment investigates the
social mechanisms and genetic biases of song learning. Male and Female nestlings
are hand-raised and subjected to male songs, female songs, or different types of
song duets from both sexes. The observed learning will indicate what types of
social interactions are necessary for young birds to learn sex-specific song
types and the appropriate rules for combining these songs into duets.

Song learning in north-temperate birds has been extensively analyzed in the
laboratory and has become a major model system for studying the ecology,
evolution, neurobiology, and genetics of learning in animals. In addition, there
are many fascinating parallels between the neurological and behavioral
mechanisms responsible for bird song learning and human language learning,
making birds important models for human language learning. Despite the
importance of this system, our understanding of song learning in birds has been
primarily restricted to temperate species where only the male sings, and it is
only recently that the diversity of singing styles among birds has been
appreciated. Species that sing complex duets, with temporally intertwined and
sex-specific song elements produced by the male and female, provide a unique
opportunity for studying the importance of social factors in bird song learning.
The results from the current research will close a significant gap in our
understanding of this widely-studied model system and broaden the potential of
applications to human behavior. In addition to the theoretical and practical
implications of the current research, this grant directly affects the scientific
training of a young researcher and numerous students. By spending time working
with one of the most well-respected scientists in his field, at one of the
premiere institutions in Scotland, and the UNAM field station in Mexico, the PI
is establishing important and long-lasting international collaborations and
gaining invaluable scientific expertise that he will bring back and pass on to
colleagues and students in the US at the end of the project.





