* 0902864
* Central American climates of the last interglacial
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2015
* USD 375,199.00

Past interglacials offer us insights into the response of climate and ecosystems
extremes beyond those experienced within the Holocene. While not perfect analogs
for projected climate change, interglacials such as Marine isotope stage 5e (MIS
5e) offer us the best empirical insights available for probably warmer and drier
conditions. Consequently, a substantial international effort is being made to
capture the MIS 5e from Greenland and there is broad interest in acquiring
highly-resolved records from all latitudes. Beyond simply wanting to know
interglacial conditions, the paleoclimatic community is particularly interested
in the transitions into and out of interglacial conditions, i.e. Termination II
and Inception I. This project provides centennial-scale multiproxy analyses for
Termination II, and MIS 5e and d (135-106 ka) from three recently collected
sediment cores from Mexico, Guatemala, and Panama. These records form the first
detailed terrestrial archive of climate and vegetation change for MIS 5e from
the Neotropics.&lt;br/&gt;The analyses include XRF, core color, and fossil
pollen, charcoal and diatom analyses. A chronology for each site is established
through a combination of tephrachronology and U-series dating. Preliminary
U-series dates from the Panamanian core confirms almost 5 m of deposition
between ages of 130 and 115 ka. The other records appear to have similar or
faster rates of deposition. Bayesian statistics are used to create transfer
functions for temperature, precipitation, and number of dry days per year. These
data are used to test hypotheses relating to the past migration of the inter-
tropical convergence zone, varying strength of the meridional overturning
circulation, the presence of quasi-cyclic climatic rhythms, and the variability
of MIS 5e relative to the Holocene. This provides the first regional estimate of
whether the past interglacial was a time of forest or scrubland expansion in
Central America, a finding that is of critical importance to modeling past and
future carbon storage.&lt;br/&gt;This data provides important benchmarks against
which paleoclimate models can be tested. Currently, no detailed terrestrial data
are available for MIS 5e from Central America or Mexico. This data is of
significance to those engaged in planning for a warmer world, whether for
agriculture, forestry or conservation. The provision of highly resolved climate
records from Central America allows hypotheses generated in other records to be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;This data is also of significance to ecologists studying
modern forest dynamics and to evolutionary biologists investigating the origins
of tropical diversity. Providing well-resolved chronologies for these cores
encourages other workers using different proxies to work on them.&lt;br/&gt;This
research leads to a significant number of new collaborations in Mexico, the USA,
Germany, Costa Rica, and the UK. During this project two undergraduates are
trained each year, and REU and RET personnel are encouraged to publish their
results. One Ph.D. student and one post-doc are supported. A female MS student
in Costa Rica is engaged in the project without charge to NSF.