* 0902485
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Advances in the Methodologies and Implications for Hydrologic Responses to Climate Change in the Upper Colorado Watershed, UT and CO
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Michael Cline, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 03/31/2010
* USD 11,920.00

Numerous lines of evidence have highlighted the relationship between the
variability of surface hydrology and the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
within the lower Colorado Watershed. One line of evidence, the paleoflood
record, illustrates the dependence of extreme flooding on the frequency of El
Niño events. Within the upper Colorado Watershed, these climatic aberrations are
not positively correlated with ENSO, and in some cases, inversely correlated.
There are no paleoflood studies in this region, so the hydroclimatic mechanisms
responsible for driving extreme flooding is based on temporally limited, gaged
records. The primary goal of this research is to address the spatial gap by
developing a watershed-scale, paleoflood chronology in the Dolores Watershed to
understand how extreme flooding has responded to shifts in climate. The
watershed encompasses a broad region of southwestern and west-central Colorado,
before draining into the Colorado River near Moab, UT. It is part of the region
that correlates very weakly with ENSO, so its response to climate shifts may act
as an analog to the majority of the Upper Colorado Watershed. This research
places an emphasis on geochronology to create a very robust flood chronology.
There are questions about the validity of using "optically stimulated
luminescence" (OSL) methods for dating paleoflood hydrology. This research will
provide an analytical assessment of OSL for its application to paleoflood
hydrology. In addition, this study is designed to evaluate the degree of
uncertainty in paleodischarge estimations by investigating the alluvial
stratigraphy to assess channel stability. Peak discharge estimates will be
completed with a one-dimensional hydrological
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will provide a more
thorough understanding of flood regime responses to climate change in the upper
Colorado Watershed. Hydrological responses to past climate shifts are a
potentially reasonable analog for modern and future hydrologic responses to
global warming. In addition, the integration of multiple age-control and field
techniques will reduce uncertainty in paleoflood research. The Dolores Watershed
has been selected for this study because of its unique position: in a climatic
region where stream flow is very poorly correlated with El Niño events, making
it a prototype for other sub-basins within the upper Colorado Watershed. The
physiography of the watershed is ideal for this study because the rivers are
mixed with both bedrock and alluvial channels, and the preservation potential
for paleoflood evidence is high. The paleoflood record in this region indicates
that numerous extreme floods have occurred, each of which greatly exceeds the
maximum flood during historical times. Water managers may apply this information
to mitigate the direct impacts of future flooding, especially in the context of
modern and future climate change.