* 0902904
* Improving Access to Technological Education Programs and Careers for Community College Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Steven Fadden, Landmark College
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 06/30/2012
* USD 149,994.00

The goal of the project is to increase the number of students with learning
disabilities who pursue and graduate from technological education programs and
either continue their academic pursuit of four-year technological degrees, or
gain employment as successful technology workforce employees. Landmark College,
a two-year college for students with learning disabilities and attention
disorders, will conduct a series of needs assessments of three community college
technology programs and regional technology employers to develop a hybrid (in-
person and online) professional development program, based on best practices.
The professional development materials will cover a number of areas of struggle
for students in technology-related courses, including mathematics and science
instruction, mastering complex vocabulary, study skills, and metacognitive
strategies to help students assess their own understanding. Program
effectiveness will be assessed through the implementation of a one-group
pretest-posttest pilot study conducted at the three community college partner
sites (Community College of Allegheny County, Lone Star College, and Western
Nevada College), using a grounded theory analysis approach to review formative
program results and summative student and faculty outcomes. An independent
external evaluator will assess the project's effectiveness in meeting its goals.