* 0902441
* Continental patterns of moisture anomalies associated with late Holocene mid-latitude megadroughts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Booth, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,921.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Warming temperatures associated with global climate change
are expected to lead to more frequent and intense droughts in many mid-latitude
regions. Understanding spatial patterns, magnitudes, and frequencies of past
decadal-to-multidecadal droughts, and linkages of these patterns to dynamics of
the coupled ocean-atmosphere system, is critical to assessing mechanisms and
providing the foundation for risk assessment and prediction. There is a clear
need for records of past hydroclimate variability in humid regions, where tree-
ring based reconstructions lack hydroclimate sensitivity and/or temporal depth.
This research produces a network of peatland-derived hydroclimate records
spanning the past 3000 years in humid regions of North America. The network is
used in conjunction with the tree-ring record of semi-arid regions and other
drought-sensitive records to determine continental-scale footprints of past
moisture anomalies. High-resolution analyses of testate amoebae, peat
humification, and plant macrofossils provide detailed perspectives on
hydroclimate variability. High-precision chronologies during significant mid-
latitude drought episodes, particularly the Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA),
provide robust portrayals of moisture anomalies during these critical events.
Data generation and synthesis is coupled with analyses of instrumental records
of drought, precipitation, and sea-surface temperatures (SSTs) to test the
hypothesis that widespread droughts like those during the MCA represented an
amplification or unusual persistence of an observed mode of 20th century
hydroclimate variability. Data-model comparisons and modeling experiments,
constrained by proxy SST records, are used to assess the relative importance of
Atlantic and Pacific Ocean influences on North American hydroclimate and the
potential dynamic response of the climate system to changes in external forcing.
The research provides spatial and temporal reconstructions of multidecadal
hydroclimate variability in understudied regions, linking this variability to
dynamics of the ocean-atmosphere system through synthesis of observational and
modeling results, and identifying mechanisms and dynamics of the largest
droughts to affect the North American continent in the last 3000 years. This
work documents late Holocene droughts in regions conventionally assumed to have
low drought risks, potentially transforming both scientific and societal
perceptions. Results are disseminated through public lectures, a web site,
teaching and advising at the University level, and organizational networks. Data
is distributed through the NOAA paleoclimatology program, as well as other
outlets. The project includes interdisciplinary training of graduate students
and research experience for numerous undergraduates. The PI has a strong track
record of recruitment of women. The PI incorporates project activities into
course materials and seminars. The project renews a productive collaboration
between the PI and the University of Wisconsin's CCR, taking advantage of the
wealth of data created by the first mid-Holocene-to-present transient run of a
fully coupled ocean-atmosphere-land model.