* 0902004
* Magnetism in the Habitable Zone: Simulations of Dynamo Activity in Lower-Mass Stars
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Benjamin Brown, Brown                   Benjamin       P
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 249,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Benjamin Brown is awarded an NSF
Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of
research and education at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Dr. Brown will
explore through 3-D numerical simulations the interplay between convection,
rotation and resulting dynamo action in stars like our sun. These simulations of
lower-mass G-, K- and M-dwarf stars will have important implications for our
understanding of the solar and stellar dynamos and will have direct relevance
for the search for Earth-like planets around distant stars. To understand
whether life can exist outside of our own solar system, we must understand the
environment of planets orbiting habitable, solar-like stars by exploring the
magnetic activity of those stars. These cutting-edge simulations, conducted in
part with NSF PACI support on national supercomputers, will help address the
fundamental questions raised by magnetism in stars like our
sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brown will also increase public awareness of
stellar magnetism through the creation of broadly distributed planetarium
content. This show on stellar magnetism may be shown in university planetaria
across the nation and at Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural
History in New York. Locally, graduate students at UW-Madison will gain new
experience in the creation and presentation of visualizations connected with
their research. They will gain practical experience in presenting to the general
public through collaborations with the Madison Metropolitan School District
planetarium and activities at the Space Place in Madison.