* 0902323
* Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Michelle Wachs, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Qing Xiang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 172,351.00

There are two interconnected parts to the proposed project: (1)the application
of symmetric function theory to permutation enumeration and (2)research in
topological combinatorics. In the area of permutation enumeration, the PI will
continue a study of the joint distribution of the major index and the excedance
number on conjugacy classes of permutations, which was initiated in her work
with Shareshian on the topology of a partially ordered set arising from
commutative algebra considerations. The major index and excedance number are two
of four fundamental permutation statistics introduced by MacMahon at the
beginning of the last century. Although the joint distribution of other
combinations of the four fundamental permutation statistics have been
extensively studied in the literature, surprisingly the joint distribution of
the major index and excedance number had not been considered until the work of
the PI and Shareshian. In this work it is shown that this joint distribution has
many remarkable properties, one of which is a new q-analog of the classical
formula for the exponential generating function of the Eulerian polynomials. In
order to prove this formula, the PI and Shareshian introduced an intriguing
class of symmetric functions called cycle-type Eulerian quasisymmetric
functions, which refine symmetric functions that have occurred in various
representation theoretic and enumerative contexts such as in Askey and Ismail's
refinement of MacMahon's enumerator of multiset derangements, in work of Procesi
and Stanley on toric varieties of Coxeter complexes, and in Stanley's work on
symmetric chromatic polynomials. There are many interesting properties that the
cycle type q-Eulerian polynomials and the cycle-type Eulerian quasisymmetric
functions seem to possess, but have yet to be proved. The second part of the
project includes a continuation of the research in poset topology that led to
the work on the joint distribution of major index and excedance number. A poset
operation, called Rees product introduced by Bjorner and Welker as a
combinatorial analog of the Rees construction in commutative algebra, is central
to this work, as is the notion of q-analog of a poset. While the work of the PI
and Shareshian represents a novel development in permutation enumeration, what
makes it even more interesting is that it has arisen from, and has found
intimate connections to work outside of permutation enumeration i.e.,
topological combinatorics, commutative algebra, toric varieties in algebraic
geometry. It is an intriguing problem to understand at a deeper level the basis
for all these connections. These deeper underpinnings may help to explain the
ongoing discovery of new results on the joint distribution of major index and
excedance number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant is
in algebraic combinatorics, which is an area of mathematics that seeks to
develop connections between combinatorics (the science of counting, arranging
and analyzing concrete discrete configurations) and fields of pure mathematics
that involve sophisticated abstract algebraic structures. The idea is to use
these connections to gain deeper insights and solve problems in combinatorics
and in the other fields. The discrete configurations that are studied in
combinatorics arise in various fields of mathematics, computer science, physics,
biology and engineering; DNA sequences, phylogenetic trees, and communications
networks are all examples of discrete configurations. Combinatorial methods are
playing an increasing role in these fields.