* 0902865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Promoting Sustainable Communities: Community Forestry as a Conduit of Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* James McCarthy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,766.00

Community forestry is designed to provide community-based groups with resource
access, income generation, and greater social equity through localized forest
management. Its implementation is representative of broader shifts in
environmental governance away from centralized command-and-control regulation,
and towards public/private partnerships and voluntary and decentralized
approaches. Nepal is often cited as a success story for community forestry, with
over 14,000 community forest user groups controlling over 1.1 million hectares
of forest land, benefiting over 35% of Nepal's population. Building on their
success in forest management, such groups have begun to promote other
sustainability initiatives, including biogas technology. This study has two
objectives. First, it explores whether and how participation in community forest
programs promotes broader environmental awareness and values, including interest
in other environmental sustainability programs, such as biogas. Second, the
study explores whether and how national and global movements for environmental
sustainability influence the form and content of community forestry and biogas
technology programs in Nepal. The study will advance the field of political
ecology by combining recent perspectives on how and why people internalize
environmentalist views and put them into daily practice with political ecology's
longer-term efforts to theorize the relationships among politics, discourse, and
sustainability. This multi-sited case study explores the connections between
community forestry and biogas initiatives in two locations in Nepal. In Jhapa
district, multiple community forest groups are promoting biogas, with one
receiving an 800,000 rupee government loan to continue its work, while in Gorkha
district, such groups are participating in a new biogas promotion program. These
sites represent a spectrum of conditions under which biogas can be promoted,
with environmental conditions in Jhapa more favorable to biogas than those in
Gorkha, and with farmers in Jhapa owning more land and cattle than their Gorkha
counterparts. Given biogas' potential to improve quality of life, it is critical
to understand if and how such projects can succeed under both ideal and
challenging circumstances. Data collection methods include ethnographic
fieldwork, participant observation, in-depth interviews, survey, participant
mapping, focus groups, primary documents, and secondary literature. Content
analysis of the collected data will explain why respondents do or do not
participate in community forest groups and adopt biogas technology, as well as
how they view these actions with respect to broader environmentalist views and
agendas.

This study seeks to understand the implications of using participation in
decentralized, voluntary forms of environmental governance---here, community
forestry---as a pathway towards a broader sense of environmental citizenship and
participation in other sustainability initiatives. Understanding how groups
design synergies between programs that advance sustainability on many fronts is
thus relevant not only to community forestry in Nepal, but to efforts to promote
and implement environmentally and socially sustainable practices worldwide. This
award to support research in Nepal is cofunded by SBE/GSS and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.