* 0902125
* Timing is everything:  seasonality and phenological dynamics linking species, communities, and trophic feedbacks in the Low- vs. High Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Eric Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 363,137.00

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Broad-scale investigations of the ecological consequences of changing climate
and seasonality in the Arctic are imperative to improving our understanding the
Arctic as a system. This understanding will, however, continue to elude us in
the absence of studies of the responses to such changes of inter-connected
biological components. This is a comprehensive investigation of ecological
responses to changing seasonality at two rapidly warming sites in the Low- and
High Arctic to address this need. This work links changing seasonality with the
phenological dynamics of species, species dynamics with the phenological
dynamics of communities, and community dynamics with species interactions across
trophic levels.

Abiotic changes associated with global climate change are occurring rapidly in
the Arctic, and documentation of their rates, magnitudes, and spatial variation
has received unparalleled focus. The documentation of observed biological and
ecological consequences of such abiotic changes has received comparatively less
attention, but one of the most common observations has been that of differential
responses to warming among plant species and functional groups. These
observations suggest that community- and inter-species level consequences of
warming may be a common aspect of ecological response to warming throughout the
Arctic. This effort will make a comparison of ecological rates of response to
changing seasonality within and across plant species, across trophic levels
between plants and herbivores (caribou and muskoxen), and through space and time
within and between the Low- and High Arctic. This research will synthesize and
continue the collection of long-term, spatially replicated data from
Kangerlussuaq, West Greenland, and Zackenberg, Northeast Greenland, to address
four aspects of ecological response to changing seasonality in the Arctic:

I. How do rates of phenological change in response to changing seasonality in
the Arctic vary among plant species, and between the Low- and High Arctic?

II. How does the timing of herbivore activity respond to changing seasonality
through time and space, and between the Low- and High Arctic?

III. How does changing seasonality alter reciprocal interactions between the
phenology of plants and herbivores?

IV. What are the large-scale and proximal drivers of the observed changes, and
do they differ between the Low- and High Arctic?

This team will use 8 years of spatially-replicated data on the phenological
dynamics of 31 plant species from Kangerlussuaq, and 13 years of spatially-
replicated data on the phenological dynamics of 6 plant species at Zackenberg,
in addition to 8 and 13 years of daily and weekly observations of caribou at
Kangerlussuaq and muskoxen at both sites.

