* 0902980
* Assessing Wind-driven Circulation Variability in the Subtropical N. Atlantic Using an Array of Archived Radiocarbon Records
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brad Rosenheim, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2013
* USD 255,073.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the North Atlantic Ocean, poleward
transport of equatorial heat is facilitated by both the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation and the Subtropical Cells (STCs). Changes in the
transport balance of these two mechanisms have been suggested by the short
instrumental record of oceanographic data, but questions about whether these
changes reflect cycles or trends in the climate system remain unaddressed by the
short length of these records. This research analyzes radiocarbon (14C) records
stored in the skeletons of corals and sclerosponges from a variety of locations
across the tropical Atlantic to constrain changes in the STCs over the past
century and beyond. The locations from which these skeletal archives have been
taken enable a unique opportunity for geochemical paleoceanographic data, rich
in temporal extent but spatially sparse, to aid in the interpretation of the
short instrumental record. Results from this study will be of interest not only
to paleo-oceanographers and paleoclimatologists, but also to climate modelers
who may aim to use numeric simulations to spatially interpolate the records
resulting from this project. This award supports a graduate research assistant
and an early career PI.&lt;br/&gt;