* 0902511
* A Pilot Project to Implement a Tiered Internship Model for Students in Geospatial Technology (TIMSGeoTech)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Donna Arkowski, Pikes Peak Community College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 07/31/2011
* USD 149,542.00

Pikes Peak Community College (PPCC) in partnership with industry and a high
school district is creating and implementing a tiered internship program in
geospatial technology (TIMSGeoTech). The project is aligning the educational
practices with industry expectations in an effort to increase the enrollment of
students and better define career pathways. The project is being informed by the
SC ATE Center of Excellence and the National Geospatial Technology Center. SC
ATE Center's successful internship, student recruitment, and industry consortium
models are being adapted and implemented for this project. The TIMSGeoTech is
advancing knowledge and understanding in many fields involving geospatial
technology, geographic information systems and science aligning graduates and
their skills with industry needs through tiered internship experiences. It is
also facilitating communication among sectors (academic, industry, and
government) to improve the relevance of coursework to today's geospatial
applications. This is allowing resources of various organizations to be combined
to provide valuable experiences for participants. Establishing paid internships
and scholarships should develop this project into a self-sustaining program. The
Tiered Internship Model can be adapted by two- and four-year colleges preparing
geospatial technicians as it creates a system for partnering with industry so
that they can 'grow their own' future workforce by tapping students early in the
educational process and grooming them for possible future employment with the
company after graduation. TIMSGeoTech is bringing together a diverse group of
industry stakeholders to create opportunities for partnerships and networking
for students, educators, and professionals. TIMSGeoTech is enhancing the
involvement of under-represented groups through outreach to workforce
development offices by providing links to unemployed and underemployed
individuals.