* 0902218
* Reconstructing climate variability and aridity in the Sierra Nevada, CA, based on isotopic evidence in sediments from Swamp Lake, Yosemite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 201,053.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

An understanding of how climate in California responds to global and regional
forcing mechanisms on multiple timescales is crucial for the management of
scarce water resources and for predicting how natural patterns will interact
with future climate warming. In light of the short instrumental record, only
paleoclimatic records can provide the basis for understanding climate
variability and ecosystem responses on longer timescales, capturing many cycles
of the decadal and centennial-scale processes that control regional climate and
determine water supplies, as well as the range of extreme conditions experienced
under different climatic regimes. This grant develops new records of climatic
variability in California based on isotopic evidence in the 19,000-year
sedimentary sequence recovered from Swamp Lake in the central Sierra Nevada.
This longer record allows high-resolution (20-50 yr) reconstructions for
previously identified dry intervals in the mid- and late-Holocene, in order to
better understand the decadal climate variability underlying long-term droughts.
Previous work demonstrated that measurements of hydrogen isotopes (del-D) in
biomarker compounds extracted from sedimentary organic matter (OM) provides a
powerful paleohydrologic tool. The current project uses coupled del-D signatures
of terrestrial plant and aquatic biomarkers to reconstruct past precipitation
patterns, evaporative balance and water availability in the Sierra. A parallel
record utilizing a suite of OM proxies (total C & N, C/N ratio, del-13C,
del-15N, biomarker abundances) traces OM sources, lake productivity and other
ecosystem responses to changing climate conditions. Climate reconstructions are
supported by a multi-year field study to understand the isotope hydrology of the
lake basin, calibration with the instrumental record, and comparisons with
existing records from Swamp Lake, the Sierra Nevada, and California as a whole.
The development of a decadally- to centennially-resolved record of Late
Pleistocene-Holocene climatic variability for the Sierra Nevada represents a
major step forward for paleoclimatic research in California. Such records are of
direct societal importance because processes on these timescales determine water
supplies, influence the distribution of plants and animals, and modulate the
occurrence of higher-frequency events such as floods and droughts. The project
provides involvement for underrepresented and minority undergraduate students in
research, and participation in programs that aim to strengthen their leadership
skills. Mentoring is coordinated for students from the AGEP program, and a
'first grad geology program - Geokids' at UCSC, and a K-12 education class
'Communicating ocean sciences' is offered. The project participates in the NSF-
funded national education programs 'Science Diaries' and 'Kids Science
Challenge' (through Pulse of the Planet, NPR). The PI also is developing an
inquiry-based curriculum on the topic of paleoceangraphy and paleoclimatology.