* 0902751
* Collaborative Research: Development of paleo-proxy to test the sensitivity of the Southern Greenland Ice Sheet to future warming
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,747.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Stoner 0902751 Oregon State University

A significant missing component in paleo-reconstructions of GIS behavior has
been the lack of an unambiguous ice sheet tracer. The development of such a
tracer for the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) retreat and aerial extent is proposed
using terrigenous provenance markers and the different bedrock terrane ages of
southern Greenland (Archean versus varying Proterozoic ages). Specifically,
streams will be sampled for suspended load sediment from the geologic terranes
of southern Greenland. Suspended load sediment will be measured for trace-
element and Sr-Nd-Pb isotope composition, and magnetic properties of the
sediment will be determined. These data will be compared with previously made
and new measurements on a core off of southern Greenland from a well-studied
sediment sequence spanning the last 430 kyrs and 5 interglacials. Isotope
studies on piston core samples will focus on the silt size fraction in order to
minimize the influence of far traveled clay size sediment. Ice rafted sediment
will also be avoided. Trace element records combined with previous and newly
obtained magnetic records will provide estimates of the response time of the
southern GIS to a warming climate by identifying the timing and duration of ice
sheet retreat. The Sr-Nd-Pb isotope tracers will allow calculations of sediment
sources and when ice retreated off portions of southern Greenland, thus
estimating its contribution to higher sea levels. In particular, the
disappearance of relatively young Proterozoic sediment at the core site places
the southern GIS margin behind its current location. A subsequent reduction in
Archean sediment and dominance of intermediate age Proterozoic sediment places
the southern GIS margin in central Greenland.