* 0902038
* Collaborative Research:The Changing Seasonality of Tundra Nutrient Cycling: Implications for Ecosystem and Arctic System Functioning
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 313,386.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Abstract

Arctic soils have large stores of carbon (C) and may act as a significant CO2
source with warming. However, the key to understanding tundra soil processes is
nitrogen (N), as both plant growth and decomposition are severely N limited.
However, current models of tundra ecosystems and their responses to climate
change assume that while N limits plant growth, C limits decomposition. In
addition, N availability is strongly seasonal with relatively high availability
early in the growing season followed by a pronounced crash. There is a need to
understand the controls on this seasonality to predict Arctic System responses
to climate change, but there are multiple questions that need answers: 1) What
causes the seasonal nutrient crash? 2) Does microbial activity switch seasonally
between C and N limitation? 3) How will a lengthening of the growing season
alter overall ecosystem C and N dynamics, as a result of differential extension
of the periods before and after the nutrient crash? 4) What will be the larger
impacts of these patterns on the Arctic system?

Addressing these questions requires following plant and soil dynamics in a very
tight time frame, coupling this understanding of the timing of C and N
interactions to an enhanced mechanistic understanding of why the nutrient crash
occurs, and then using transect sampling and ecosystem modeling to explore the
large-scale implications of this seasonal crash. This proposed research will
address our questions by: 1) Varying the length and timing of the growing season
in the field by advancing snow melt and warming the ecosystem; 2) Establishing
the fine scale seasonal time-courses of soil N availability, plant N content,
leaf expansion, root growth and rhizodeposition, ecosystem respiration,
microbial biomass and enzyme activity; 3) Conducting lab experiments to
determine the extent to which microbial activity is limited by temperature, and
C and N availability before and after the crash; 4) Determining how the timing
of the nutrient crash and plant growth vary across a latitudinal transect; 5)
Refining the Multiple Element Limitation model (MEL) that was developed for
arctic ecosystems to better handle how plant and microbial systems respond to N
limitation, and incorporating the specific drivers of the crash into MEL; 6)
Testing the large-scale spatial and temporal effects of the seasonality of
nutrient availability and how it may change in a warming Arctic with a
lengthening growing season.

This work will require intense mechanistic research focusing on transitions and
transformations that occur over only a few weeks at most, but which have
profound impacts on the tundra ecosystem. Researchers will scale this
mechanistic work to the intermediate spatial scale by conducting transect
measurements along a latitudinal transect to validate that patterns that occur
locally are robust. They will scale to the whole Arctic system by integrating
these mechanisms, and importantly, the N-effects on decomposition, into the MEL
model that is designed to explore multiple limiting resource effects on
ecosystem function. As an integrated package, this research will explore how the
changing seasonal pattern that drives the crash in N availability in tundra
soils will alter overall tundra C-cycling and its role as a source or sink of C
and through this its role in the global climate system.