* 0902216
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Governance Without Government: Explaining Order in a Brazilian Favela
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Jeff Garmany, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 03/31/2011
* USD 11,967.00

More than half of city dwellers worldwide, roughly 1.6 billion people, currently
live in poverty. In Brazil, for example, 51.7 million people reside in favelas
(i.e., urban slums), a figure equaling 36.6 percent of the country's total urban
population. Though each favela community is unique, like impoverished
communities elsewhere, most residents confront a lack of state resources (e.g.,
hospitals, schools, urban infrastructure) and rarely participate significantly
in political processes. Far from devolving into massive, anarchic urban sprawls
as one might expect, however, these communities uphold a striking level of
social stability and political structure: researchers consistently report that
social and political order is maintained in Brazilian slum communities, even
when official governing bodies have no visible presence. Still unknown is how
and why a majority of favelas, despite the limited presence of a visible
governing authority, continue to function like any other Brazilian neighborhood.
This doctoral dissertation research queries how governance (i.e., the
coordination of complex social systems and steering of societal development) is
produced and maintained in spaces where the institutions of government appear to
be essentially absent. Through a case study of a favela in a midsized city in
northeast Brazil (Fortaleza), and relying upon a mixed-methodological research
design (e.g., semi-structured interviews, focus groups, participant observation,
archival research), this doctoral dissertation research seeks to explain the
paradox of governance in ungoverned spaces. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By
introducing urban development research to theoretical contributions of research
on governance, this study will help to not only resolve existing debates over
social cohesion in non-governed areas, but also to provide greater clarity and
substance to two dynamic social science traditions. For political theory, it
will bring empirical transparency by considering a case (urban slums) that is
being duplicated in thousands of cities across the globe. And for urban
development, it will move beyond the confines of Brazil's more studied urban
agglomerations, joining primary data with a theoretical investigation to
understand socio-political order in one of the world's most rapidly growing
communities. This research helps to explain political stability in slum
communities and, even more importantly, will provided insights on what sorts of
pragmatic measures might alleviate the effects of widespread
poverty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of
International Science and Engineering.