* 0902472
* RUI Collaborative Proposal: Climate and Chronology of the Last Glacial-Interglacial Transition, North-Central Great Basin, U.S.A.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Benjamin Laabs, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 247,226.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Recent developments in the understanding of Pleistocene
glacial records in the western U.S. reveal spatial variability in the onset of
the last glacial-interglacial transition (GIT; the time ~17-10 ka) among the
northern, middle, southern Rocky Mountains, and the central Colorado Plateau.
Such variability may reflect differences in precipitation among these areas
caused by shifts in the location of the polar jet and accompanying storm tracks,
or possibly the importance of Great Basin pluvial lakes as moisture sources for
downwind mountain ranges. In determining the extent, timing, and chronology of
glacier and lake fluctuations in the north-central Great Basin, this project
fills a broad spatial gap in the understanding of glacial and paleoclimate
history in the western U.S., and provides a much needed addition to climate
records used to validate regional climate models. Intellectual Merit: Numerous
mountain ranges and intermountain valleys in the north-central Great Basin
contain abundant evidence of glacier and pluvial-lake fluctuations during the
last GIT. However, the timing of glacier and lake responses to climate changes
during this transition is virtually unknown in this region, and the nature of
temperature and/or precipitation changes during this interval of profound
climate change is poorly understood. Using glacier and pluvial-lake records from
this region to infer climate changes during the Latest Pleistocene is of great
current interest for several reasons. First, the location of the Great Basin,
central among well-dated glacial and pluvial-lake locales in the interior
western U.S., provides significant potential for examining the response of
climate-sensitive, small glaciers and lakes to climate changes associated with
the retreat of North American ice sheets and accompanying reorganization of
regional-scale atmospheric circulation. Second, the excellent preservation of
glacial and pluvial-lake deposits provides ideal targets for cosmogenic-surface
exposure dating and optically-stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating. Finally, the
proximity of mountain glaciers to closed-basin pluvial lakes during the last GIT
affords a rare setting in which combined numerical modeling of glacier and lake
mass balance can be used to set narrow limits on paleo-temperature and
precipitation. Broader Impacts: This research is carried out by faculty from two
predominantly undergraduate institutions, and all aspects of field and
analytical work are aided by student researchers from Middlebury College and
SUNY Geneseo. Maps produced through this project are published by the Nevada
Bureau of Mining and Geology, making the glacial history of these popular areas
available to recreational users. EarthCache sites are in development for the
Nevada Bureau of Mining and Geology website to provide information about the
geology and Quaternary history of popular localities in the study area.
Additionally, mapping and all other results are provided to the USDA-Forest
Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the National Park Service, which
manage nearly all of the proposed study areas.