* 0902846
* GEM:  Quantitative Estimates of Plasmaspheric Losses and Implications for Solar Wind-Magnetosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* John Gill, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2013
* USD 287,899.00

This is a 3-year project to determine the effects and implications of
plasmaspheric material being eroded from the plasmasphere and subsequently being
convected to the dayside reconnection site. Specifically, the project seeks to
answer the following science questions: (1) how plasmaspheric losses are
partitioned during magnetic storms between downward flow into the ionosphere and
transport to the dayside boundary layers and (2) whether transport of
plasmaspheric material to the dayside magnetopause slows magnetic reconnection
as manifested in a possible systematic reduction in the polar cap potential at
these times. Global images of the plasmasphere from the EUV instrument onboard
the IMAGE spacecraft; cold plasma density and flow data from geosynchronous
spacecraft; density and total flux tube content derived from ground-based
measurements of whistlers and cross polar cap potential measured by the
SuperDARN radar will be combined to address these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have significant broader
impacts in a number of ways. It will support the research career of a female
scientist, who will act as the science PI on the project. Undergraduate students
will participate in the research project through an established REU program.
Finally, magnetic reconnection is a universal process and observational
verification that reconnection is reduced in the presence of cold plasma would
be a result that would have implications for numerous other plasma- and
astrophysical studies. &lt;br/&gt;