* 0902930
* Experimental Studies of  Basic Physics of Plasma Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Amiya Sen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 135,883.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Anomalous local turbulent transport in plasmas will be measured directly with
novel diagnostics. By measuring critical parameters, the fundamental scaling
laws of transport will be compared with various theories. A key element of the
project is the diagnostic uses of feedback. A first ever ion temperature
fluctuation diagnostic uses an ion energy analyzer which is modulated by a
feedback signal derived from the fluctuations. The cross-correlation of this
measurement with the potential fluctuations yields the ion thermal transport.
The chief intellectual merit of the project lies in the challenge posed in the
central issue in plasma anomalous transport physics: Bohm and gyro-Bohm scaling.
This will be done via novel basic physics experiments and correlated models.

Many of the general concepts and methodologies, especially the experimental
determination of a nonlinear turbulent system modeling via feedback, are quite
extrapolatable to many problems in fluid mechanics, aerodynamics, chemical
reaction systems etc. with great potential benefit. The integration of research
and education will be accomplished by exposure of the students to the clearly
interdisciplinary research represented by the project, containing physics,
applied physics, system and control engineering both in the laboratory and in
the classes. Enhancement of the infrastructure of research and education will be
accomplished via collaborations with several national and international
universities and laboratories.