* 0902581
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Disability Rights Movement and Advocacy Organizations
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Robert Crutchfield, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,933.00

This dissertation addresses the rise of the disability rights movement with
particular focus on the expansion of disability advocacy organizations.
Disability rights have had a late start in advocacy and protest despite earlier
legislative gains like the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Accounts of the
disability rights movement suggest that although the movement might share
similarly structured rights activities with other minority rights movements,
there are also important differences which shed light on the ability of social
movement and organizational theories to explain the expansion of disability
advocacy. The analyses in my dissertation are all longitudinal and use event-
history analysis, as well as logistic and Poisson regression models. The main
data is an original longitudinal (1961-2006) dataset of disability
organizations. There are two broader impacts of this project. First, competition
and innovation in the nonprofit service sector can give rise to more advocacy-
oriented organizations. Second, this project seeks to answer important questions
about the success of social movement organizations. This dissertation explains
the ways in which disability organizations, particularly in their shift towards
advocacy, continued to survive, and whether this change has led to success, real
or perceived.

