* 0902103
* Geometric realizations of local Langlands correspondences
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Matthias Strauch, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 135,794.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to investigate
representations of p-adic reductive groups (mainly general&lt;br/&gt;linear
groups) and Galois groups which are (simultaneously) realized by the
cohomology&lt;br/&gt;of deformation spaces of p-divisible groups. The proposed
research naturally falls into two&lt;br/&gt;projects, according to the type of
cohomology theory that is considered. The rst project&lt;br/&gt;is concerned
with the de Rham cohomology of the p-adic symmetric spaces de ned
by&lt;br/&gt;Drinfeld. These can be considered as the special bers of formal
schemes, and these formal&lt;br/&gt;schemes represent deformation functors for
certain p-divisible formal groups (with extra&lt;br/&gt;structures). It was
shown by P. Schneider and U. Stuhler that the (compactly supported)&lt;br/&gt;de
Rham cohomology groups of these spaces realize generalized Steinberg
representations&lt;br/&gt;(of general linear groups). Torsion points on the
universal formal group give rise to etale&lt;br/&gt;coverings of the symmetric
spaces, and global arguments (relying on the use of Shimura&lt;br/&gt;varieties)
show that their cohomology groups realize supercuspidal representations.
Be-&lt;br/&gt;cause these spaces are Stein spaces, their cohomology groups can
be computed by means&lt;br/&gt;of rigid-analytic di^erential forms. Using the
relation to di^erential forms, the project&lt;br/&gt;aims at constructing
lattices in these supercuspidal representations which then give
rise&lt;br/&gt;to Banach space representations. Furthermore, the PI seeks to
relate these Banach space&lt;br/&gt;representations to certain families of
potentially crystalline Galois representations, at least&lt;br/&gt;when the
spaces are one-dimensional (in which case the Galois representations are of
di-&lt;br/&gt;mension two), and when the covering is 'tame'. The second project
is concerned with the&lt;br/&gt;etale l-adic cohomology of deformation spaces of
one-dimensional formal groups. These&lt;br/&gt;cohomology groups are known to
realize the local Langlands correspondence between n-&lt;br/&gt;dimensional Weil
group representations and representations of the p-adic GL(n).
Again,&lt;br/&gt;the only known proofs for this fact, due to M. Harris and R.
Taylor (respectively P. Boyer&lt;br/&gt;in the equal characteristic case) depend
on global arguments. The PI proposes to investi-&lt;br/&gt;gate the equality
between epsilon constants of representations which correspond to
each&lt;br/&gt;other, in the case when the base eld is of positive
characteristic, by using local methods&lt;br/&gt;from rigid-analytic geometry.
For the Galois representation a formula due to G. Laumon&lt;br/&gt;describes the
epsilon constant in terms of a local Fourier transform, and this
Fourier&lt;br/&gt;transform in turn has a rigid-analytic description. Analyzing
this description the PI seeks&lt;br/&gt;to relate Laumon's formula to a formula
of Bushnell and Frohlich for the corresponding&lt;br/&gt;representation of
GL(n).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is about investigating
solutions of algebraic equations with special emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on methods
involving congruences with respect to a xed prime number p. For
instance,&lt;br/&gt;even though a polynomial in general may have no roots which
are rational numbers, there&lt;br/&gt;may well be integers which are roots up to
multiples of (arbitrary) high powers of p. This&lt;br/&gt;can be considered as
an approximate solution with respect to p, and these
approximate&lt;br/&gt;solutions give rise to a solution which is no longer an
ordinary number, but a so-called p-&lt;br/&gt;adic number. The arithmetic of
p-adic numbers is considerably easier than the arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;of rational
numbers, yet complex enough to reveal lots of information about
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;equations (with rational coefficients). Moreover, it is
possible to do analysis with p-adic&lt;br/&gt;numbers. The local Langlands
correspondence describes the arithmetic of p-adic numbers&lt;br/&gt;in terms of
actions of certain groups of matrices on linear spaces. These linear spaces
are&lt;br/&gt;derived from non-linear or 'curved' spaces by 'taking homology',
which is a process of&lt;br/&gt;converting geometric information into linear
spaces. The curved spaces in turn, which&lt;br/&gt;are like surfaces in spaces
of p-adic numbers, are accessible to analytic methods, with&lt;br/&gt;functions
depending on p-adic numbers as arguments. The PI proposes to use
these&lt;br/&gt;available analytic methods to investigate the curved spaces (and
subsequently the linear&lt;br/&gt;spaces they give rise to) with the goal of
getting a better understanding of the local&lt;br/&gt;Langlands correspondence
and extending it beyond its classical domain.