* 0902105
* Increasing research opportunities for undergraduates:   A program for Native American and Pacific Islander students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Elizabeth Losos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,348,552.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), in collaboration with Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)supports a research program in
tropical biology designed to address the specific cultural and social background
of Native American and Pacific Islander undergraduate students, two groups that
are severely underrepresented in the environmental and biological sciences. This
program is a continuation and extension of a successful program funded by LSAMP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the 2010-2012 Native American and Pacific
Islander program is to provide an intensive field research experience for Native
American and Pacific Islander undergraduate students. The program is structured
around an eight week timeframe during which the participants will conduct
research at OTS? Las Cruces Biological Station, among other sites, and visit
local indigenous communities. The focus of the program is the development of the
students? interest in biology and their capacity to conduct field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of the program lies in engaging
Native American and Pacific Islander students in pure and applied biological
research, while introducing them to the biodiversity, cultural diversity and
community-based conservation issues of the tropics. Under the guidance of the
program staff and faculty research mentors, the students will complete high
quality research projects designed to sharpen their technical skills and enrich
their professional development. In addition, by providing a broad range of
scientific perspectives and research experiences, the students will gain a sense
of career awareness to clarify and direct their future academic
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAPIRE program is designed to impact the academic
and professional development of Native American and Pacific Islander students by
providing a broad range of scientific and research skills to improve their
academic competitiveness at the undergraduate and graduate levels and to
encourage them to pursue careers in the environmental and biological sciences.