* 0902307
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Faculty Mentorship and Graduate Student Progress
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* In Paik, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2012
* USD 9,001.00

This project conducts an in-depth case study of three population cohorts of
graduate students pursuing doctorates at one elite research university in the
United States, to examine the influence of gender and race on the formation of
mentorship networks within these student cohorts, and examines the extent to
which these networks impact various milestones en route to Ph.D. attainment.
Faculty mentorship is repeatedly cited as a key factor in graduate student
persistence and degree completion, but its assessment and measurement has
remained elusive. A measurement of faculty mentorship is constructed - in the
form of students' dissertation committee advisors and the duration of committee
memberships - to explain how mentorship networks can enhance or inhibit graduate
student progress. Drawing on analysis of both quantitative longitudinal data and
qualitative interview data, this project contributes to the literature on
doctoral education and gender and race in higher education by capturing the
trajectories of all non-completers in each population as well as doctoral
recipients; examining students from multiple academic departments and broad
fields; and elucidating the influence of faculty mentorship on graduate student
experience and post-graduate success. The project?s mixed methodology will
contribute to work in the sociology of higher education, the intersection of
gender and race, and the impact of race and gender on social networks. In
addition, this work will provide guidance to future scholars, faculty, and
higher education administrators in improving graduate program experience by
shedding light on the development of student-faculty mentorship relationships.
In particular, determining the extent to which race and gender generate barriers
to graduate program progress and completion is key to developing and maintaining
diverse graduate student as well as diverse faculty communities. Research
findings will be presented at conferences and submitted to journals within the
fields of education and higher education administration as well as sociology.