* 0902716
* P2C2: North American Megadrought: Atmosphere-Ocean Forcing and Landscape Response from the Medieval Period to the Near-Term Greenhouse Future
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 638,135.00

Funding is provided to investigate whether landscape and vegetation feedbacks
played a role in creating the severity and persistence of Medieval megadroughts
and if these feedbacks might also impact future anthropogenic-induced
aridification.

Specifically, the researchers will: 1) create new marine proxy-based
reconstructions of tropical sea surface temperatures (SSTs) for the Medieval
period and use these to force atmosphere models in an attempt to simulate the
megadroughts. The resulting modeled climatology will then be used to force
vegetation models to estimate vegetation change during the megadroughts. These
estimates will be used to develop additional atmosphere model simulations (with
an interactive dust module) that combine the impact of SSTs, removal of
vegetation and expanded dust sources and aerosol loading. Other atmosphere model
simulations will be forced with altered vegetation and dust source boundary
conditions as estimated from paleoenvironmental data; 2) force vegetation models
with projections of future climate (from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change Assessment Report 4) to determine changes in vegetation and dust sources
that will be used as boundary conditions in additional simulations of future
climate change; and 3) work to develop a fully coupled land surface-vegetation-
dust module for inclusion in the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS)
model for use in additional simulations of SST-forced Medieval megadroughts and
of future climate.

The broader impacts involve supporting undergraduate and graduate students,
supporting a new researcher, and contributing to the understanding of climate-
related drought.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

