* 0902503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multiproxy Analysis of Tropical Cyclones and Climate Variability at Big Thicket National Preserve, Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* David Finkelstein, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2011
* USD 8,250.00

Because trees are stationary organisms, they are dependent on their surrounding
environment. Trees incorporate carbon from atmospheric carbon dioxide and oxygen
from soil moisture into annual layers of wood (cellulose). When the annual rings
are accurately dated using established dendrochronological techniques, high-
resolution stable isotope chronologies can document environmental change. This
doctoral dissertation research project will examine the relationships between
tree-ring stable isotopes (carbon and oxygen) and tree-ring width with various
climate properties, such as drought, temperature, precipitation, tropical
cyclone events, and large-scale ocean/atmospheric oscillation patterns at Big
Thicket National Preserve in Texas. Tree-ring climate records will be developed
using small-diameter increment cores taken from living longleaf pine trees. The
width and chemistry of each annual tree ring will be analyzed to provide a
record of climate variability and tropical cyclone frequency and variability
along the Texas Gulf Coast. Tropical cyclone (hurricane) systems can produce
rainfall with a chemical signal distinct from that of normal rainfall. Rainfall
from tropical cyclone events should replace or mix with existing soil waters and
may remain in the soil for up to six weeks. Tree-ring cellulose therefore can be
used to identify both modern and past hurricane events.

Because hurricanes pose a threat to many people living along the Gulf and
Atlantic coasts of the southeastern United States, the capability to build
centuries-long hurricane records from biological and chemical records is crucial
to enhance understanding about how these events have changed through recent
times, as well as for understanding the possible changes that could occur in the
future. One oxygen isotope study used to characterize tropical cyclone events
and climate variability in the southeastern U.S. used only one tree for any
portion of the isotope chronology, but such single-tree chronologies may be
problematic for interpreting regional climate for several reasons. This research
project will attempt to overcome these problems by addressing several possible
limitations. First, the chemical (isotopic) composition of soil water being used
by trees for photosynthesis may not be homogeneous across an entire stand.
Second, the amount of chemically distinctive rainwater characteristic of
tropical cyclone events may not uniformly replace the existing soil moisture
evenly across a stand. Finally, a single tree may not be capable of capturing
enough of the common climate signal to characterize the effects of regional
climate. This project will test these possible limitations by analyzing single-
tree isotope chronologies versus multiple-tree chronologies. The results should
help characterizing the variability that exists in the isotopic composition of
soil moisture in a stand. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.