* 0902682
* Pilot Project: Reconstructing tropical North American climate with the sedimentary record of Lake Chalco, Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Erik Brown, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 102,764.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project examines a sedimentary sequence from Lake Chalco (Central Mexico)
to develop a ~50 kyr record of terrestrial climate variability in the North
American tropics. The project uses proxies that reflect hydrological and thermal
variability, focusing in particular on the transition from the Last Glacial
Maximum to the Holocene. This project is in cooperation with the Autonomous
University of Mexico who, in the first phase of a drilling program, recovered a
~100 m drill core. Subsequent drilling may extend this by 100 m, providing a
record back to ~300 ka that includes the previous two interglacials. This pilot
project focuses on the uppermost 50 m of the core recovered earlier. The
analyses include x-ray fluorescence core scanning for major elemental
composition at an average resolution of ~20 years through the 50 m section, as
well as a series of organic geochemical analyses, including MBT
(paleotemperature), biomarker del-D (aridity) and lignins and biomarker del-13C
(vegetation response) at ~1000 year resolution since 50 ka. This work provides a
'proof of concept' for this site and a unique level of information on past
temperatures and precipitation since mid-MIS 3 in a region where climate records
are sparse. The climate record from Chalco should provide insights on regional
responses to past changes in coupled climate systems. Recent work in Antarctic
ice cores documents significant differences in atmospheric pCO2 and climate
change over the Middle Pleistocene (EPICA 2005, Siegenthaler, 2005), but high-
resolution continental records spanning this interval are rare globally and
absent in North America. The full Chalco record has the potential to provide
unique information that fills this critical gap, improving our understanding of
our present interglacial and its future course. This project contributes to the
training of the next generation of geoscientists through the direct support of
graduate and undergraduate students. This study also fosters international
collaboration among scientific communities in the U.S. and Mexico; Mexican
students will come to the Large Lakes Observatory to work on this project.
Broader impacts to the scientific community include a reconstruction of the
climate history of central Mexico spanning the past 35 kyr, and a validation of
the application of the MBT paleotemperature proxy in lacustrine systems of
Mexico. Increasing temperatures predicted by modern global climate change will
significantly impact natural systems as well as human populations in the coming
century. Gaining a better understanding of climate system processes and how they
are reflected in geochemical proxy records can help in modeling future climate
trends. Appropriate application of rigorously investigated proxies provides the
best information about paleoclimate estimates currently available on timescales
beyond the existence of instrumental records.