* 0902777
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender, Migration, and New Spaces for Palestinian Women
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Amy Mills, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 03/31/2010
* USD 11,579.00

Migration is often examined as either an international experience or as rural to
urban movement. Migration in Palestine fits neither of these models, but rather
displays its own distinct migration flow and pattern. This is due to
restrictions on mobility within the Palestinian territories, which in turn have
limited economic potential and dramatically altered the Palestinian economy as a
whole. In the past, these migration flows have been to outside the Palestinian
territories. A more recent adaptive strategy is for Palestinians to move
internally to Ramallah, a town quickly emerging as the de facto capital of the
Palestinian territories, and as such, the economic and cultural center of the
West Bank. Among these recent Ramallah migrants is the population under
examination: highly educated, single young women from various parts of the West
Bank. The presence of these young women indicates the extent to which
restrictions on Palestinian society have begun to alter gender roles and
behaviors among Palestinian women, as these women exert themselves in a new
social and economic space removed from patriarchal households. The project
examines the ramifications of the changing Palestinian economy for women by
exploring the ways in which the act of migration, and of living away from home,
transforms household roles, relationships and young women's identities. The
focus on the scale of the migration and on the unique gendered aspects of it is
a primary research goal. Methods employed will be semi-structured interviewing
in Arabic of the young women themselves, their families and other key
informants. The interviews will be supplemented with participant observation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research combines ideas and
theory from feminist geography, migration studies, and Middle East areas
studies. The emphasis is on understanding how gender and other power relations
are constituted at varying scales such as the household, civil-society, the
nation-state and the global economy. Palestinian women live in a constantly
changing political atmosphere, which can vary from day to day and even hour to
hour, and an in-depth examination of their lives will inform migration and
gender studies at large. Little attention has focused on single Palestinian
women, or on the ways in which their internal migration choices and outcomes are
conditioned by the larger context of political restraints on mobility. This new
migration pattern is an opportunity to study the relationship between gender and
migration in conjunction with the formation of place-based identities and
constructions of home and household. The case study of Palestinian women has
much to teach about how current patterns of migration form and are influenced by
factors beyond an individual's control, although they can still illustrate a
route to women's empowerment and mobility. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a student to
establish a strong independent research career.