* 0902895
* Late Holocene Climate Variability From Eolian Lake Sediments in Relict San Luis Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Fasong Yuan, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 253,233.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoclimate research has yielded a
number of proxy records from a variety of sources (e.g. tree rings, cave
deposits, shorelines, beach deposits, and lake sediments etc.) in the American
Southwest and provided important information of southwest climate fluctuations
during the late Holocene. Nevertheless, the documentation of late Holocene
climate variability in the American Southwest is far from complete. For this
area, proxy records documenting basin wide season-specific history of three
distinct climatic systems are scarce: for winter storms, spring dust storms, and
warm-season monsoons. In particular, little is known of past changes in dust
storm dynamics in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the basis of previous
work by others and preliminary results of two surface cores taken from relict
San Luis Lakes in July 2007, the PIs believe that San Luis Lakes were dominated
by eolian sediments intercalated with fluvial deposits along with discrete
missing records caused by deflation of dried-out lakes. Examination of longer
sediment cores will allow them to recognize the dominant forcing mechanisms of
late Holocene climatic variability in this region. They are studying the
chronology, sedimentology, elemental and isotope geochemistry of sediments from
San Luis Lakes to reconstruct decadally-resolved late Holocene variability in
the American Southwest, with special attention to the two contrasting epochs of
the Medieval Warm Episode and the Little Ice Age. The team will collect two
5-m-long sediment cores from two different lakes in the closed-basin area of the
San Luis Valley, develop a sediment chronology through optically stimulated
luminescence (OSL) analysis of quartz grains and radiocarbon (14C) dating of
organic materials in downcore sediments, and conduct a series of
sedimentological, geochemical and isotopic analyses of downcore sediments
(magnetic susceptibility, grain size distribution, carbonate mineralogy, Mg/Ca
and del-18O, etc).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research serve the
needs for policy makers of regional water resources management for the vast
dryland region in the American Southwest currently undergoing rapid growth of
population and economy and also help to understand the role of the San Luis
Lakes in the development of the Great Sand Dunes (GSD). This project benefits
people living in the Rio Grande valley, archeologists working on the habitation
patterns of Native Americans, geologists studying the GSD eolian system, and the
general public visiting the GSD. This project involves two undergraduate
students and one graduate assistant in the field and laboratory work. The
broader impacts of this project also include 1) fostering multi-institutional
collaboration with established scientists in the field, 2) training
undergraduate and graduate students, and 3) disseminating research findings at
conferences and peer-reviewed journal publications.