* 0902215
* First International Congress of Sustainability Science and Engineering: Where Science and Engineering Meet the Needs of Society
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

CBET- 0902215&lt;br/&gt;HUANG, YINLUN, WAYNE STATE
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides partial funding,
primarily for the travel and attendance at the First International Congress on
Sustainability Science and Engineering: Where Science and Engineered
Technologies Meet the Needs of Society, organized by a group of scientists,
educators, engineers, and governmental officials from 12 countries. This
congress will be held in Cincinnati, Ohio, Aug. 9-12, 2009. Industries have been
actively seeking approaches and plans of action that lean them toward the goal
of sustainable development. There is a clear need to organize an international
conference that can address broader issues of sustainability science and
engineering, and discuss how the development of science and technologies in the
industries can meet the needs of the society. The congress will seek to assess
the state-of-the-art sustainable engineering and science, and to share knowledge
and experience for achieving genuine economic, environmental and social
sustainability. The broader impacts of the project will facilitate the exchange
knowledge and experience among scientists, researchers, educators, and
practitioners around the world, and help the US delegates identify international
collaboration opportunities in the research and education of sustainable
engineering. This project will support a total of 20 faculty (preferably those
in their early career development stage), postdoctoral fellows, and
graduate/undergraduate students to attend the conference. Those in the groups
underrepresented in science and engineering are strongly encouraged to
participate.