* 0902054
* Numerical and Semiclassical Investigation OF Casimir energies and Forces
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Martin Schaden, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Casimir effects are macroscopic manifestations of changes in the energy of the
quantum ground state. They result from changes in boundary conditions or of
classical backgrounds for quantized fields. The corresponding Casimir forces can
dominate at micro- and nano-meter distances and in very strong gravitational
fields. Building on the recently vastly improved understanding of such effects,
this investigation will advance numerical and semi-classical estimates of
Casimir energies and forces. World-line methods and algorithms are to be
developed to the point that they permit the computation of Casimir forces in
realistic systems with unprecedented accuracy. By directly generating convex
surfaces with the appropriate probability measure very accurate vacuum forces
could be obtained for a large class of convex bodies. The existing world-line
formalism for calculating vacuum energies of scalar fields satisfying Dirichlet
boundary conditions is to be extended to include other boundary conditions and
ultimately compute vacuum forces due to quantum electrodynamics. The non-
perturbative inclusion of effects due to surface roughness will also be
investigated. Semi-classical methods will be used to analyze and guide the
design of more efficient algorithms. Semi-classical periodic orbit theory will
be further developed and applied to estimate changes in vacuum energy due to
periodic classical photon orbits in the extreme space-times near (micro-) black
holes and the early universe. The project introduces new analytic and
computational methods to research in other fields as well. A well-defined
stochastic measure on convex surfaces can be used to describe statistical
deformations of higher dimensional convex spaces as well as of biological
membranes. Stable micro black holes and Casimir effects due to extreme
gravitational backgrounds could improve our understanding of dark matter and of
dark energy. Accurate numerical estimates of Casimir forces in complex
geometries furthermore will reduce development costs and improve the
functionality of micro- and nano- mechanical devices. The control and efficient
manipulation of vacuum forces is essential in the progressive miniaturization of
mechanical devices. This project thus is at the heart of an emerging field of
increasing technological importance. The project provides a post-doctoral
associate the opportunity to contribute significantly to these developments.

The activity is well-positioned to recruit and promote the work of under-
represented minorities. It will ultimately have implications ranging from
nanotechnology to cosmology.