* 0902182
* SuperCDMS Soudan
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2010,06/30/2013
* Bernard Sadoulet, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,833,707.00

Observations of galaxies, superclusters, distant supernovae, and the cosmic
microwave background radiation tell us that about 85% of the matter in the
universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this dark
matter would be of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics, and high-
energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised of Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments after the
Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our galaxy may be
detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in a terrestrial detector.

The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) Collaboration has pioneered the use of
low temperature phonon-mediated detectors to detect the rare scattering of WIMPs
on nuclei and to distinguish them from backgrounds. This powerful technology is
operating deep underground in the Soudan mine in Minnesota. This award provides
construction funding for the SuperCDMS Soudan project which will extend the
deployed germanium target mass at Soudan from the present 4 kg to 15 kg.

The SuperCDMS experiment will have a broad impact which extends beyond the dark
matter search. The technical developments will further advance phonon-mediated
detectors, which have already found many applications in cosmology, astronomy
and industry. The project will contribute to the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, using techniques at the leading
edge of measurement technologies. In addition, the SuperCDMS collaboration will
expand its public outreach program at the Soudan mine.