* 0902177
* Tracking the Seasonal Contribution of Algal Fatty Acids to the Arctic Marine System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gay Sheffield, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 617,856.00

The Bering Sea has one of the highest seasonal sea ice regimes in the Arctic and
one of the highest rates of observed change. Cascading effects of seasonal
changes in sea ice are expected to influence primary production and propagate
through marine ecosystems in the Arctic. Funds are provided to support a
transformative approach to better track the complex seasonal interdependencies
between arctic marine primary production and arctic marine food web components
in the Bering Sea. The Principal Investigators will track the seasonal,
proportional contributions of specific biomarkers derived from the two main
primary producers, sea ice algae and open ocean phytoplankton, into higher
trophic levels (sympagic, pelagic and benthic invertebrates and ice seals) in
the Bering Sea. The overall goal of this proposal relates to providing an
exceptional level of ecological detail by: 1) tracing the seasonal inputs of
specific fatty acid biomarkers deriving from sea ice alga and open ocean
phytoplankton through the marine food web using sophisticated fatty acid
profiling and novel compound-specific stable isotope analyses (CSIA); 2) tracing
the seasonal (spring and summer) changes in the proportions of these biomarkers
in sympagic, pelagic and benthic arctic marine invertebrates; 3) which are an
important subsistence resource to Alaskan Native communities in the region.
Their detailed and seasonal perspective will contribute to ongoing food web
studies in the Bering Sea (e.g., the Bering Ecosystem Study and Bering Sea
Integrated Ecosystem Research Program - BEST/BSIERP, funded by the NSF and North
Pacific Research Board), including research being conducted by the Center for
Alaska Native Health Research (CANHR) on marine subsistence resources used by
Alaskan Native communities.