* 0902173
* Phenotypic Constraints and Community Structure: Linking Intraspecific and Interspecific Tradeoffs
* BIO,DEB
* 09/30/2008,08/31/2011
* Amy Angert, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2011
* USD 312,883.00

Trade-offs between competing functions prevent any one organism from excelling
in all environments, promoting diversity in natural communities. In the Sonoran
Desert, a trade-off between growth rate and drought tolerance contributes to
coexistence among winter annual plants. The goal of this project is to determine
whether this trade-off observed across disparate species reflects a deeper
constraint operating within all species. Researchers will compare populations
from across an aridity gradient in a greenhouse manipulation of water
availability and use controlled breeding to estimate genetic constraints on
growth and drought tolerance. A trade-off between growth and drought tolerance
within species would indicate that fundamental constraints limit plant
productivity and stress tolerance. If the trade-off is not apparent within
species, then ecological processes such as competition create the key trade-off
that structures the community.

This project will reveal potential constraints on population and community
responses to climate change. The conceptual framework can also be extended to
investigate why some non-native species become invaders that threaten
biodiversity while others do not. The project will contribute to NSF goals for
fostering education and diversity by supporting the research program of an
early-career woman and providing training and mentorship for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups.