* 0902734
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Ice Core Paleoclimate Records from Combatant Col, British Columbia, Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 210,236.00

Funding is provided to obtain new ice core accumulation records from Combatant
Col, Mt. Waddington, in southwestern British Columbia (BC), Canada. Combatant
Col is located significantly farther south than other existing ice core sites
along the west coast of North America and variations in precipitation tend to be
out of phase with those in Alaska and the Yukon.

Combatant Col sits at 3000 meters and contains more than 200 meters of ice. The
net annual snow accumulation is ~2.5 meters/year and the mean annual temperature
-5°C. A 65-meter core from the site shows that clear annual layering is
preserved in the geochemistry and in dust and black carbon. The age of the ice
near bedrock is estimated to be between 200 years and 1000 years old. It is
anticipated that an annually-resolved record of layer thickness will be
recovered at the site to allow for a record of snow accumulation covering the
last 200-1000 years.

The Combatant Col record, in combination with other existing records of
precipitation variability along the western margin of North America, will be
used to develop an updated and improved reconstruction of precipitation
variability in this region over the last 200-1000 years to address fundamental
questions about Pacific decadal scale variability.

The broader impacts involve supporting an early career female investigator and
strengthening international collaborations with researchers from institutions in
Canada.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).