* 0902898
* Collaborative Project: Using GIS with real-time water quality assessment to guide scientific inquiry and learning in a community college environmental studies program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Matthew Schwartz, Northwest Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Lea
* 05/31/2012
* USD 68,807.00

A course in Aquatic Environmental Science is being developed at Northwest
Florida State College (NWFSC), a two year college. The cornerstone of the course
is a series of field sampling activities using a combination of field analytical
instruments and web-enabled GIS products to assess, in real-time, spatial and
temporal variability of biogeochemical parameters in a local estuary. Teams of
students are collecting data using handheld multimeters to perform field
analyses for physical parameters (temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen)
and separate portable colorimeters to measure biogeochemical parameters
(nitrate, ammonium, and phosphate). Students are using field laptop PCs to
upload water quality data (via a wireless network card) to a GIS webserver,
maintained at a nearby four-year university, the University of West Florida
(UWF). The data from all sampling teams are compiled by the GIS server and used
to generate GIS layers that graphically depict the spatial variability of water
quality parameters using the entire data set. While still in the field, these
GIS layers can be immediately accessed by students and instructors to obtain a
whole basin view of spatial variation in water quality parameters. These summary
results are used to generate and test field hypotheses or to facilitate in-the-
field comparison with historical data collected during previous semesters and
stored on the field laptop. The Aquatic Environmental Science course is a
component of Physical Sciences in the Science Department at NWFSC. The target
audience for this course includes students enrolled in an AA program and
students enrolled in the Middle School Science Teacher Program for pre-service
teachers. The major field sampling component of the course is designed to meet a
number of goals related to both STEM disciplines and technical workforce
training by creating an experiential learning activity based on field data
collection. Specifically, the new course has field and classroom components that
provide students with the opportunity to use a variety of field technical
equipment within the context of an ecological assessment. The goal of this
combination is to simultaneously address STEM learning and technical aptitude
within a field-based project. The proposed field activities also are being used
as an articulation opportunity to introduce two-year college students at NWFSC
to GIS technology and environmental sciences. By collaborating with a UWF there
are opportunities for recruiting NWFSC students into baccalaureate and graduate
programs. The field activities also are being integrated into a workshop for
regional in-service high school science teachers.