* 0902002
* 2009 AEESP Conference and CAREER Workshop - Grand Challenges in Environmental Engineering and Science: Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Craig Just, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 02/28/2010
* USD 43,000.00

0902002&lt;br/&gt;Mattes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fields of environmental
engineering and science, as well as public health, have made remarkable progress
in treating drinking water supplies, providing for safe conveyance of
wastewater, and improving air quality over the past 50 years. But what future
grand challenges await us over the next few decades? And which areas of
environmental research are most critical to address these challenges? In 2050,
with almost 9 billion people and a Gross World Product 2-4 times larger than
today, environmental scientists and engineers are sure to play an important role
in society. Whether we can improve the future outcome will depend to a large
extent on our students, the next generation of environmental professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2009 AEESP Conference is to provide a forum for AEESP,
as a community, to discuss challenges and to better prepare environmental
engineering faculty and students to tackle these challenges. Both the National
Academy of Sciences (2001) and the National Academy of Engineers (2002) have
identified the following environmental Grand Challenges which offer the
potential for major technological, scientific, and societal breakthroughs:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Understanding human impacts on major biogeochemical
cycles&lt;br/&gt;2. Forecasting incidence of water-borne hazards and
disease&lt;br/&gt;3. Assessing effects of climate change&lt;br/&gt;4. Improving
our ability to predict changes in water resources and quality&lt;br/&gt;5.
Designing ecologically sustainable cities&lt;br/&gt;6. Understanding and
forecasting hydrologic cycle processes&lt;br/&gt;7. Quantifying relationship of
land-use/cover to aquatic ecosystem quality&lt;br/&gt;8. Reinventing the use of
materials (that become pollutants)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is
organized around the Grand Challenges, with each challenge having one session
with a keynote speaker, a student award speaker, and six to eight additional
speakers. Each session will be a mix of both research and education talks, which
is an innovative, exciting aspect of this proposal. By combining the talks
within each session, we hope to highlight successful examples of integrating
research and education. In addition, we will offer several workshops focused on
looking forward to new ways to address these Grand Challenges through improved
research and education. Specific workshops will discuss strategies to enhance
our graduate education programs, as well as our and our student's
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of the career
workshop for young assistant professors in environmental engineering and
science, a part of the 2009 AEESP conference, is to inform participants about
the NSF CAREER Award proposal process and to stimulate discussion concerning
personal and professional growth as a tenure-track faculty member in
environmental engineering and science.