* 0902090
* A Change of Seasonality of the Upper Arctic Ocean in Response to Atmospheric and Sea-ice Forcing
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 497,366.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to investigate the
change of seasonality of the Arctic Ocean Ekman transport and
upwelling/downwelling, and their relationships to key components of the Arctic
System. A systematic investigation of the Arctic Ocean upwelling and its change
of seasonality is needed in order to understand complex interactions among
components of a rapidly changing Arctic System. Upwelling is arguably the single
most important dynamical variable in oceanography. It forces oceanic gyres
through the Sverdrup balance. Upwelling replenishes nutrients in the surface
layer and helps to sustain phytoplankton production. It is a conduit for heat
flux from the warm Atlantic Water layer of the Arctic Ocean to the mixed layer,
where it influences the sea ice thermodynamics and the atmospheric circulation.
Upwelling and Ekman transport affect the surface salinity and thus play roles in
the oceanic thermohaline circulation. The most intense upwelling occurs along
the Arctic coast, so a change of upwelling seasonality can influence land
processes, such as the permafrost in nearshore sediments. Daily Ekman transport
and upwelling from 1979 to 2006 have been estimated using satellite and buoy
observations. This dataset will be updated, validated and made available to the
community in the first year of this project. The PI will quantify the changes in
seasonality of the Ekman layer, and examine how they are related to the decline
in sea-ice cover and to oscillatory climate modes (such as the Arctic
Oscillation). The impacts of the changes in seasonality of upwelling on the
chlorophyll concentration, mixed-layer temperature and salinity will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;