* 0902222
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gendered Empowerment of Community Organizations in Ahmedabad, India: Toward a Socio-Spatial Model of Sustainable Civil Society Participation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Laura Russ, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/2010
* USD 7,600.00

Reliance on decentralization has meant that central and local governments across
the globe have increased their dependence on non-public provision of key public
services. This trend is growing in the slum-upgrading sector in the developing
world, where nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and local civil society groups
have taken on roles not only as community organizers but also as developers of
large-scale public service and housing projects. In India, where slums now
account for 25 percent of all urban housing, the Ahmedabad Slum Networking
Program (SNP) is frequently cited for "best-practices" in decentralized service
delivery, where the local government relies heavily on local community-based
organizations (CBOs) to provide and maintain infrastructure in their
neighborhoods. Researchers and decision makers still know little about the
socio-spatial dimensions that impede CBOs or enable them to survive, however,
especially with reductions in funding, organizational training by NGOs, or local
government incentives to participate. To address this gap, this doctoral
dissertation research project begins with the assumption that organizational
structures -- especially with respect to gendered leadership -- lead to
different abilities to make choices and act effectively. The primary hypothesis
on which the doctoral candidate will focus her research is that it is this
ability to make choices and act on them that determines whether a community-
based organization remains active or becomes defunct. The student will employ a
mixed methods approach of informational interviews with key informants, in-depth
interviews with NGO management and field staff, and a survey of CBO officers and
general committee members to gather critical information needed to test this
hypothesis.

Despite critical research regarding the disconnect between the benefits of anti-
poverty work and gender-specific empowerment programs, little research has
focused on how this disconnect also can impact development at the intermediate
scale of community-based civil society institutions. Much existing research has
focused on large structural forces, such as the globalizing economy, or micro-
level individual behavior, such as whether women feel empowered by participating
in programs. By focusing directly on community institutions, this project will
enhance basic understanding of the ways that individual behavior and structural
forces influence the sustainability of local community-based organizations.
Consequently, this research will address important conceptual gaps regarding
community-based institutions. In addition to potential theoretical
contributions, the study results will be useful to practitioners and policy
makers by highlighting the potential strengths and pitfalls of community-based
organizations for providing urban social service and infrastructure provision
over both the shorter and longer terms. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career. This award to support
research in India is jointly supported The NSF Geography and Spatial Sciences
Program and the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.