* 0902685
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Variegated Landscape of Local Immigration Policies in U.S. Metropolitan Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Helga Leitner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 10/31/2010
* USD 11,333.00

While immigration enforcement in the United States has traditionally operated at
the federal level, hundreds of local governments in the past decade have
considered or implemented local scale immigration policies to deal with issues
of undocumented immigration in their communities. Much of the scholarship on
this relatively new localization of immigration policy has focused primarily on
the legal and political aspects of these policies, and has thus neglected how
the nature of these policies varies within metropolitan areas. It appears that
whereas central cities tend to prefer inclusionary policies, their suburbs,
where immigrant populations are frequently growing the fastest, often take the
opposite route and enact exclusionary initiatives. Such policies, in fact, are
reminiscent of past ordinances in the suburbs that helped produce metropolitan
residential segregation. This doctoral dissertation research project explores
the factors and conditions influencing the implementation of local immigration
policies and how political responses to immigration vary within metropolitan
areas. Specifically, the research also examines the motivations that drive local
immigration policies in the suburbs. This project draws upon data collected for
the Chicago, Washington DC, and Phoenix metropolitan areas, and uses statistical
modeling, GIS-based spatial analysis, as well as document analysis and key
informant interviews to investigate how and why the implementation of these
local policies varies across space. This study aims to demonstrate how
variations in local socio-demographic characteristics and socio-spatial
identities have helped foster an emerging patchwork of local immigration
policies within US metropolitan areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project examines the ways in which suburban communities are responding to rapid
demographic changes. Such processes have the potential to dramatically re-shape
the demographic character of metropolitan areas in the United States. As suburbs
across the US experience dramatic changes due to immigration, it is vital to
understand how the intersections between US immigration policy and local
metropolitan characteristics influence suburban responses to these changes. This
project thus links scholarship on migration with work on suburbanization and
residential segregation. It also has the potential to inform urban policies
concerned with immigrant integration and social inequalities within US
metropolitan areas. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career. &lt;br/&gt;