* 0902179
* Isotopically Controlled Semiconductors: Diffusion and Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Eugene Haller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This project will address two semiconductor
issues of great scientific and technological interest. The first one relates to
the precise motion of impurities in semiconductors at high temperatures caused
by a process called diffusion. Mixed crystal layers grown on standard silicon
wafers generate mechanical stress, which in turn affects carrier mobility and
dopant diffusion. These effects shall be studied and determined quantitatively
so that the full potential of crystal alloying can be reached. The results of
this study will benefit the formation of smaller and faster integrated circuits.
The second project focuses on semiconductor nanocrystals. To make a
semiconductor have particular conducting properties, atoms of other elements are
often added. This process is known as doping the semiconductor, and the added
atoms are called ?dopants.? Doping nanocrystals is challenging because dopant
atoms move to the nearby nanocrystal surface where they no longer function as
expected. Neutron Transmutation Doping (NTD) will be used to transform some of
the semiconductor atoms into dopants via thermal neuron capture followed by
radioactive decay. The NTD process can be performed at room temperature where
the dopants are ?frozen? in their place. If successful, the NTD process applied
to nanocrystals may lead to the ultimate miniaturization of transistors and
diodes. Graduate students assisted by undergraduates will perform all the
research described. The discovery-oriented research will lead to Masters and
Ph.D. degrees, maintaining a highly trained workforce, which is crucial for US
competitiveness.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The performance of Integrated Circuits can be
improved by raising the electron and hole mobilities through the application of
mechanical stress. Growing epitaxial layers of SiGe alloys can induce the
necessary stress. This project will make use of isotopically controlled,
stressed as well as relaxed Si(1-x)Ge(x) multilayer structures to determine the
diffusivities and diffusion mechanisms of the major dopants; Boron, Arsenic and
Phosphorus. Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy will be the main tool to determine
the depth distribution of dopants and host crystal atoms. The resulting
information will be useful in the design and fabrication of advanced
semiconductor devices. A second focus of the project is the doping of Ge and Si
nanocrystals, a formidable problem caused by segregation to the nearby surface.
The Neutron Transmutation Doping (NTD) process of istopically enriched
nanocrystals such as 70Ge or 74Ge makes possible ?cold? doping via thermal
neutron capture followed by radioactive decay: 70Ge + n produces the acceptor
71Ga; while 74Ge + n produces the donor 75As. A rich range of doped structures
can be envisioned assuming the formation of core-shell, bi-lobe and alloyed
nanocrystals can be controlled. Graduate students working towards their MS and
Ph.D. degrees will conduct the experimental research assisted by undergrads.
This training at the cutting edge of semiconductor science and technology
contributes to the maintenance of a domestic pool of experts, which are vital
for the U.S. industrial competitiveness.