* 0902957
* LGM and Deglacial Radiocarbon from U-series Dated Drake Passage Deep-sea Corals
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Laura Robinson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2011
* USD 205,709.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The proposal seeks funds to continue a follow-up analytical
work of deep-sea corals collected in the Drake Passage during a research cruise.
The project's goal is paleo-climate research looking to constrain the depth
structure and time evolution of the radiocarbon content of the Southern Ocean
during the glacial and deglaciation. Radiocarbon is a versatile tracer of past
climate; its radioactive decay provides an internal clock with which to assess
the rates of processes, and it can be used to trace the movement of carbon
through the Earth's system. It enters the ocean through air-sea gas exchange, so
processes that limits this will, therefore, reduce the radiocarbon content of
both surface and deep waters. The Southern Ocean is a critical location for
exchange of heat and carbon between the deep-ocean and atmospheric reservoirs,
and the deep waters formed there fill large volumes of the global deep and
intermediate oceans. As strong currents tend to scour away sediments, carbonate
preservation is limited, and radiocarbon reservoir ages are poorly constrained,
many traditional paleoceanographic techniques become impractical. It is proposed
to alleviate these difficulties analyzing the chemical composition of deep-sea
coral skeletons. Their aragonitic skeletons can be precisely dated using
U-series decay, and when coupled with radiocarbon analyses will allow to
calculate the C14/C12 ratio of the past water column.