* 0902878
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religious Identities and Citizenship Practices
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Christian Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 7,218.00

SES-0902878&lt;br/&gt;Christian Smith&lt;br/&gt;Daniel N.
DeHanas&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immigrant second generation youth in Europe,
particularly young Muslims, have been the subject of frequent concern and
controversy over public expressions of religious faith. How does religion
influence the kinds of citizens second generation youth are becoming? More
specifically, in which ways do religious identities provide resources or
constraints for the development of national identity, political articulacy, and
active civic engagement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will
contribute to a social scientific understanding of religion and citizenship with
a comparative study of second generation Bangladeshi youth (largely Muslim) and
Jamaican youth (largely Christian) in London, England. The youth will be aged 18
to 25, male and female, and systematically selected from the East End and
Brixton, two similarly mixed-income and ethnically concentrated areas of Inner
London. A total of 120 in-depth semi-structured interviews will be conducted, 40
with Bangladeshis, 40 with Jamaicans, and 40 with religious leaders and other
local residents. These interviews will be complemented by ethnographic
observation in eight systematically selected area mosques and churches that draw
significant attendance from second generation youth. With its mixed methods and
comparative research design, this dissertation is uniquely placed to investigate
and explain the various pathways by which Muslim, Christian, and non-religious
youth develop identities and practice citizenship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation will have broader impacts in at least three important ways.
Significant research attention is now given to the integration of young second
generation Muslims in Europe. A first broader impact of the dissertation will be
to expand that research agenda by comparing young Muslims to the often ignored,
but numerically similar, population of young second generation Christians,
providing new comparative insights. Second, this study will inform policy makers
who address the concerns of the study populations, as it promises to illuminate
the role of religion in citizenship and ways in which young people can develop
into more fully engaged citizens. Finally, there are plans for written and
presented dissemination of the findings to both academic and non-academic
audiences in the U.S., Britain, and elsewhere in Europe. Each nation has
different immigration patterns and integration policies, and audiences will gain
insights from the dissertation that can be applied to their own particular
social contexts.