* 0902109
* Effects of lengthening growing season and increasing temperature on soil carbon fluxes and stocks in Arctic tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jianwu Tang, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,879.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
warming is lengthening the growing season and increasing temperature in the
arctic ecosystem. The lengthened growing season is featured by earlier snow melt
and later fall freeze-up. Photosynthesis and respiration may respond differently
to these changes, resulting in changes in the seasonal pattern, the annual
carbon budget, whole-system carbon stocks, and the nutrient supply in the
Arctic. Given the large amount of carbon stored in the arctic system and high
sensitivity of carbon to temperature, the changing seasonality will influence
the global carbon cycle and the climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to examine if and how microbial respiration, root
respiration, and photosynthesis respond differently to earlier snow melt in
spring and later soil freeze-up in fall, if and how these processes respond
differently to enhanced temperature in the growing season, how the annual carbon
budget changes, and what the implication is for the future arctic tundra
ecosystem and the global carbon cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study site will
be in a tussock tundra ecosystem at the Toolik Field Station on the North Slope
of Alaska. Open-top chambers will be used to manipulate temperature and the
growing season. A mini-trenching approach will be used to partition soil
respiration and separate the different response between root respiration and
microbial respiration to the manipulated growing season and soil temperature.
Combining two treatments (warming and trenching), 9 warming, 9 warming +
trenching, 9 trenching, and 9 control plots will be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial and root respiration will be
continuously, automatically measured with a belowground CO2 profile system,
which is a better approach than the chamber measurement method in the tundra
ecosystem. This continuous system allows examination of the mismatch of
photosynthesis and respiration in response to the change in temperature and the
timing of snowmelt and refreezing, while causing negligible disturbance to soils
and aboveground plants in the tundra. Corresponding measurement of soil
temperature, water content, canopy air pressure, air temperature and water vapor
pressure will also be conducted. A portable photosynthesis measurement system
with imbedded light sources will be used to measure leaf photosynthesis and its
response to light. Periodic measurement of photosynthesis and leaf respiration
will be extrapolated with a photosynthesis model. Continuous time-series data of
photosynthesis, leaf respiration, root respiration, and microbial respiration
with its correlation with temperature will be analyzed to examine the response
to changing seasonality. Net ecosystem production will be calculated to examine
changes in the annual carbon budget, its coupling with nitrogen availability,
and implication for the carbon stock in the arctic and global system.&lt;br/&gt;