* 0902134
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Climate-Driven Phenological Change:  Observations, Adaptations, and Cultural Implications in Northeastern Siberia and Labrador/Nunatsiavut
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Astrid Ogilvie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 566,517.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an interdisciplinary
effort to systematically document, model, and interpret key linkages between
physical, biological and human systems in the context of changing seasonality
(phenology) due to global and local climate change. In line with the CSAS
solicitation, the primary research objective of PHENARC is to understand the
linkages between Arctic system climate change, altered phenological processes,
and adaptations and responses of human societies to these changes to decipher
implications for the future. The project?s overarching research questions are:
i) What are the key seasonal events that form an integral part of the ecosystems
in PHENARC?s two main study areas of northeastern Siberia and Labrador?; ii) How
are these seasonal events changing, and what specific phenological shifts are
occurring in these study areas?; iii) What are the drivers of these seasonal
events, and how do they ripple through/affect the entire system?; iv) How are
phenological changes and their resulting ecosystem impacts affecting the timing
of people?s subsistence and other activities?; v) How are these societal changes
in turn affecting the larger cultural system? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
answer such questions, PHENARC will employ qualitative and quantitative methods
of field study, retrospective investigations, and modeling/synthesis techniques.
Data sources will include: systematic meteorological observations; climate proxy
data; documentary historical records; oral history; and data drawn from
interviews with contemporary respondents in the project?s two study areas.
PHENARC builds upon the solid foundation of Arctic systems data already
established by the project PIs in the Arctic/Subarctic regions of northeastern
Siberia and Labrador/Nunatsiavut, two arctic regions not extensively studied
before, that provide a variety of terrains, and ecosystem and human communities
for a robust comparative study. Additionally, the communities differ in cultural
and ethnic mix. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PHENARC represents a novel approach to
advancing knowledge of key linkages between climate and human systems by
integrating Arctic climate data with local knowledge drawn from rural native
communities in two distinct arctic regions. PHENARC involves the targeted
communities, regional and national specialists, and a team of international
collaborators and affiliates. By investigating patterns of seasonality in two
disparate arctic regions that are each home to a dynamic contrast of mixed and
native settlements, and with a resulting potential transfer of knowledge across
scales and international borders, PHENARC?s contribution to global knowledge
promises to be considerable with high potential for disseminating widely new
knowledge regarding changing seasonality in Arctic climate and human systems.
Project is includes a close collaboration with local community residents and the
results will be disseminated widely on local, regional, and circumpolar levels.