* 0902280
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Mobility Practices and Avoidance of Hazards
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Donald Anderson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This study will investigate how the social space of the city, with all its risks
and inequalities, is shaped and reproduced through practices of urban mobility.
As a case study, this study will focus on the knowledge and practices that
taxicab drivers and their passengers make use of in travelling through Mexico
City, particularly the ways they represent dangerous space, and construct their
own responses to it. Mexico City, as an almost archetypically large and complex
urban space, has an especially established local discourse on the difficulties
and hazards of urban space, on the dangerous spaces of the city, and on the
resourcefulness of its residents in finding their ways safely around. The
taxicab sector is an ideal site for such a study because the driving profession
involves an explicitly articulated socio-spatial body of knowledge developed in
large part for the purpose of avoiding and responding to danger. Through
participant observation and interviews the researcher will outline the knowledge
and strategies taxidrivers and passengers draw on to navigate urban space
successfully, particularly how they avoid or manage danger, whether perceived or
real. The informants' livelihood context will be examined to understand their
structural constraints and motivations. With GPS loggers and video, recordings
will be created of taxidrivers' daily trips and of their driving narratives, to
capture the fleeting ways in which personal, interpersonal, and social spaces
are constructed in relation to each other, in the course of the drivers' work,
and in their retellings of it. Thus, this study will investigate how these
knowledges and practices situate their practitioners as competent and knowing
subjects in relation to the social space of the city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to the emerging field of mobility studies, by
operationalizing the philosophical underpinnings of mobility theory in the
course of an ethnographic study. Many studies of mobility have drawn on top-down
forms of knowledge, such as surveillance data, to obtain representations of
mobile subjects and practices. This study, by investigating ways of knowing
formed in the context of spatial labor, will be one of the relatively few so far
to draw on the practical, bottom-up understandings of urban space which
exemplifies the true promise of the mobilities approach. This research will
problematize, in novel ways, the relation between the discourse on urban danger
and the practical strategies used to avoid danger, by focusing on a kind of
situation in which the interrelated effects of class, labor, and communicative
technologies can be elucidated. This study will also help to bring the
perspectives of urban spatial workers, specifically taxicab drivers, into the
scholarly discourse on the city and its mobilities