* 0902203
* Probabilistic aspects of asymptotic geometric analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Mark Meckes, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 118,951.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is in the field of asymptotic geometric analysis, which deals with
high-dimensional phenomena in convex geometry and functional analysis, and more
specifically in applications of probability theory in this field. The project
has two separate areas of emphasis, the spectral behavior of large random
matrices and the distribution of volume in high-dimensional convex bodies. The
proposed techniques for studying these problems include both traditional
probabilistic tools of random matrix theory and asymptotic geometric analysis,
like the method of moments and the concentration of measure phenomenon; as well
as novel techniques from theoretical probability, like Stein's method. In the
area of random matrices the proposer studies the fluctuations of norms and
eigenvalues of random matrices. One main goal here is to sharpen and extend
concentration results due to the proposer and others. The proposer will also
continue his study of the behavior of large random Toeplitz matrices, a class of
random matrices which has only recently been investigated in the literature, and
related random matrix ensembles. In the area of convex geometry the proposer
will continue his work on Gaussian approximation theorems for volumes of
sections of high-dimensional convex bodies, as well as related problems about
how the volume is distributed in high-dimensional convex bodies. An important
feature of the problems considered here, which is typical of the field, is their
intrinsically high-dimensional nature. For example, many quantitative geometric
questions are trivial in a sufficiently low number of dimensions, but deep and
unexpected phenomena can arise when the dimension becomes very large. In the
context of random matrices, the primary interest is in results which are
nontrivial for large finite matrices, as opposed to more-traditional limit
results as the size becomes infinite. This high- but finite-dimensional aspect
is crucial for potential applications to fields like geometry, statistics, or
computer science.

High-dimensional phenomena arise whenever one studies quantitative problems
involving a large number of parameters. Besides areas in pure mathematics like
convex geometry and functional analysis which are the focus of this project,
such problems naturally arise in fields as diverse as statistics, computer
science, mathematical biology, and physics. The so-called curse of
dimensionality is familiar in many quantitative fields, indicating the potential
difficulty of dealing with such problems. The goal of asymptotic geometric
analysis, on the other hand, is to identify regularity or patterns that arise in
systems that depend on a very large number of parameters, but which are not
apparent for a small number of parameters. Thus high-dimensionality in some ways
becomes a blessing rather than a curse. Probability theory is a central tool in
this field, both because many problems involve randomness in an explicit way,
and because many a priori deterministic problems can be clarified by introducing
a probabilistic viewpoint. That is, patterns that arise in high dimensions
become apparent when one looks at things in an appropriately random way. This
project deals with both these types of applications of probability to high-
dimensional phenomena.

