* 0902221
* Towards deciphering the optimal field - system interaction in femtosecond adaptive control of molecular dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2014
* USD 742,999.00

The shaping of light pulses coupled with feedback to alter their shape for
optimum results, provides an experimental knob to control molecules. Such
control can lead to improvement of the yield of a reaction in a way that is not
possible by other means. The research has three aspects: (1) determining the
optimal light pulse to control the three fundamental vibrational modes of a
3-atom system (e.g., CO2), (2) measuring the spectrum and time characteristics
of the light pulse which gives the desired results, and (3) understanding
theoretically the interaction between the light pulse and the molecular system.
In the series of experiments to be done, the optimally shaped light pulses (with
durations measured in femtoseconds) will be obtained via so called "adaptive"
feedback. State-of-the-art imaging of the molecular system following interaction
with a light pulse causes changes to the next light pulse via a computer running
genetic or evolutionary algorithms which "learn" how to alter the amplitude of
each mode of the light pulse to obtain a result closer to that which is desired.
This process continues until the desired outcome is
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work may contribute to
transforming the field of molecular control because they will have an impact
beyond the small systems to be studied. The approach could be used for
extracting important information associated with inter- and intra-molecular
motion and dynamics from much larger systems. Efforts to control vibrational
modes of molecules will be one key to enabling the use of ultra-short, shaped
pulses of light in the mid infrared range of the spectrum for the creation and
manipulation of molecular qubits. A qubit, analogous to the bit of a
conventional computer, is the fundamental unit of "quantum computer", which is a
potentially powerful computing machine which scientists do not yet know how to
build. This work may contribute to better understanding of one possible solution
to this problem. Finally, the results of this work could enable new approaches
to problems of concern to environmental stewardship and National Security. This
project is being carried out at the University of Maryland and will be a
training ground for graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdocs. The
cross disciplinary nature of the program involves students with physics,
chemistry and engineering backgrounds. A special effort is being made to attract
investigators from underrepresented groups into our program.