* 0902392
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Ice Core Paleoclimate Records from Combatant Col, British Columbia, Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Douglas Clark, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 281,109.00

Funding is provided to obtain new ice core accumulation records from Combatant
Col, Mt. Waddington, in southwestern British Columbia (BC), Canada. Combatant
Col is located significantly farther south than other existing ice core sites
along the west coast of North America and variations in precipitation tend to be
out of phase with those in Alaska and the Yukon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combatant
Col sits at 3000 meters and contains more than 200 meters of ice. The net annual
snow accumulation is ~2.5 meters/year and the mean annual temperature -5Â°C. A
65-meter core from the site shows that clear annual layering is preserved in the
geochemistry and in dust and black carbon. The age of the ice near bedrock is
estimated to be between 200 years and 1000 years old. It is anticipated that an
annually-resolved record of layer thickness will be recovered at the site to
allow for a record of snow accumulation covering the last 200-1000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Combatant Col record, in combination with other
existing records of precipitation variability along the western margin of North
America, will be used to develop an updated and improved reconstruction of
precipitation variability in this region over the last 200-1000 years to address
fundamental questions about Pacific decadal scale
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts involve supporting an
early career female investigator and strengthening international collaborations
with researchers from institutions in Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).