* 0902201
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social Diversity and Collective Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Tucker McGrimmon, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,016.00

SES-0902201&lt;br/&gt;Shane Thye&lt;br/&gt;Tucker McGimmon&lt;br/&gt;University
of South Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of majority rule voting in group
decision making is one of the most pervasive institutions within democratic
societies. Groups, often acting on behalf of a population, must choose between
competing alternatives and use majority rule to decide which alternative to
support. Firms deciding on competing investment projects, hiring by academic
departments and in some cases, even the determination of guilt or innocence in
jury trials are examples. The assemblage of these groups, the time invested to
hear and decide on alternatives, and the consequence of the decision, may extend
well beyond the group making the decision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning with
Condorcet (1785), groups have been shown to outperform individuals in choosing
the superior of two alternatives when using majority rule. This conclusion rests
heavily upon the assumption that group members vote independently. That is, they
do not take into account the information and opinion of others, nor are they
influenced by other group members. However, research in sociological social
psychology has shown that groups tend to display correlated behavior thereby
violating the assumption of independence. The investigators argue that social
structures emerge within groups predicated upon either status or social identity
which induce predictable forms of correlated behavior. Specifically, the level
of social diversity within a group is particularly important in generating
predictable patterns of correlated behavior. The investigators construct a new
laboratory experiment to determine if (i) the level of diversity affects the
degree of correlated behavior, (ii) groups predicated upon status and social
identity differ in their form of correlation, and (iii) majority rule will be
less effective in status diverse groups as opposed to identity diverse groups.
This experiment will be conducted at the Laboratory for Sociological Research at
the University of South Carolina and will collect voting behavior from subjects
participating in two stage voting games. Prior research has not empirically
tested the impact of social diversity on majority rule and this study therefore
offers a new test for an original theory of voting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of broader impact, this project offers to deepen our understanding of how
social hierarchies affect group decision making. Theoretically, a key
contribution is that we integrate rational choice and social psychological
approaches in a more comprehensive model of collective decision making.
Empirically, the research creates a new experimental paradigm to test these
ideas, the development of which adds to the training and research experience of
both graduate and undergraduate students in the Laboratory for Sociological
Research at the University of South Carolina. Overall, the study seeks to
uncover fundamental principles that characterize collective decision making that
have the potential to transform how we think about collective decision making
mechanisms. The research will inform scientists and practitioners alike. The
former include students of sociology, social psychology, economics, political
science, and organizational psychologists; the latter include private and public
organizations that employ team or group frameworks that rely on majority rule in
their decision making processes. At issue is the understanding of how social
structure in general, and social diversity specifically, affect the
institutional rules we use to make decisions in democratic societies.