* 0902131
* Neural Control of Object Recognition and Action Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Lewis Wheaton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Bernstein
* 04/30/2010
* USD 26,622.00

This proposal requests NSF funding to support a special workshop on the neural
control of object recognition and action, to be held in September 2009 at
Georgia Institute of Technology. Humans have the capacity to both recognize
tools and comprehend how they are used to achieve a behavioral goal. However,
many people suffer from disorders related to the failure in integrating
cognitive and motor processes, particularly after brain injury. The two well
studied deficits in this regard are apraxia, impairment in goal-directed
movement, and agnosia, impairment in object recognition. Currently, researchers
tend to treat apraxia and agnosia as separate phenomena, and they build separate
theories to account for them. A better understanding is possible if researchers
consider the many similarities in agnosia and apraxia, as there is much that can
be learned from more collaborative work in the two domains. An immediate goal of
this workshop is to foster communication between researchers who study apraxia
and agnosia by 1) encouraging and developing collaboration between the two
fields, and 2) promoting research that integrates concepts and accounts from
both fields, and 3) identifying the neural substrates of impairment and recovery
that may underlie both apraxia and agnosia.

The understanding of the target questions of the workshop will have significant
implications for both basic science and public health. Apraxia and agnosia have
debilitating effects on patients in their daily lives, and these deficits
require the joint efforts from researchers in neuropsychology, neuroscience, and
kinesthetic sciences. The proposed workshop has a highly interdisciplinary
nature and is likely to promote new and existing collaborations. The funding
will bring international experts to the meeting, and enable students and
postdocs to participate in the meeting by including reduced fees and
opportunities for travel support. The speakers and the organizing committee
include women and members of underrepresented minorities. Finally, a critical
outcome of the workshop is to develop collaborative clusters to advance the
field in both basic neuroscience and clinical applications.