* 0902296
* Degenerations of algebraic varieties, with applications to combinatorics and representation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Allen Knutson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 351,320.00

Knutson's proposal makes use of degeneration of algebraic varieties to study
algebraic combinatorics, particularly combinatorial representation theory.
Littelmann's path model in representation theory already has such an
interpretation: Chirivi gave a degeneration of each flag manifold G/P (plus
ample line bundle) to a reduced, seminormal union of toric varieties.
Unfortunately, this used properties of Lusztig's canonical basis, so was
specific to representation theory applications. Knutson hopes to replace these
properties with Samuel-Rees-Nagata degenerations, to achieve similar reducedness
results for degenerations of much more general varieties. One specific
application is in computing branching rules from a group G to a symmetric
subgroup K, using a K-equivariant degeneration of G/P, and Knutson, jointly with
Jiang-Hua Liu, states a conjectural rule based on this.

Many interesting numbers and polynomials are associated to irreducible algebraic
sets, where "irreducible" essentially means "not glued from smaller pieces in a
nontrivial way". A circle x^2 + y^2 - 1 = 0 is such an example, as its equation
does not factor, and one can associate the degree 2 to this equation. But if we
degenerate it to x^2 + y^2 - 0 = 0, then the equation does factor (over the
complex numbers), giving the union of two lines x = +/- iy. Those two equations
are degree 1, and from the degenerative geometry we obtain the combinatorial
result 2 = 1 + 1. Knutson uses this technique to study much more interesting
irreducible sets, e.g. the space of all maximal nested chains of subspaces in a
vector space; degenerating them to highly reducible unions of simple pieces
replaces their geometric complexity with combinatorial complexity, and gives
much more interesting formulae for their degrees (and generalizations thereof).
In some of the work proposed, he specifically plans to pursue this technique to
understand how quantum-mechanical systems with noncompact symmetry (e.g. under
special relativity transformations, which allow boosts by speeds up to but not
including light-speed) decompose when one only considers their compact
symmetries (e.g. under rotation, by angles that are trapped on a circle and
cannot run off to infinity). This is the same sort of problem (though the hoped-
for results would be wholly complementary) as studied recently by the ATLAS team
in the study of the representations of E_8.