* 0902065
* Collaborative Research: The Seasonal Response of the Arctic and Global Climate System to Projected Sea Ice Loss within the Context of GHG-induced Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marika Holland, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 670,103.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The primary goal of this project is to investigate the
mechanisms underlying the seasonal response of the climate system to Arctic sea
ice loss within the context of anthropogenic climate change. This research will
utilize the NCAR Community Climate System Model, version 4 (CCSM4), which is a
fully coupled global atmosphere-ocean-cryosphere-land model with terrestrial and
oceanic carbon-nitrogen cycling capabilities. The overarching goal of this
proposed effort is to investigate the relative roles of sea ice loss versus
rising greenhouse gases for changes in the seasonal succession and timing of
Arctic processes. This will involve research designed to assess the influence of
seasonal sea ice loss on aspects of the marine, terrestrial, and atmospheric
systems, with a particular emphasis on the seasonal dependence of the responses.
This work will include a series of targeted sensitivity integrations to isolate
processes of interest. These experiments will be evaluated within the context of
available observations. This project will also assess the integrated effects of
these various processes and how they in turn feed back onto the seasonality of
Arctic sea ice change. Current and projected changes in the Arctic system have
repercussions for the global climate system, Arctic wildlife, and socio-economic
activities in the region. Improving our understanding and modeling of the
factors affecting the seasonal timing and succession of processes within the
Arctic system will allow for improved Arctic and global system predictability.
This has a direct impact on the ability of society to anticipate, mitigate, and
adapt to future change.