* 0902588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetically Engineered Crop Adoption and Liberalization Reforms in Burkina Faso
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Daniel Press, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 11/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The global food crisis has sharpened attention on how to improve conditions for
the world's poor, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Burkina Faso is an African
trend-setter in adopting two specific reforms, the liberalization of the state-
run cotton sector and the adoption of genetically engineered (GE) cotton, both
of which are designed to improve the livelihoods of poor producers and blunt the
negative impacts of the food crisis. Preliminary research suggests, however,
that both of these reforms may contribute to a widening gap between rich and
poor by promoting economic opportunities that benefit the relatively rich to the
neglect or detriment of the relatively poor. Such social differentiation could
lead to decreased food production by poor rural producers and increased
migration of poor rural producers to urban areas where they must purchase food
at rising costs. In the case of both reforms, the Burkinabé state is depicted as
a passive recipient of plans designed by international financial institutions
(liberalization) and multinational agro-business companies (GE cotton). Little
is known about how the state changes and implements reforms to help poor
producers. This research has two goals: 1) to determine whether and how
liberalization and GE cotton reforms contribute to a widening gap between rich
and poor in Burkina Faso, and 2) to demonstrate the role of the state in
contributing to this process of social differentiation. This research employs a
mixed-method approach including archival research, critical document review,
quantitative data, and interviews of rural producers and of key cotton sector
actors and key informants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will evaluate
whether two important reforms, namely the liberalization of the agricultural
sector and the introduction of genetically engineered organisms are useful
measures to address the food crisis. An output of this research with be whether
to continue with such reforms and/or how to modify them to better achieve their
goal of blunting the impacts of the food crisis for poor producers. This
research will also demonstrate how the state interacts with these reforms,
potentially exacerbating or diluting their impacts. These questions are of
considerable concern given the current financial crisis, and a subsequent
decrease in development assistance for poor countries. As a doctoral
dissertation improvement grant this award empowers a promising student to
establish a promising research career that aids society.