* 0902873
* 10th Japan-US Seminar: Genome-Enabled Integration of Research in Plant-Pathogen Systems January 24-28, 2010, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2010
* Alan Collmer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

The project is to convene the 10th US-Japan Seminar on Plant-Pathogen
Interactions. The workshop is being organized by scholars from both Japan and
the US and is to be held in Corvallis, Oregon, January 24-28, 2010. The general
purpose of this recurring workshop is to promote collaborative activities
between US and Japanese researchers in specific, cutting-edge areas of the
analysis of the interaction of microbial pathogens with plant hosts. The theme
for the 10th workshop is Genome-Enabled Integration of Research in Plant-
Pathogen Systems. The advent of genomics, that is, a comprehensive knowledge of
all the genes within an organism, and the technologies that genome knowledge is
facilitating, are having tremendous impact on the study of plant-pathogen
interactions. Aspects of parasitism and the ensuing host response, their
interrelation and the technologies and systems-level approaches being developed
to explore them will be highlights of this workshop. The development and
exchange of such information is critical to our abilities to understand and
maintain natural plant populations and to effectively produce the variety of
plant products needed for such things as food, fiber and fuel for the present
and future. The broader impacts of the proposed activity are multifaceted. Since
its inception, this series of workshops has successfully fostered critical
scientific discussion, the exchange of ideas and materials and the formation of
productive research collaborations between US and Japanese investigators. In
this, the 10th Seminar, a particular emphasis is given to training and promoting
the development of collaborations involving a diverse group of young scholars
including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from both Japan and the US.
An additional outcome of the meeting will be the dissemination of the activities
of the workshop to the broader research community through publication of the
Proceedings as a book.