* 0902936
* Collaborative Research: Electronic Processes in Disordered and Biomolecular Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Drabold, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 255,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to model the interaction of light with particular materials. The
research will focus on understanding electronic properties and charge-transfer
mechanisms in disordered systems which has impact on efforts to develop improved
photovoltaic and photocatalytic materials, and better light-sensing devices.
Scientific goals are to determine: 1) The structure of ordered and disordered
photoactive oxides including vanadium and titanium based oxides, 2) The
atomistic origin of light induced effects in these oxide systems as well as in
glasses, for example the Staebler-Wronski effect in hydrogenated amorphous
silicon and analogous phenomena in chalcogenide glasses, 3) Fundamental
understanding of charge and energy transfer processes in acceptor-donor
biomolecules with a focus on chlorophyll-carotene systems for potential bio-
inspired photovoltaics, 4) Fundamental understanding of charge transfer
processes in photoactive metal organic framework materials. Practical new codes
will be developed for non-adiabatic molecular-dynamics simulation. The research
will be carried out in collaboration with experimental groups with an aim to
guide experimental research. Collaborations with other theoretical groups will
enable powerful computational techniques to be developed.

The PIs will leverage several student research programs already in place in the
State of West Virginia; these programs extend to Drabold through Lewis and thus
will impact Ohio University students as well. The PIs will recruit students from
these programs and are committed to a mission of broadening participation in
their computational materials research. Developing a strong program in nanoscale
science and engineering, including developing cyberinfrastructure capabilities,
is also a priority for the State of West Virginia. The PIs will further extend
and develop a strong program of science outreach to K-12 students and teachers
in Appalachia. The PI?s will start a pilot annual joint scientific conference
entirely for, and to the maximum degree possible, administered by regional
students. The efficacy of this work will be quantitatively gauged and reported.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education to use advanced computational methods to study how light interacts
with several classes of technologically important materials, focusing on the
motion of electronic charge induced by exposure to light. Technological
applications of these materials include generation of energy from sunlight and
catalyzing chemical reactions like the transformation of carbon dioxide into
methanol induced by light. The research will focus on understanding key quantum
mechanical states of electrons that are important when the material is exposed
to light and how electronic charge moves from one group of atoms to another.

This is fundamental research that contributes to the intellectual foundations of
solar energy generation and photochemistry. The research will be carried out in
collaboration with experimental groups with an aim to guide experimental
research. Collaborations with other theoretical groups will enable powerful
computational techniques to be developed.

The PIs will leverage several student research programs already in place in the
State of West Virginia; these programs extend to Drabold through Lewis and thus
will impact Ohio University students as well. The PIs will recruit students from
these programs and are committed to a mission of broadening participation in
their computational materials research. Developing a strong program in nanoscale
science and engineering, including developing cyberinfrastructure capabilities,
is also a priority for the State of West Virginia. The PIs will further extend
and develop a strong program of science outreach to K-12 students and teachers
in Appalachia. The PI?s will start a pilot annual joint scientific conference
entirely for, and to the maximum degree possible, administered by regional
students. The efficacy of this work will be quantitatively gauged and reported.