* 0902040
* Collaborative Research: Pan-Arctic climate and ecosystem response to historical and projected changes in the seasonality of sea ice melt and growth
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bonnie Light, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 279,690.00

This award will support a quantitative assessment of the causes and effects of
variations in the seasonal timing of sea ice melt onset and freeze initiation,
through use of the observational record and earth system model projections of
future climate. The study will synthesize existing datasets including results
from ARCSS Synthesis of Arctic System Science (SASS) and Arctic Observing
Network (AON) projects. This will be complemented by an analysis of control and
sensitivity integrations from the Community Climate System Model, version 4
(CCSM4), which has improved polar processes and capabilities, including a more
general and consistent sea ice albedo representation and an
ecosystem/biogeochemistry component. Specifically, the study will (1)
investigate interactions and feedbacks between seasonal changes in the sea ice
and snow conditions, the amount of solar insolation, and the partitioning of
this radiation, (2) assess the implications of these interactions for changes in
ice-ocean-atmosphere heat, freshwater, and bio-available iron exchange and
investigate their influence on ecosystem dynamics, biogeochemical cycling, and
climate in the CCSM, and (3) evaluate and ultimately improve the capabilities of
earth system models in light of these processes, specifically by improving the
physics associated with surface albedo and light transmission parameterizations
for ice covered seas.

This study has many 'Broader Impacts' for a variety of audiences. The results
will be used to assess the representation of the seasonal cycle of Arctic
climate and the Arctic ecosystem in earth system models, and will aid in
understanding the intricate balance of key trigger events in the Arctic
atmosphere-sea ice-ocean-biogeochemical system. The model simulation output will
be freely available and useful to studies using ecosystem models that include
higher trophic levels, as well as to researchers designing and analyzing
observational field programs. The pan-Arctic focus of the study will provide
context for measurements and studies undertaken at specific geographic
locations. Through mentoring programs at NCAR and CRREL, two undergraduate
students will work on the project. Results from this work will be introduced to
the classroom through visits to local elementary schools, and inclusion in
curricula at Dartmouth College, University of California Irvine and University
of Washington. Museum presentations at the Pacific Science Center (Seattle), the
Burke Museum (Seattle) and the Montshire Museum (Vermont) will reach wider
audiences outside of the traditional classroom.