* 0902494
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multicultural Citizenship and Indigneous Identity
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This project investigates indigenous movement strategies for constructing
multicultural citizenship in Bolivia and Guatemala. It compares how the
movements invoke their identity to justify demands for land, territory, and
political autonomy -- rights that are crucial to indigenous citizenship and
that, when granted, can dramatically alter power relations and the locus of
state authority. Bolivia's indigenous movement politicizes its identity to
justify demands for "territory" and "autonomy"; their Guatemalan counterparts,
by contrast, demand land redistribution and focus on building "local power"
within community government. In both countries, indigenous people are a
historically marginalized and racialized majority, and the challenge of
including them as full citizens of the state is tremendous. Why do the Bolivian
and Guatemalan indigenous movements respond to this challenge in such different
ways, and how can we explain their differing demands? I propose that political
opportunities and institutions interact with indigenous identity to produce the
different demands -- and different politicizations of identity -- in the
Bolivian and Guatemalan movements. Using data from semi-structured interviews,
observations, and documents, I will reconstruct the processes of demand-making
through the local and national level experiences of major indigenous social
movement organizations in each country. The findings will contribute to theory
on social movements and identity politics, and will reveal the socio-political
factors that lead to very different ways of reconfiguring citizenship in multi-
ethnic and racially polarized democracies. Additionally, the results of the
study will carry important practical implications by investigating indigenous
movement agency in influencing multicultural rights policies, which are debated
in both national and international arenas.