* 0902784
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Study of the Innovation Process
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* David Knoke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2010
* USD 3,200.00

This research extends prior work by taking a broader view of innovation in a
rapidly changing and increasingly important industry: biotechnology. Scholars
and practitioners assume innovation is necessary for survival as firms strive to
keep pace in today's rapidly changing business climate. Although anecdotal
evidence exists, current research fails to systematically answer a crucial
question regarding product innovation: Should firms develop novel products or
build on existing products to increase the likelihood of success at each stage
of innovation (i.e., product invention, product development, product success)?
To answer this question I examine data on U.S. publicly-traded biotechnology
firms and their products from 1985-2005. Data collection efforts include coding
company reports on product development and strategic alliances as well as coding
data from patents filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Data from
patent citations allow me to evaluate the extent to which a product is central--
within a network of products--relative to the firm's, alliance partner's or
competitor's existing products. Analysis consists of evaluating firm, product,
and alliance characteristics that are associated with success across the stages
of innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides several
contributions to the understanding of biotechnology and technological
innovation. First, understanding the factors that improve innovation in the
biotechnology industry is critical for government and industry concerns
regarding increasing costs of drugs and healthcare and for servicing the needs
of an increasingly aging population in the U.S. Findings from this research
should provide additional insight into factors that increase efficiency and
reduce costs in biotechnology product development. Second, results from this
study will yield a better understanding of the role of technology in sustaining
successful innovation beyond typical alliance and resource-based explanations.
Third, this study will provide a theoretical contribution to the literature on
innovation more generally by conceptualizing innovation relative to both the
firm and the environment across the stages of innovation.