* 0902066
* Collaborative Research: Diamonds and Oil from the Tundra: A System Study on the Impact of Changing Seasons on Mining and Oil Exploration
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Goldstein, Babson College
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 173,191.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural resource extraction is the backbone of
the arctic economy. Oil and gas exploration and production taxes account for 88%
of the State of Alaska?s revenue, providing $10.2 billion in fiscal year 2008.
In addition, 4,400 direct and 37,344 indirect Alaskan jobs are due to this
industry. In Canada, oil and gas are also crucial to the economy, but so too is
diamond mining, with a total value of diamond extraction in the Northwest
Territories of $2 billion in 2007. As a result, Canada is the 3rd largest
diamond producer in the world. The mines employ about 4,000 people, roughly 35%
of whom are Aboriginal. These arctic oil, gas, and mining activities occur
predominantly in remote locations off the all-weather road system, so alternate
forms of transport of fuel, equipment, and people are heavily used. In Alaska,
oil exploration occurs in winter under state regulations that require sufficient
snow and frost to protect the tundra. In Canada, trucks take thousands of loads
up a 600-km ice road to supply the diamond mines with fuel and material. These
essential winter operations hinge on predictable seasonal transitions (summer-
to-winter; winter-to-summer) and cryospheric conditions, but data indicate the
spring thaw comes as much as 3 weeks earlier than 50 years ago, and lake and
river ice break up earlier than before. These seasonal shifts are already having
an adverse impact on minerals and oil/gas activities in the North, with a
trickledown impact on local and Northern economies. No formal economic-based
analysis has been done to assess how changing seasonal patterns are impacting
these vital industries of the North. This research will conduct a pilot effort
to identify means of answering this question, as well as two ancillary
questions: How are anticipated changes in cryosphere seasonality likely to
affect such economic performance in the next decade? and Are there adaptive
strategies that can reduce the sensitivity of these key industrial sectors to
future changes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot effort will focus on how
changing seasons impact the Canadian diamond mining operations in the Northwest
Territories through alteration of the reliable period when ice roads can be
utilized, increased variability of that open period, and the economic
consequences of uncertainty. Here they will use combined economic and
cryospheric models to examine the impact of season length on the regional
economy. Researchers will observe how environmental data are collected in the
field, how they are utilized by regulatory agencies to make decisions, and how
businesses weigh climate impacts with other factors in their operations. Based
on these studies, the team will isolate the impact of climate-driven changes in
seasons from the other factors. The outcome of the project will be explicit
information on the extent to which climate-driven changes in seasons are
affecting ice road use. More generally, it will be a methodology (including
modeling) of how to distinguish climate drivers from non-climate drivers for
uniquely Northern businesses.