* 0902035
* SGER -- Hurricanes Gustav &amp; Ike:  Relative Sustainability of Saline Wetlands in the Mississippi River Delta Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Irving Mendelssohn, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Hurricanes are important forces that sculpt landforms within coastal wetlands
and influence their ecology through effects on physical, chemical, and
biological processes. In addition, sea-level rise and land subsidence are long-
term processes that affect coastal areas, as in the Mississippi River Delta
Complex (MRDC), which contains &gt;40% of the Nation's wetlands. Intertidal
plants, like mangroves and salt marsh grasses, are important in promoting
accumulation of sediments and organic matter, thereby building the soil resource
and maintaining wetland elevation as sea level rises. Species shifts may make
wetlands more vulnerable to sea-level rise, depending on the species' capacities
to build marsh elevation. This project will take advantage of recent hurricane
events, Hurricanes Gustav and Ike that made landfall in September 2008 near Port
Fourchon, Louisiana to compare the capacity of mangrove and salt marsh
ecosystems to capture sediment, create a barrier to sediment delivery, stimulate
organic matter contributions to soil, and increase elevation in coastal areas.
This information becomes increasingly important if sea-level rise and hurricane
intensity and frequency increase with global climate change as predicted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how hurricanes interact with processes
controlling coastal elevations is essential to developing sound plans to
conserve and protect these ecosystems and the services they provide. The
sustainability of coastal wetlands in the MRDC is critical not only as a natural
resource and for seafood production, but also for their key role in protecting
the ports of New Orleans and Port Fourchon, through which nearly 30% of the
nation's energy resources and foreign imports pass.