* 0902582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: People, Primates, and Pathogens: An Eco-Social Study of Cross-Species Disease Transmission in Western Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Jonathan Mayer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Emerging infectious diseases pose significant threats to global public health.
The vast majority of diseases enter the human population through pathogen
transfer from animals. The example of a human-acquired primate virus, which
mutated to HIV serves as the underlying motivation for this project.
Understanding the social and geographic contexts for human acquisition of animal
pathogens will enable the interruption of pathogen exchange. The research
setting for this research is Kibale Forest National Park in western Uganda,
which serves as an epicenter of primate biodiversity and a focus of human-
primate interaction. Conflicting goals of conservation and human livelihood over
the preservation versus utilization of the environment, result in significant
pressure on primate populations. This applies both to those living in the park
and especially those inhabiting small, highly degraded patches of forest outside
protected areas. This pressure leads to increased interaction between people and
primates, and as interaction increases, so does the risk of pathogen transfer.
This research analyzes the ecological and social factors that cause people-
primate interaction around forest patches. It investigates the impact that human
activities and spaces play in relation to primate habitat on human health.
Health and behavior surveys combined with maps of activity spaces provide the
data to test for meaningful relationships between disease, activities and spaces
of people and primates. Further data will be generated through interviews with
key informants. These interviews provide the project with the political,
economic, and social structures behind human activities and spaces. The
investigators expect to find structural elements shaping human activities and
dictating activity spaces; and that activity spaces shared with primates
significantly impact human health.

This project extends current research focused on the biophysical processes of
cross-species pathogen transmission. By pursuing two goals simultaneously - one
that explores associations between primate exposure and risk of infectious
disease and the other to understand structural factors that inform such
exposures - we respond to gaps in contemporary cross-species disease research.
Refining the spatial relationship between human activities, primate habitat, and
health will provide the global community with a geographic context for emerging
cross-species disease. Moreover, articulating the nuances of social, political
and economic structures mediating transmission dynamics addresses the complex
effects of social structure on disease ecology. Flexible interview methods allow
underrepresented groups to voice health and conservation concerns. Understanding
the social and spatial conditions that promote disease transmission is vital for
predicting and preventing the emergence and spread of potentially pandemic
cross-species diseases.