* 0902010
* Clusters of Galaxies: Key to Galaxy Evolution and Cosmological Physics
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Sarah Hansen, Hansen                  Sarah          M
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 12/31/2011
* USD 221,105.00

Dr. Sarah Hansen is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California-Santa Cruz. Dr. Hansen will utilize new and recent observations of
galaxy clusters to address key outstanding issues in galaxy evolution and
cosmology. The PI will characterize the population of galaxies in clusters to
z~1 identified in a joint optical and Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ) survey. She will
use the measured distribution of optical properties of these systems to (a)
constrain models of galaxy formation and evolution and (b) improve cosmological
parameter estimation by decreasing the scatter in the mass-observable
relationship. This work will be the first time that the evolution of galaxies in
massive dark matter halos has been studied with a sample of clusters derived
from an SZ survey.

Dr. Hansen will also partner with the California State Summer School for
Mathematics and Science (COSMOS) program to develop a course designed to share
the excitement of astrophysical inquiry and research with promising high school
students from California. Furthermore, by partnering with the California Teach
(CalTeach) program, Dr. Hansen will initiate opportunities for teacher training
and professional development relating to astrophysics in the high school science
curriculum.