* 0902993
* Collaborative Research: Integrating proxies and Earth System Models to elucidate water cycle dynamics:Did global warming cause an enhanced hydrological cycle in the Eocene?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mark Pagani, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2013
* USD 272,660.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Does global warming increase the vigor
of the hydrological cycle? This question forms the overall research theme of
this study, which investigates the role of hydrological cycle feedbacks in
climate change using a combination of proxy reconstructions and Earth System
Models. The PIs focus on the early Paleogene, particularly on periods of extreme
climate such as the Early and Middle Eocene Climatic Optima and the Eocene-
Oligocene transition. Related questions that will be addressed are: 1) Is global
warming associated with substantial poleward extension of the Hadley circulation
and subtropical dry zones?, 2) Do mid-latitude storm tracks move poleward
carrying precipitation, water vapor, and latent heat with them?, and 3) Do
changes in the atmospheric water transport and runoff alter oceanic deep water
formation and meridional overturning? The PIs will also address questions
specific to Eocene paleoclimate studies. Broader impacts include strong societal
relevance, education programs including integration of the research into the
Urbino Summer School in Paleoclimate and outreach to STEM programs, and training
of 3 PhD students.