* 0902258
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Climate System Sensitivity to Ice Age Orbital Forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Poulsen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2014
* USD 245,660.00

Changes in Earth's orbit through time are one of the main drivers of low
frequency climate change. Though the influence of Earth's orbit on insolation is
known, understanding of the orbit-climate link is incomplete. The orbital
characteristics in many Plio-Pleistocene paleoclimate records are not consistent
with local insolation forcing. The objective of this work is to investigate how
orbital forcing affects the climate system, and to identify climate processes
and feedbacks that modulate this forcing. To do this, the PIs have developed an
earth system model that includes atmosphere, ocean, ice sheets, and vegetation
responses, and is capable of running long transient simulations over multiple
orbital cycles. In addition to generally investigating the orbit-climate link,
the PIs will also use their model to address paradoxes raised by Plio-
Pleistocene proxy records including (i) the glacial 41-kyr problem, (ii) the
tropical 41-kyr problem, (iii) the evolution of climate sensitivity to orbital
forcing, and (iv) the glacial 100-kyr problem. The award will support a graduate
student and research experiences for undergraduates. A museum display on Ice
Ages will be developed in collaboration with the University of Michigan?s
Exhibit Museum of Natural History.