* 0902067
* Wisconsin Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Manuela Romero, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* tasha inniss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,500,529.00

The Wisconsin Alliance for Minority Participation (WiscAMP) represents
17-bachelor degree?]granting and 17 two?]year campuses located throughout the
State of Wisconsin. The overall goal for WiscAMP is to double the number of
underrepresented minority students (URM) who graduate with bachelor degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. The overall
goals for this alliance are as follows 1) To establish comprehensive programs
that support and sustain URM students in STEM disciplines at each of the
institutions in the alliance. 2) To develop partnerships between two and four
year institutions that allows students to move seamlessly from one institution
to another. 3) Increase the faculty and staff understanding of the barriers
keeping URM students from staying in or moving through STEM majors. 4) To
increase the overall rate of retention of URM students in STEM disciplines,
especially between the freshman and sophomore years. 5) Decrease the amount of
time to graduation for URM students in STEM.

This alliance will pursue the following four objectives: 1. Extend, expand, and
maintain activities that support students throughout their STEM education. This
alliance intends to develop comprehensive programs that support students upon
entry into the institution and throughout their STEM education. 2. Extend,
expand, and maintain partnerships between two and four?]year campuses that
foster connections for URM students in STEM disciplines. Based on prior results
the WiscAMP will build upon and expand collaborations that assist in the
transfer of students from one institution to another. 3. Strengthen
alliance?]wide activities that create and sustain relationships within and
between institutions. The partner institutions are proposing to build stronger
relationships by reinforcing and expanding alliance?]wide activities. 4.
Continue to collect data that informs and guides programmatic efforts.
Collecting, analyzing, and presenting data about our alliance is in itself
transformative therefore this alliance will continue to collect aggregate data
for the improvement of the evaluation process. Intellectual Merit. WiscAMP spent
the first 4 years forging partnerships and establishing processes for
communication and collaboration across geographically dispersed and
mission?]driven organizations. Based on prior results the Mid-level WiscAMP is
proposes to support, strengthen and expand evidence?]based practices known to
reduce the rate of attrition and time to graduation. A major priority for this
Mid-level phase is reducing the rate of attrition between freshman and sophomore
year and increasing the number of URM graduates progressing toward the
professoriate.

Broader Impacts. WiscAMP will support both education of individual URM students
and innovative programs at alliance schools to meet its goals. The short-term
outcome will be an increase in the racial/ethnic diversity of students
graduating with degrees in STEM majors from WiscAMP partner schools. The long-
term outcome will be greater ethnic and racial diversity among academic and
government leaders in STEM. WiscAMP could serve as model for other states in
increasing the number of URM STEM graduates.