* 0903672
* Leading First Mid-IR Astronomy by the CanariCam Science Team at the Gran Telescopio Canarias (GTC)
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Charles Telesco, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2014
* USD 115,764.00

AST-0903672 Telesco

When it begins science operations in Fall 2009, the Gran Telescopio Canarias
(GTC) will be the largest optical and infrared telescope in the world. The GTC
is located atop 2400-meter-high Roque de los Muchachos on La Palma in Spain's
Canary Islands. Its segmented mirror has a light-collecting area equivalent to a
single circular mirror 10.4 meters in diameter. The University of Florida is a
GTC partner with Spain and Mexico. Dr Telesco led the team that built CanariCam,
the GTC facility camera that operates in the mid-infrared (thermal) region at
wavelengths between 8 and 25 microns. To use to best advantage over 30 nights of
GTC observing time awarded to the instrument builder, Dr Telesco formed the
CanariCam Science Team (CCST), an international team of more than thirty
astronomers. The CCST will carry out groundbreaking research in three key areas:
sub-stellar objects (brown dwarfs and giant exoplanets), active galactic nuclei,
and protoplanetary disks. These results will have broad implications for our
understanding of puzzles at the leading edge of astrophysics.

This award provides critical threshold support to assure the success of the
CCST, covering travel funds for observing runs and team meetings. This is
crucial for bringing the GTC into full science operation and allowing US access
to the world's largest telescope and its state-of-the-art mid-IR
instrumentation. The graduate students and post-docs on the CCST will receive
training in a superlative international environment, which will also lay the
groundwork for future world-wide collaborations.