* 0903025
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Children in the Urban Informal Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Patricia Price, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 09/30/2012
* USD 11,757.00

The presence of street children in the developing world has been the subject of
international public scrutiny and academic interest for nearly forty years. The
dominant representation of street children as a symbol of urban decay has led to
efforts to eliminate their public presence. For this research project, graduate
student Amy Ritterbusch, supervised by Dr. Patricia Price, will undertake
research on this marginalized population often overlooked in the academic
research literature

The condition and protection of street children remains an issue that has been
ineffectively addressed by governmental and non-profit institutions, and
misunderstood in academia with respect to where they exist and who they are.
Over a 12 month period, the researchers will utilize child-led, ethnographic
methods integrated with archival research to examine the social lives and spaces
of twenty urban street children in Bogotá, Colombia. Using a multiple methods
approach for data collection that will include participatory mapping,
ethnography, photography, and the analysis of government and institutional
documents, the researchers will explore from which sector of the urban
population these children come, where street children spend their day, and the
types of activities in which they participate. The research will also document
the perceptions and the realities of street children's lives, and explore the
paucity of data and knowledge of female children as compared to their male
counterparts.

In answering these questions, this research will focus on the "lived
experiences" of street children, and consider what social forces contribute to
them becoming and remaining a member of this marginalized population. The
results are expected to reveal the broader social contexts in which these
children live, seemingly invisible to society. The results will also produce
knowledge about a population that is largely missing in the Latin American
literature on children as well as augment the scarcity of social science
research on children in the global south, children existing outside of families
and homes.