* 0903560
* IGERT: Environmental Aquatic Resource Sensing: Basic Science, Business Education and Outreach
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Craig Williamson, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,756,719.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training
(IGERT) project represents an interdisciplinary, dual-institution (Kent State
and Miami University) program focused on environmental aquatic resource sensing.
The purpose of the program is to train doctoral students in environmental
sensing, focused on freshwater resources, accentuated with business experiences,
in order to develop professionals equipped for diverse careers. Because
freshwater resources are critical for global function and human survival there
is a critical need to understand their vulnerability. Threats to aquatic systems
are diverse; understanding and meeting these challenges requires new tactics and
technologies. In response, there is increasing use of automated sensors to
collect environmental data creating a new need for training of environmental
scientists. Training doctoral students in materials science, aquatic science,
environmental sensors and business is thus the primary goal of this project. The
curriculum emphasizes concentrated courses coupled with hands-on experiences to
accomplish the main educational goals: environmental research education based on
hypothesis testing and exposure of students to sensor development and business
principles. To foster community development, cohorts will participate in multi-
disciplinary workgroups. The training provided by this project will prepare
graduate students for a variety of future careers relevant to freshwater
resources. Results of the research will be disseminated to stimulate K-16 and
public interest in environmental science. Development of a diverse research
community will be facilitated via a combination of recruitment and ongoing
program connections. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.