* 0903228
* Meeting 21st-Century Cybersecurity Needs Through Advanced Technological Education
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Cathryn Balas, Clark State Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2012
* USD 213,775.00

This project is developing an associate degree in cybersecurity based on
materials, courses, and curricula previously developed by ATE centers for
cybersecurity education, especially the Center for Systems Security and
Information Assurance (CSSIA).

Project activities include:

* creating a fully articulated career pathway connecting classes in the 11th and
12th grades of high school with an associate degree program in cybersecurity at
Clark State Community College, and connecting the associate degree program at
Clark State with a four-year degree at two neighboring public universities,
Central State University and Wright State University;

* connecting the career pathway in cybersecurity to the U.S. Air Force Research
Laboratory's new "Career Path Model";

* providing professional development for the college faculty and high school
teachers who will teach the new curriculum, as well as appropriate training for
guidance counselors;

* documenting the linkages between corporate cybersecurity requirements and the
college's curriculum;

* integrating classroom learning and work-based experiences by placing students
in internships and other project-based business learning experiences in
cybersecurity; and

* recruiting a diverse population of students for the program through
connections with GEAR UP and Project Lead the Way at the high school level.

Clark State Community College has a partnership with Avetec, a nonprofit
research organization, for facilitating business involvement in cybersecurity
and high-performance computing. The project is leveraging this partnership to
develop and implement the new curriculum. In particular, Clark State is working
with Avetec and other local employers (including QBase, Lexis Nexis, SAIC,
Computer Sciences Corporation, Standard Register, Teradata, NCR, and Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base) to create high-quality cybersecurity internship
opportunities for students.

Expected outcomes of the project include a clearly defined career pathway that
can be adopted by other high schools and colleges, significant improvement in
student learning in the discipline of cybersecurity, new models for high school
and college faculty to work and learn together, new models for work-based
learning for students, and integration of high-performance computing and other
advanced technologies into the cybersecurity curriculum to meet current and
future workforce needs for skilled technicians.