* 0903916
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Plasma Physics of Antihydrogen Generation and Trapping
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jonathan Wurtele, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE under
contract UC Berkeley Renewal of Grant DE-FG02-06ER54904 .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this collaborative research is to
measure the relative spectra of hydrogen and antihydrogen. Differences in the
spectra could only result from CPT violation. A second, more remote goal is to
measure the relative effects of gravity on hydrogen and antihydrogen. Positive
results from either measurement would completely change our understanding of
fundamental particles and fields. This proposal is focused on the immediate
plasma and atomic physics issues surrounding the trapping of antihydrogen. These
issues will be studied with experiments at CERN, with classical trajectory Monte
Carlo, molecular dynamics, and 3D PIC codes, and with analytic theory. Some of
the questions that will be addressed include: how to confine positrons,
antiprotons in an octupole at sufficiently cold temperatures; how do leptons
interact with the background radiation field; how do antiproton-antiproton
collisions relax nonthermal distributions; how to mix positrons and antiprotons
so that the resultant antihydrogen can be held in a very shallow neutral trap;
how do zerofrequency bounce resonances cause antiproton loss when the confining
potentials are changed, and; how to predict the energy and state of the
resultant antihydrogen under various mixing schemes. While the motivation for
seeking answers to these questions comes from antihydrogen research, many of
these questions raise novel and deep issues in plasma and atomic
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goals of this research address the
very basis of our understanding of the world around us. Potentially, it has deep
implications on the nature of particle interactions, on the question of matter-
antimatter symmetry, and on cosmology. At the same time, this research is
uniquely visible because the study of antimatter is accessible and fascinating
to the public. Antihydrogen experiments are sufficiently simple that they can be
comprehended in their entirety by graduate students. Consequently, they offer
students a broad education. Experimentalists learn beam and plasma physics,
experimental planning and design, instrumentation, UHV practice, electronics,
cryogenics, magnetics and software development. Along with theory development,
theorists can make critical contributions to the design, operation, and analysis
of the experiments. The relative accessibility of the material makes it easy to
integrate undergraduate students into both the experimental and theoretical
program. The proposed research includes significant participation by members of
underrepresented groups in the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
undergraduate participation adds a broader educational impact through the early-
year training of students by introducing them to scientific research as a
possible career path.&lt;br/&gt;