* 0903073
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Channeling Politics:  Activists, Waterways, and the Fluid Lines of Citizenship in 20th Century Amsterdam
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Narratives of Amsterdam inevitably open with a description of the city's
historic canal system, noting its place-defining character. This doctoral
dissertation research project investigates the relationship between Amsterdam's
canals and the city's 20th century political struggles over rights to housing,
safety, wealth, and identity. The study focuses on three periods of political
volatility: socialist activism for labor reforms in the 1930s, countercultural
demonstrations against market domination in the 1960s, and conservative populist
campaigns for economic deregulation since the 1990s. Newspaper clippings, union
archives, activist paraphernalia, and municipal reports from these years
document surges of social advocacy surrounding employment conditions,
residential evictions, financial inequities, and cultural repression. Using
these documents, this project reconstructs the spatial history of these social
movements. In so doing, it explains how activists used the historic canals as a
physical site, economic resource, and symbolic icon to facilitate their
campaigns for civic reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is part
of a large-scale effort to rethink spatial politics both within and beyond the
field of Geography. Instead of analyzing Amsterdam's canals according to their
construction history, this project illuminates the political utility of the
quays. This approach sheds new light on the material dynamics of political
activism using a theoretical framework that is compatible with the existing
sociology literature on social movements. It also responds directly to calls
from geographers and anthropologists to integrate knowledge about land practices
with theories of social change in urban settings. The findings contribute to
important city planning debates about the changing nature of public space and
its relationship to housing, jobs, environmental health, and community wellness.
Cumulatively, these contributions help re-politicize spatial analysis,
generating new insights into the relationship between built landscapes and
citizenship rights.