* 0903336
* Faculty Professional Development in Design, Construction, Assembly and Analysis of a solid body electric guitar
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Singer, Butler County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2013
* USD 898,813.00

This ATE professional development project is a collaboration between STEM
faculty teams from Butler County Community College (Butler, PA), Purdue
University (West Lafayette, IN), Sinclair Community College (Dayton, OH),
Ventura College (Ventura, CA), College of the Redwoods (Eureka, Ca.), as well as
high school STEM faculty in each of the states involved. Faculty teams at the
respective locations are working together to design, build, and analyze solid
body electric guitars as a means of learning applied concepts of science,
technology, engineering, mathematics, and as a means of understanding product
lifecycle management. This experience is providing teachers and students an
accurate simulation of the collaborative design and rapid manufacturing
processes routinely used in business and industry. Over 150 STEM faculty members
from high schools and community colleges are participating in an intense five-
day Summer Professional Development Program and are having extensive academic
year follow-up activities. The teacher participants are using these processes
and simulations in their classrooms to enhance the STEM laboratory learning
experience. Nearly 5000 students are learning about cross-disciplinary STEM
problem solving that is becoming increasingly important for new design
technicians to experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An external evaluator is
examining the professional development activities for their effectiveness. The
results and lessons learned from the project are being disseminated through
presentations at local, regional, or national conferences of professional
associations. All lessons and laboratory activities are being made available
through self-contained portable curriculum kits. Selling the guitars for more
than the guitar kits cost is providing the means for sustaining this activity.
Project information is being made available through the website
http://www.guitarbuilding.org/, which is being hosted by the Manufacturing
Education Resource Center (MERC) at Sinclair Community College.