* 0903466
* On-chip magnetics for power management and delivery in multicore processors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* William Bailey, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2014
* USD 454,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new class of on-chip power
electronics circuits that will enable highly granular, active power management
for future multicore processors, allowing energy-delay trade-offs to be
performed in the presence of workload variability. The approach is based on the
introduction of magnetic materials as a "post-process" on a standard CMOS run.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Current implementations employ off-
chip, board-level voltage regulation and bring in independent supply voltages
from off-chip. Such approaches are not scalable and require that power be
delivered to the chip at highly scaled voltage levels, leading to unsustainable
current demands. We specifically address how passive magnetic devices can
dramatically improve the design of on-chip power management and delivery
circuits by providing for high density energy storage on-chip. We will innovate
new magnetic devices (inductors and GMR sensors) that can be implemented on a
conventional CMOS process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project
will allow the PIs to train graduate and undergraduate students in a truly
cross-disciplinary research environment combining physics, nanoscale materials,
circuit design, and power electronics applications. This research effort will
also feed a new course at Columbia on power electronics, with a special emphasis
on integrated approaches, bridging the disconnect between the power electronics
community and the traditional integrated circuit design community. Significant
effort will be made for K-12 outreach by systematically training highly
motivated high school students within the program and also enhancing the
interaction with the local K-12 educators.