* 0903101
* P2C2:  Testing Speleothem-Based Radiocarbon Calibrations Through A Process-Based Cave Study and a New 35 Kyr Calibration Curve
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Kathleen Johnson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2012
* USD 461,495.00

Funding is provided to improve the carbon-14 calibration curve that is used for
dating paleoclimate samples. In general, geochemical modeling approaches will be
used to study climatic controls on speleothem geochemistry while statistical
analyses will be used to construct a new calibration curve. Specifically, the
researcher will use speleothems from Heshang Cave, China to test the dead carbon
fraction (DCF) effect on sample dating. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals
include: (1) investigating the modern environmental controls on speleothem
carbon-14 through expansion of the current environmental monitoring program to
include carbon-14 and carbon-13 measurements of soil carbon, soil carbon
dioxide, monthly modern calcite samples, monthly dripwater dissolved inorganic
carbon samples, and cave air carbon dioxide for comparison with existing
calibration data to constrain environmental controls on carbon cycling in the
karst system and investigate links with other proxies; (2) investigating the
location and structure of the radiocarbon bomb peak within the 2.5 meter
annually-laminated HS4 stalagmite to determine soil-to-speleothem carbon
transfer dynamics; (3) constructing a centennial-resolution Holocene carbon-14
record from HS4, tied to existing uranium-thorium (U-Th) dates, to investigate
possible climatic controls on DCF over this time period; and (4) constructing a
new, well-tested speleothem-based radiocarbon calibration curve from paired
U-Th-carbon-14 dating of a 2.0 meter long stalagmite, HS7, which formed from
35,800 to 11,800 years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will support a
new female investigator and students while strengthening international science
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).