* 0903508
* SGER: Documenting the Transient Nature of Natural Free Convection in Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Remke Van Dam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 49,117.00

Geophysical imaging of a sabkha in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) following an
extreme precipitation event in 2008 shows the first compelling evidence of free
convection flow processes in a natural groundwater setting. The imaged pattern
is consistent with fingering caused by precipitation-induced redissolution of a
halite crust and a pre-existing convection pattern; the distribution of these
fingers is similar to those observed in lab experiments and numerical
simulations.

Natural free convection, which is important for heat and solute transport across
a range of hydrogeologic settings, has been studied for over a century but
almost entirely in theory, numerical models, and laboratory experiments.
Currently, very little is known about the growth and decay of convective
instabilities because most research assumes steady state conditions. In order to
resolve key questions about origins and persistence of convection, as well as
their associated spatial and temporal scales, it is vital to resolve the
transient nature of different interacting regimes.

Our UAE field site is an ideal location to address some of these knowledge gaps.
Precipitation records suggest that fingering at this site may only be initiated
once every decade with a halite crust building up during dryer years. Our pilot
data demonstrate the unique opportunity to monitor the dynamic nature of density
fingering. We propose to integrate time-lapse geophysical, hydrological, and
geochemical measurements with preliminary hydrological modeling. The exploratory
research will provide a transformative advance for this important field. The
results will be disseminated through research papers and conference
presentations and will form the foundation for a continued research program
including a full-scale modeling effort.



