* 0903506
* Correlations and Fluctuations in Weakly-Collisional Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Frederick Skiff, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed within
the context of the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint
solicitation NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate
participation in the overall research effort, which is being funded by the DoE
under contract DE-FG02-99ER54543. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma transport
phenomena generally involve fluctuations. Thus, a predictive theory of transport
must describe them. The proposal is to determine the velocity-space structure of
the fluctuations by making measurements between two spatial points and at two
different ion velocities. Such measurements have never been made and provide a
unique opportunity for new detailed tests of fluctuation theory. The proposed
experiments are a logical and natural extension of the earlier work which has
demonstrated the feasibility of phase-space resolved fluctuation
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Understanding fluctuations is intimately
linked to understanding the transport phenomena as well as the dynamics of
plasmas. For example, the MFE fusion energy program has identified the need for
well diagnosed experiments on ion-scale fluctuations with the goals being to
characterize the fluctuations and to understand the mechanisms of transport.
Fluctuation induced transport is fundamental to nearly every physical situation
involving plasmas from space and astrophysical contexts to industrial
applications. The experimental techniques developed in this research,
specifically those having to do with laser induced fluorescence, are applicable
in other contexts and so contribute to the general research infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students, undergraduate students, and high-school
students are involved in projects related to the research. The researcher also
uses the laboratory as a starting point for popular lectures. The public
lectures have also led to short-term collaborations helping local industry
(mostly related to physical acoustics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate
participation adds a broader educational impact through the early-year training
of students by introducing them to scientific research as a possible career
path.