* 0903977
* Emergent Collective Phenomena in Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Seung-hun Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Complex oxides provide
numerous opportunities to study novel electronic, magnetic, and struc-tural
phenomena that emerge out of strong interactions between electrons, such as high
Tc su-perconductivity, quantum spin liquid states, and magneto-electricity.
Understanding their under-lying microscopic mechanisms as well as exploring
their rich phase diagrams poses grand challenges in condensed matter physics.
This individual investigator award supports a project to study several exemplary
transition metal oxides to address some fundamental questions, especially
focusing on how the relevant degrees of freedom, such as spin, charge, and
lattice, are coupled to induce the aforementioned complex properties. Of
particular interest are the exploration of possible new phases and quantum phase
transitions in quantum and frustrated magnets, examination of electron-phonon
coupling in high Tc superconductors, and testing conflicting theoretical models
in magnetic multiferroics. Elastic/inelastic neutron scattering techniques that
directly probe static and dynamic properties of solid at the atomic length scale
will be employed. Undergraduate and graduate students will spend time at several
internationally top research institutes in the U.S., Europe, and Japan for
crystal growth and neutron scattering
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). An electron is an elementary particle that carries electric charge
and spin (magnetic moment). Abundant in a solid, electrons can interact strongly
with each other to bring about novel phenomena when certain conditions are met.
Well-known examples of the collective behaviors in strongly correlated electron
systems are superconductivity that leads to magnetic levitation and
multiferroicity that allows one to control magnetic and electronic properties
simultaneously, both of which have potential revolutionary industrial
applications. This project will address key issues regarding these phenomena by
investigating several exemplary complex oxides. The outcome will advance our
understanding of how the spin, charge and crystal lattice are correlated to
cause such effects. The research will provide important information on how to
better engineer the properties for future technical applications. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art crystal growth and
characterization techniques at several international top research institutes,
and will have opportunities to develop their own international research
network.&lt;br/&gt;