* 0903838
* Special Values and Transcendence
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Papanikolas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2013
* USD 156,239.00

The principal investigator proposes several projects in arithmetic geometry and
transcendental number theory that focus on the deep links between the analytic
and arithmetic information coming from values of special functions. In one
project, the investigator plans to continue the study of quantities related to
Anderson-Drinfeld motives in positive characteristic, including periods,
logarithms, Gamma values, zeta values, multiple zeta values, and L-values. Using
the Galois theory of difference equations, he will pursue results about the
algebraic independence of these quantities both individually and in
combinations. In another project, the investigator will consider new problems
which associate function field arithmetic invariants to special values of Goss-
Hecke L-series. Finally, the investigator will pursue problems relating finite
field hypergeometric functions to L-series associated to Siegel modular forms.

Number theory is one of the fundamental branches of mathematics, and it serves
as the basis for many applications, including cryptography and coding theory.
The proposed research considers questions involving values of analytic functions
that somewhat remarkably convey fundamental information about fields of
algebraic numbers or geometric objects defined over them. Such questions have
their genesis in work of Euler and Gauss, and mathematicians continue to
endeavor to unravel their mysteries. Several parts of the project lead naturally
to problems for graduate and undergraduate research.



