* 0903833
* IMUA  III: Pacific High Island Evolutionary Biogeography: Impacts of Invasive Species, Anthropogenic Activity and Climate Change on Hawaiian Focal Species
* O/D,EPS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Donald Straney, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* robert coyne
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,000,000.00

Proposal Title: IMUA III: Pacific High Island Evolutionary Biogeography: Impacts
of Invasive Species, Anthropogenic Activity and Climate Change on Hawaiian Focal
Species

Institution: University of Hawaii

Goals: This project seeks to enhance the sustainability of Hawaii?s science and
technology capabilities for understanding and predicting the impact of invasive
species, anthropogenic activities, and climate change on the biodiversity, and
ecosystem of the islands. The project also seeks to provide information on the
current or potential future use of endemic Hawaiian species (endemic species are
defined as any species in Hawaii and any species used by early Hawaiian society
to define Hawaii?s place in the natural landscape) with a goal of sustaining
focal species of historical importance to the original human inhabitants of
Hawaii.

The Environmental Dynamics and Ecosystem Responses (ENDER) project component was
designed to develop a collaborative research network to address the
environmental changes occurring throughout the Hawaiian archipelago in all
ecosystems and across temporal and spatial scales. This component seeks to
develop research synergy across climatic and other environmental gradients on
the Big Island and eventually expanding their study to all of Hawaii and the
Pacific.

The Ecological Genomics and Metabolomics (ECOGEM) project component will
identify endemic plant and animal species along two environmental transects (the
ridge to reef across various microclimes of the Big Island and from the Big
Island to Kure Atoll) along with other transects and examine the focal species
for genetic and metabolic adaptive responses. Results of these studies will be
important for the understanding of both short-term and long-term changes in
Hawaiian ecosystems, and will contribute to understanding the impacts of human
activities on tropical ecosystems world-wide.

Intellectual Merit This project significantly enhances the research
competitiveness of Hawaii by building capacity in areas that support the state?s
innovation goals. The key areas include expanding the speed and capability of
cyber-connectivity; establishing comprehensive data management, advanced data
visualization, and modeling capabilities; integrating existing and new geo-
spatially referenced data sets related to ecological functionality and genomic
and metabolomics of endemic, heritage and invasive species; and educating a new
and ethnically diverse generation of citizens trained in science and technology.



Broader Impacts This project will impact the diversity of the environmental
sciences communities by engaging Native Hawaiian and students from Pacific
Island cultures in the design and execution of modern scientific and
technological research demonstrating that modern science and traditional
cultural practices need not be incompatible. The inclusion of guidance from
diverse cultures in the design and execution of the STEM activities that are
important to the society within which those activities occur can serve as a
prototype of science-community relationships throughout the world.