* 0903131
* 21st Century Learning: A Connecticut Higher Education, Industry and Government Collaboration
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* John Birch, Connecticut Pre-Engineering Program, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2014
* USD 986,501.00

The Connecticut Community Colleges and their College of Technology (COT) in
partnership with the Connecticut Pre-Engineering Program (CPEP) is expanding and
enhancing their Life Support and Sustainable Living (LSSL) Program. The LSSL
Program is focusing on Mechanical Engineering Technology and is: (1) providing
additional community college, university students, and faculty with
unstructured, case-based learning experiences; (2) preparing participants for
the workplace through professional skills education, including leadership, team
building, project planning and management, behavioral diversity, and critical
thinking; and (3) developing case-based learning curricula for dissemination to
high schools and community colleges.

Past LSSL case-based student projects include the development of a sleep apnea
monitor for premature infants, space suit design modifications, and helicopter-
delivered pods for natural disaster mitigation. The current project is expanding
the LSSL Program to all twelve Connecticut Community Colleges, additional
universities, and industry partners. In addition, the LSSL Program is
strengthening the pipeline from high schools to community colleges, preparing
graduates for the workforce or continuing their education. Summer workshops are
being used to disseminate grade-level appropriate scenarios to high school
teachers and CPEP is disseminating the best practices of the LSSL Program
through the Engineering Challenge for the 21st Century Program, a four-week
program for urban youth.