* 0903242
* An Innovative 2+2+2 Model for the B.A.T. Degree With Service Management Certification
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joyce Thompson, Lehigh Carbon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2013
* USD 149,594.00

This project proposes to explore the development of a Bachelor of Applied
Technology (B.A.T.) degree at a new free-standing institution to be housed at
the community college, but governed by its own Board of Trustees comprising
members from the college, the Lehigh Career & Technical Institute, sponsoring
school districts, employers, and the community. The program increases the number
and diversity of students in the field who have higher technical degrees, making
them more marketable to potential employers and meeting the needs of business
and industry for more highly skilled and well-prepared technicians.

The project includes the following ATE program improvement components: improving
articulation between programs at secondary schools and two-year colleges,
providing pathways from two-year colleges to four-year college or university
programs, developing lifelong career and educational pathways for technicians to
support the changing workplace, and addressing the knowledge, skills, and
competencies needed for the evolving, converging, and emerging technical
workplace. The college is developing a 2+2+2 career pathway, integrating
industry standards and workplace competencies into the curriculum, as well as
adapting educational materials and courses developed elsewhere. The program
increases high school students' interest in their freshman and sophomore year
through a series of informational sessions, provides junior and senior high
school students with courses and externships, enrolls high school graduates in a
Computer Specialist A.A.S. degree, and, finally, offers the third and fourth
years of a Bachelor of Applied Technology degree at a new free-standing
institution housed at the college. The B.A.T. curriculum does not duplicate
previous coursework and includes specialized training in service management and
experiential learning through internships at local companies.