* 0903596
* The Unusual Features in Superstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Janet Kozyra, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 626,091.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine data analysis
and modeling to investigate: (1) phenomena that appear, or are significantly
modified, only during the most extreme geospace disturbances, (2) the linkages
between them, (3) the reasons they appear in some events and not others, and (4)
the range of associated solar wind conditions. These unusual features include
great red aurorae, visible stable auroral red (SAR) arcs, strong low-latitude
ion-atom auroras, softening of both the auroral precipitation and the ring
current energy spectrum, appearance and effects of strong prompt penetration
electric fields, and newly-discovered intense fluxes of warm (&lt; 30 keV)
energy banded ions mirroring at high altitudes on subauroral field lines. The
changes in coupling between the inner magnetosphere and underlying ionosphere
due to the warn ions will be investigated as one key difference between
superstorms and more typical magnetic storms. Another key difference is the
occurrence of short-lived, highly localized enhancements in the convection
electrojets that seem to play a part in triggering great red auroras. This
investigation will cover the twelve most recent superstorms, as well as a
variety of earlier events, and compare to a set of more typical magnetic storms
during which these phenomena are absent. In addition, comparative studies will
be used as tools to investigate why superstorms differ in aspects of their
features; why some smaller storms also contain superstorm phenomena; and what
changes occur in superstorms as a result of differences in their solar wind
drivers. These studies will use data sets from the ACE, WIND, FAST, TIMED,
IMAGE, Polar, DMSP, NOAA/POES, UARS, and LANL geosynchronous satellites along
with ground-based magnetometers, photometric observations, an archive of HEIDI
ring current simulations for 90 magnetic storms that occurred from 1996-2005,
and an archive of AMIE-derived geomagnetic indices and electrodynamic patterns
from 1991-2002. The data sets are all available in open archives on the Internet
or locally at the University of Michigan. In terms of broader impacts, the
project will contribute to an international effort to address global sun-to-
Earth coupling issues that require international data sets and interdisciplinary
collaboration for progress. This effort was started as a component of the
international CAWSES (Climate and Weather of the Sun-Earth System) program. The
collaboration with Walter Gonzalez at the National Institute for Space Research
(INPE) in Brazil on superstorm research topics is an important outcome of this
earlier work. Results of the studies will be disseminated not only through
standard journals but also in virtual conferences linking the scientific
community worldwide that are planned as a component of CAWSESII, contributing to
an educational experience in interdisciplinary and international collaborations
for US graduate students and researchers and to the development of new forms of
virtual scientific communication. The project may benefit society by improving
scientific understanding of the complexity in the sun-Earth system during
extremes in space weather to extend the range of useful prediction.