* 0903817
* Collaborative Research: Metabolically Engineered Organisms for Conversion of Cellulose to Isobutanol
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Frances Arnold, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 578,885.00

Meeting the world's rapidly growing energy needs while protecting Earth's
increasingly threatened climate and ecological balance is one of the greatest
challenges facing society. This project will explore a new route to producing an
advanced liquid fuel from biomass by constructing a thermophilic microbial
platform to convert cellulose to isobutanol. Compatible with current engines and
with higher energy density, isobutanol is superior to ethanol as a fuel.
Isobutanol can replace dwindling and politically unstable petroleum supplies
without contributing to global warming and, unlike ethanol, can be incorporated
into the energy economy using current technology and infrastructure. To target
the fundamental hurdle in advanced biofuel research of utilizing cellulose as
the feedstock, the goal will be to develop a thermophilic and (partially)
cellulolytic Geobacillus host organism to produce cellulase(s) to augment the
native cellulolytic activity. The ability of this organism to grow at the
moderately elevated temperatures where cellulases are highly active and to
utilize the sugar products of cellulose degradation that normally inhibit the
cellulases will enhance performance and minimize the need for additional
expensive enzyme addition during fermentation to generate biofuels. Specific
objectives of this project will be to generate stable, active bacterial
cellulases and express those new enzymes in Geobacillus. Simultaneously, the
isobutanol pathway will be established in this moderately thermophilic host. The
final goal will be to integrate and optimize cellulose degradation and
isobutanol production pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This
research effort will train some of the most talented students and postdoctoral
researchers in the world in protein and metabolic engineering, two technologies
that are in very strong demand in the biotechnology industry, particularly the
rapidly-growing biofuels/chemicals industry. This project will support extensive
undergraduate research while interfacing with numerous outreach programs. The
educational plan includes joint research meetings and co-advising of graduate
students as well as the integration of parts of the research project into
modules for laboratory courses. This project proposes a novel approach to
addressing one of society's greatest challenges, developing a renewable source
of transportation fuels and chemicals.