* 0903894
* Collaborative Research: Engineering yeast consortia for surface-display of complex cellulosome structures: A consolidated bioprocessing approach from cellulosic biomass to ethanol
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wilfred Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 09/30/2013
* USD 612,000.00

0903894&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering strategy proposed emphasizes the
efficiency of hydrolysis and synergy among cellulases, rather than focusing on
the amount of enzymes produced or used. To emulate the success of a natural
mechanism for efficient cellulose hydrolysis, complex cellulosomes (self-
assembled multi-enzyme complexes) will be assembled on the yeast cell surface,
enabling the ethanol-producing strain to utilize cellulose and concomitantly
ferment it to ethanol. More importantly, by organizing these cellulases in an
ordered structure, the enhanced synergy will increase the efficiency in
hydrolysis, and thereby enhance ethanol production. The use of a single yeast
strain for surface anchoring and cellulase secretion is unlikely to be
successful again based on bioenergetic limitations. To solve this problem, a
synthetic yeast consortium will be developed for the functional presentation of
the complex cellulosome structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering microbes to utilize cellulose
eliminates the need for cellulose treatment. If successful, this will allow
vastly abundant low-cost agriculture residues to be used as raw materials for
ethanol production. The enhanced value of crops leads to additional incomes to
farmers, more efficient land use, and contributes to long-term agriculture
sustainability. The increased production of ethanol reduces pollution to the
environment and the need for imported petroleum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integration of metabolic engineering strategies with the implementation of
process technology represents a unique effort that expands the fundamental
development of metabolic engineering into a practical remediation technology.
The proposed research involves intersection of principles and methods of
molecular genetics, synthetic biology, and fermentation. Graduate students
participating in this research will gain an integrated perspective of the
important interfaces and synergies connecting biochemistry, modern genetics, and
process engineering. As the integration of research and education is one of the
key programs of NSF, the proposed research will involve the participation of
K-12 school students, undergraduates and graduate students, particularly from
underrepresented groups.