* 0903447
* Qameleon: Hardware/software Co-operative Automated Tuning for Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 267,810.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The push toward heterogeneous architectures to increase performance, while
reducing energy consumption creates considerable challenges for software
development. For example, programmers must make non-trivial decisions about when
to use special accelerators vs. powerful core CPUs and also become steeped in
complex architectural details to tune effectively. The goal of this research
project is to alleviate these challenges using a novel framework that enables a
wide-range of computations to be expressed at a high-level and subsequently
tuned automatically for the underlying heterogeneous platform. More
specifically, the PIs propose Qameleon, a new programming environment that can
cooperatively tune the program and the hardware configuration automatically and
continuously using statistical machine learning techniques. The proposed work
will be the first in GPU programming to consider adaptively partitioning a
computation on a heterogeneous platform at run-time. This work will also improve
understanding of the trade-offs among programming features, architectural
support, performance, and power in heterogeneous architectures. The research
will also develop several metrics to characterize the application based on the
outcome of the statistical modeling.

The proposed research brings together cross-disciplinary techniques?from
architectures, compilers, machine learning, and applications ? and researchers
from both academia and industry to build new common programming interfaces that
can hide the complexity of heterogeneous architectures from the programmers,
while still providing high-performance and energy-efficient execution. The
Qameleon programming environment will be designed to teach at the undergraduate
level by incorporating research results into new undergraduate courses aimed at
both computer scientists and domain scientists alike.