* 0903597
* IGERT: Solving Urbanization Challenges by Design - A New PhD Program Between Architecture and Engineering
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* John Taylor, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,959,996.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports the development of a new Ph.D. program at Columbia University that will
combine architecture and engineering perspectives to address the growing
challenges of urbanization. The program will provide doctoral students with the
multidisciplinary design and planning skills needed to conduct research to meet
new urban requirements for: (1) adaptability - designing buildings and power,
transport, water and sanitation infrastructure with sufficient flexibility to be
repurposed as urban needs evolve, and as the immediate environment surrounding
various urban structures changes; (2) ecology - designing to address the
environmental performance of buildings, urban landscapes, land uses and
infrastructure; and (3) resilience - designing buildings and infrastructure
anticipating the impact of climate changes on sea level, and the possibility of
man-made and natural disasters. The most important intellectual contribution of
this IGERT will be the examination of the interdependent requirements of
planning, and designing holistically for adaptability, ecology and resilience.
Collaborative architectural and engineering studios will be used as a
pedagogical tool for integrating engineering and architectural research
approaches at the doctoral level. The involvement of urban stakeholders in the
studio research will help ensure that the research is relevant and applicable in
practice. Collaborations with universities in urban environments located within
Europe, Africa and Asia will provide a global perspective to the program.
Significant efforts will be made to ensure broad participation of women and
under-represented minorities in the program. The IGERT will graduate a cohort of
diverse doctoral students who can help shape the policies, priorities, and
investments needed for contemporary urbanization. IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.