* 0903109
* MCDA: Efficient Mechanisms for Multicore Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* William Dally, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 09/30/2013
* USD 404,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mainstream computing - on
the desktop, in the datacenter, and in embedded devices - is undergoing an
unprecedented shift toward parallelism as manufacturers adopt multi-core
architectures. Conventional multi-core processors have very inefficient
communication, synchronization, and locality-management mechanisms causing them
to scale poorly on hard problems and to be difficult to program. The research
proposes to develop a set of efficient mechanisms - hardware APIs and supporting
microarchitecture - for communication, synchronization, and locality management.
Specifically, the project proposes to develop an agile memory hierarchy,
register-based communication and synchronization, and fast active messages. By
reducing communication and synchronization overhead by orders of magnitude, it
is possible to substantially improve the efficiency, programmability, and
scalability of multi-core processors. Overall, the mechanisms will free
programmers from the incidental constraints imposed by conventional multi-core
architectures - allowing them to concentrate instead on the fundamental issues
of parallelism, locality, and load balance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work is expected to have an immense impact on future architecture and
programming systems for multi-core processors. By reducing communication and
synchronization overheads, the mechanisms will enable many applications that are
not embarrassingly parallel to benefit from multi-core architectures. The work
is likely to enable a new generation of multi-core programming systems. The
educational plan includes to integrate the results of this research into
graduate and undergraduate courses at Stanford University.&lt;br/&gt;