* 0903811
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and theoretical study of the plasma physics of antihydrogen generation and trapping
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Francis Robicheaux, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 126,000.00

The ultimate goal of this collaborative research is to measure the relative
spectra of hydrogen and antihydrogen. Differences in the spectra could only
result from CPT violation. A second, more remote goal is to measure the relative
effects of gravity on hydrogen and antihydrogen. Positive results from either
measurement would completely change our understanding of fundamental particles
and fields. This proposal is focused on the immediate plasma and atomic physics
issues surrounding the trapping of antihydrogen. These issues will be studied
with experiments at CERN, with classical trajectory Monte Carlo, molecular
dynamics, and 3D PIC codes, and with analytic theory. Some of the questions that
will be addressed include: how to confine positrons, antiprotons in an octupole
at sufficiently cold temperatures; how do leptons interact with the background
radiation field; how do antiproton-antiproton collisions relax nonthermal
distributions; how to mix positrons and antiprotons so that the resultant
antihydrogen can be held in a very shallow neutral trap; how do zerofrequency
bounce resonances cause antiproton loss when the confining potentials are
changed, and; how to predict the energy and state of the resultant antihydrogen
under various mixing schemes. While the motivation for seeking answers to these
questions comes from antihydrogen research, many of these questions raise novel
and deep issues in plasma and atomic physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goals of this research address the very basis of our understanding of the world
around us. Potentially, it has deep implications on the nature of particle
interactions, on the question of matter-antimatter symmetry, and on cosmology.
At the same time, this research is uniquely visible because the study of
antimatter is accessible and fascinating to the public. Antihydrogen experiments
are sufficiently simple that they can be comprehended in their entirety by
graduate students. Consequently, they offer students a broad education.
Experimentalists learn beam and plasma physics, experimental planning and
design, instrumentation, UHV practice, electronics, cryogenics, magnetics and
software development. Along with theory development, theorists can make critical
contributions to the design, operation, and analysis of the experiments. The
relative accessibility of the material makes it easy to integrate undergraduate
students into both the experimental and theoretical program. The proposed
research includes significant participation by members of underrepresented
groups in the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;