* 0903842
* Charging and Heating Dynamics of Nanoparticles in Nonthermal Plasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Uwe Kortshagen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal Title: Charging and Heating Dynamics of Nanoparticles in Nonthermal
Plasmas&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Kortshagen, Uwe R.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Minnesota-Twin Cities &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: CBET-0903842 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various aspects of "dusty" or "complex"
plasmas have continued to excite the plasma com-munity since the 1980s. The
first wave of interest was sparked by the detrimental effects of the formation
of nanoparticles during the manufacture of microelectronic devices. In parallel,
the discovery of exciting new physical phenomena in strongly coupled plasmas
gave birth to the booming field of complex plasma studies. Recently a new focus
of attention has emerged: Using reactive dusty plasmas as controllable sources
of nanoparticles. These nanoparticles have interesting physical and chemical
properties that make them promising for novel applications. However, even after
more than a decade of study, some of the most basic physical processes of such
"nanodusty" plasmas are still poorly understood. Moreover, due to the
difficulties of preparing well-characterized experimental systems of "nanodusty"
plasmas, most of our knowledge is based on models that lack experimental
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
study the fundamental dynamics of nanoparticle charging and heating in highly
defined, well-characterized low temperature plasma environments. To achieve this
objective, a unique process to synthesize highly monodisperse, luminescent
nanocrystals with well-defined diameters in the range of 3-20 nm will be used;
these particles will be injected into carefully designed and characterized test
plasmas. For the nanoparticle charging problem, experiments will be performed
with size-controlled nanoparticles to test whether the orbital-motion-limited
theory or a theory accounting for collisional effects needs to be used for small
nanoparticles. Another high-risk/high-reward experiment will attempt to measure,
for the first time, the charge distribution of nanoparticles immersed in a
plasma. Results of these experiments will provide new information for
accompanying modeling studies. For nanoparticle heating in plasmas, a set of
first-ever experiments will be performed using "nanoparticle thermometers" to
study the average temperature of monodisperse nanoparticles in plasmas as well
as to gain information about their temperature distribution function. One set of
experiments will exploit the temperature-dependence of the photoluminescence of
nanoparticles to gain information about particle temperatures. Another set of
experiments will use the nanoparticles' microstructure to determine whether the
particle temperature reached or exceeded the particles? crystallization
temperature. Results of these experiments will be compared to numerical models
for particle heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has a wide range of
broader impacts. On the technical side, it will build the scientific foundation
for the use of plasmas as sources of functional nanoparticles for uses in
nanotechnology. It will also serve as a springboard for a number of education
and outreach activities. These include K-12 outreach through local public school
districts; involvement of undergraduates in research; training of graduate and
undergraduate students in a highly interdisciplinary research environment;
teaching of new interdisciplinary graduate courses; fostering greater
involvement of women and underrepresented groups in our graduate research
programs; and active engagement with industry.