* 0903069
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Family Formation and Social and Economic Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Barrie Thorne, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

SES-0903069 Barrie Thorne Jennifer Randles, University of California-Berkeley

In 1996, Congress overhauled the federal welfare system to encourage the
formation of married two-parent families to promote child well-being and reduce
parents? reliance on government benefits. As a continuation of this policy
shift, in 2001, President George Bush created the Healthy Marriage Initiative
(HMI), a policy that earmarked $150 million dollars annually in federal seed
money to support community-based education programs that teach youth and adults
how to value marriage and communicate more effectively. This project studies
three primary questions: 1) How do government-sponsored marriage education
programs frame healthy relationships and marriage, the skills necessary to
create and sustain them, and the problems that undermine them?; 2) How are
relationship skills taught in the classroom?; and 3) What is the experience of
instructors and individuals who participate in marriage education programs? The
study uses a three-part qualitative research design including: 1) textual
analysis of the most commonly used HMI-approved relationship skills/marriage
education curricula; 2) participant observation in HMI-funded relationship
skills courses and marriage educator training workshops; and 3) interviews with
educators and participants in HMI-funded classes for low-income and poor non-
married parents in Northern California.

The research completes an in-depth study of how marriage education programs work
in practice, especially as they tailor their messages for low-income groups.
Marriage education promotes a particular way of thinking about marriage and its
role in society, specifically its ability to transmit social and economic
advantages. This project analyzes how curricular materials portray marriage
themes, how instructors promote them in the classroom, and how participants
respond to them.

Broader Impacts: The research can inform improvements in relationship education
curricula that go beyond instruction in communication techniques and include
discussions of larger socio-structural issues, such as job insecurity, the
growing challenge of balancing work and family, changing gender roles, and for
many, living in poverty.