* 0903923
* Distinct Electron Regions in 2D and 3D Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Li-Jen Chen, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 276,545.00

Magnetic reconnection is an important energy conversion process that can
impulsively release stored magnetic energies, and is highly relevant to solar,
magnetospheric, and laboratory plasmas. Particle characteristics and their
evolution in the diffusion region of collisionless reconnection is a largely
unknown area, especially in 3D. This research will combine data analysis,
simulation, and engineering expertise to map out distinct electron regions
within the ion diffusion region of magnetotail reconnection using data from the
multi-spacecraft mission Cluster. 2D and 3D PIC simulations will guide the
interpretation of Cluster data. &lt;br/&gt;The project schedule:&lt;br/&gt;In
year 1, distinct electron regions for Cluster reconnection events in the
magnetotail will be reconstructed and the evolution of electron distribution
functions during the course of reconnection will be investigated by PIC
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;In year 2, electron characteristics and dynamics will be
studied within the evolving electron current sheet during reconnection using 2D
PIC simulations and high-resolution Cluster EDI electron data.&lt;br/&gt;In year
3, distinct electron regions around key energy conversion sites will be
identified, including magnetic nulls, in 3D reconnection using Cluster and PIC
simulation data. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to understand the nonlinear
energy conversion physics in space plasmas that has crucial applications to
solar and astrophysical physics as well as laboratory reconnection. The proposed
study is key to understanding dissapation in reconnection layers in space. The
expected new knowledge will further our understanding of how kinetic-scale
plasma processes couple to macroscopic phenomena such as magnetospheric
substorms.&lt;br/&gt;Results from the proposed investigation will be
communicated to the science community in AGU meetings, and APS Division of
Plasma Physics meetings. As part of the proposed effort, the results will be
published in refereed journals. The results obtained through the proposed
project will be organized into a minicourse on reconnection in the magnetotail.
The minicourse will serve as an introduction to a key energy conversion process
in the magnetosphere for pre-college (through partnership of UNH with the Harlem
Children Society), undergraduate and graduate students at UNH.&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of Physics of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and by
Atmospheric Sciences Division of the Geosciences Directorate