* 0903832
* Collaborative Research: Understanding of Presheaths and Sheaths in Plasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Greg Severn, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 175,003.00

AWARD Public Abstract

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Understanding Sheaths and Pre-Sheaths in
Plasmas Principal Investigator: Hershkowitz, Noah / Severn, Greg Institution:
University of Wisconsin-Madison / University of San Diego Proposal No: CBET-
0903783 / CBET- 0903832

This research addresses basic science questions concerning the sheath-presheath
physics in multispecies plasmas that are central to many fields of plasma
science and technology, including plasma thrusters, plasma processing, divertors
of fusion devices, Langmuir probes, and RF plasmas. After more than 80 years,
many important questions associated with sheaths will be addressed for the first
time.

Proposed experiments are aimed at establishing the basic properties of sheaths
and associated presheaths for a variety of situations for which theoretical
predictions and assumptions have not yet been verified. Coordinated studies will
be carried out at the University of Wisconsin and San Diego University to
determine the presheath and sheath plasma potential profiles and the resulting
ion velocity distribution functions associated with ion acceleration. Most of
the experiments are to be carried out in the laboratory of Prof. Hershkowitz.
However, LIF diagnostic development is being carried out on both campuses and is
led by Prof. Severn. Plasma parameters will be determined with two or more
techniques; e.g., combinations of emissive probes, Ar and Xe metastable ion LIF,
Langmuir probes, the phase velocities of ion acoustic waves, pseudo-wave
velocities and optical emission spectroscopy. Agreement of several diagnostics
is needed because of the invasive or incomplete nature of the diagnostics due to
(e.g.) particle depletion by probes and LIF measurements of metastable rather
than ground state ions. Experiments will employ hot-filament multi-dipole,
capacitive, inductive, and helicon sources currently in operation in our
laboratory. Negative ions will be produced by adding O2, SF6, or Cl2 into Ar and
Xe plasmas.

As noted above, many plasma-based technologies would benefit. The results of the
proposed research will be disseminated broadly in the scientific community and
industry through publications and conference presentations. The panel considered
it likely that the results will be used in plasma physics textbooks and will be
widely referenced for years to come. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in the research, and the experiments used in these investigations
will be used in student laboratory courses. The relatively inexpensive tabletop
experiments used in these investigations are suited to student laboratory
courses, permitting students to perform state-of-the-art experiments.

