* 0903092
* SGER:  The Regional Real Estate Database and Project: Implications for Public Policies in the U.S. Housing  Market
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2008,10/31/2009
* Jim Granato, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2009
* USD 49,500.00

The nation is in the throes of a major housing market correction and an
accompanying financial market crisis. Almost overnight, policy makers have come
to the realization that a large part of the cause was the result of public
policy gone wrong: excessive deregulation of the financial industry and
insufficient oversight of the mortgage origination industry. While the nation
struggles to overcome the consequences of past mistakes, it must also start to
restructure government?s role in both industries. The problem is that there are
few serious analyses of the depth and complexities of the policy mistakes that
led to soaring foreclosures and the snowball effect created by plummeting home
values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As policy makers contemplate new sets of
regulations and guidelines, they will have to weigh the sometimes conflicting
objectives of expanding homeownership to American households and the need to
have a more secure and stable housing market in which homeownership is
sustainable. This requires analyses of affordability and mortgage qualifications
and of the misguided innovations which led millions of homeowners to take upon
themselves mortgage obligations beyond their means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such
analyses, however, cannot proceed without better databases with which serious
academic studies can be conducted. The lack of data has forced both academics
and policy markers to discuss the past and its implications for future policy
using only anecdotal information or crude aggregate data. This research project
corrects this problem by systematically collecting and organizing panel housing
market data from multiple sources that enables researchers to address a wide
variety of housing market issues.