* 0903426
* Pulsed Plasma with Synchronous Boundary Voltage for Rapid Atomic Layer Etching
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Demetre Economou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Pulsed Plasma with Synchronous Boundary
Voltage for Rapid Atomic Layer Etching&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Economou, Demetre J. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Houston&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0903426 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will conduct research to develop the principles and techniques for a practical
method of etching surfaces away, one atomic monolayer at a time, by pulsing the
electronics of an etching device. Creating such a method is a critical need for
advancing nanoscience and nanotechnology. The novel, promising central idea is
to pulse the plasma and ion bombardment rather than the reactive gases. Current
plasma etching techniques do not have the level of control or damage-free nature
that is needed for patterning delicate structures smaller than 20 nm. It should
be far easier to control electrical plasma applicators as compared to fast
acting mechanical valves used to pulse gas injection. Furthermore, conventional
Atomic Layer Etching (ALET) is very slow because it pulses the introduction of
etching gases with long reactant adsorption and purging steps, but the new type
of ALET should have a much faster etching rate (x30) because electrical pulsing
can be performed much faster than mechanical pulsing. Basic knowledge will
emerge on pulsed plasmas, plasma-surface interactions, and new methods for
plasma-aided formation of nanostructures. The latter will have broad impact on
diverse areas of nanotechnology, permitting the fabrication of emerging
technologies including abrupt heterostructure interfaces and extremely thin
layers for optoelectronics, quantum devices, and
nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the research carried out under this
award, novel pulsed plasma methods with synchronous boundary voltage will be
developed for rapid ALET. An electrostatically shielded, inductively coupled
plasma (ICP) will be employed, containing mostly rare gas with a trace (e.g.,
&lt;1% Cl2) of reactive gas. Because the plasma potential will lie below the
?chemical sputtering? threshold, it should be possible to form a saturated
product (e.g., SiClx for Si etching) layer in about 1 s, without etching. This
layer will then be removed by nearly monoenergetic ion bombardment, created in a
short period (~0.5 s) of rapidly pulsed ICP power (e.g., 50ì ON / 100ì OFF),
combined with synchronous pulses of a positive DC bias voltage applied to a
boundary electrode (boundary voltage) during most of the afterglow (ICP power
OFF). During this period, the ion energy will be precisely controlled to lie
above the threshold for chemical sputtering but below the threshold for physical
sputtering of the substrate, resulting in self-limiting etching. Synchronous
pulsing of the boundary voltage will also sharpen the ion angular distribution
(IAD) to about ±3°. Narrow IADs are essential for highly anisotropic etching
with vertical sidewalls, especially for etching nanoholes. Plasma experiments
and simulations will be performed to understand the complex interactions between
the pulsed ICP and the synchronous boundary voltage, including measurements of
time-resolved ion bombardment energy and angular distributions. These will be
coupled with etching experiments including the effect of noble gas ion mass, and
reactant (Cl, Br, I) mass and electronegativity on sub-surface lattice damage
and ALET monolayer accuracy. In-situ and ex-situ diagnostics will be employed to
measure product removal rate as a function of chemisorbed layer surface coverage
and substrate damage. Silicon and GaN ALET will be investigated, but the method
will be applicable to a variety of substrates.&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the
research will involve two PhD students, two undergraduates, and several outreach
activities, including a collaboration with the Coalition for Plasma Science to
increase public awareness for societal benefits of plasmas. Undergraduate
students (more than 50% of the University of Houston students are minorities) as
well as a teacher will be recruited with the help of the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experience for Teachers (RET) programs of the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;