* 0903049
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Converting Pastures to Grasslands: State Interventions into Pastoral Livelihoods and Grassland Ecosystems of Tibet
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Emily Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 05/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This research project investigates a major government program launched in 2003,
the grazing removal project, which calls for the removal of grazing from large
areas of rangeland in Tibet for the purpose of restoring purportedly degraded
pastures. The project works by creating fenced zones in which grazing is to be
banned for several months annually to ten years. Graduate student Yundan Nima,
under the supervision of PhD advisor Dr. Emily Yeh, will investigate the
rationales for this grazing removal project. Specifically, this research asks
why has the Chinese central government initiated the grazing removal project in
pastoral Tibet and to what extent is it being implemented by sub-national and
local governments as intended by the central government?; how are pastoralists
accepting, rejecting, modifying or adapting to the project, and why?; to what
extent do traditional forms of grassland management system and Tibetan
pastoralists' local knowledge articulate with what would be expected for non-
equilibrium ecosystems and how does this affect pastoralists' response to the
project?

The framework for analyzing the grazing removal project as a state intervention
is informed broadly by political ecology, an approach that analyzes the ways in
which environmental problems and their proposed solutions are shaped by
political-economic, social, and cultural factors, at multiple scales. Field
research will use a mix of methods that include detailed household surveys, in-
depth, semi-structured interviews, oral histories, transect walks, and
participation observation. Individuals to be interviewed include herders and
governmental officials at all levels (from central government down to village).
Intensive ethnographic study will be conducted in two villages in Nagchu. By
investigating the on-the-ground implementation of the grazing removal project
and the ways in which its targets come to identify with or reject it, the
project contributes to understandings of state development and environmental
projects, including their social and environmental consequences as well as the
ways in which they may produce new identities.

This project contributes to political ecology through a multi-scalar analysis of
how state interventions into pastoral livelihoods are formulated, translated
into implementation, and contested. The project also makes a substantial
contribution to studies of pastoralism, contributing knowledge about how rapid
change and government interventions are affecting range management patterns and
livelihoods in developing countries. Through the project Tibetan herders will
have an opportunity to express their experiences with and perceptions of
government environment and development policies, as well as their assessments of
their own current and future livelihood conditions.

