* 0903572
* Gravitation theory and black hole thermodynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Theodore Jacobson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 657,002.00

The research supported by this award aims to further our understanding of
gravitational physics in areas ranging from fundamental theory to astrophysical
phenomena. Despite the fact that General Relativity, Einstein's theory of
gravity, is well-confirmed by many tests and observations, outstanding puzzles
in both cosmology and quantum gravity motivate investigation of the properties
and predictions of various modifications. This research will study, in
particular, theories with a preferred reference frame. The focus will be on
stability and dynamical viability of such theories. A second theme of the
research concerns properties and phenomena associated with spinning black holes,
which are the universal endpoint of complete gravitational collapse. Topics to
be studied include the mathematical description of such black holes, the
limitations on their spin rate, and mechanisms that might produce the extremely
energetic jets of matter that are observed to be ejected from their
neighborhood. A particular such mechanism involves magnetic energy concentrated
in tube-like structures behaving as elastic strings. A third area of the
research aims to develop a better understanding of the nature of the entropy of
black holes and other influence horizons. In particular, while this entropy
appears to obey the second law of thermodynamics, the exact meaning of that
statement and its validity remain murky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research on modifications of General Relativity will produce a better
understanding of the possibilities and problems that entails, and new ways to
test the theory and to interpret anomalies if such should arise. The work on
spinning black holes will provide insight into the dynamical behavior of such
objects, and may contribute to understanding the origin of the high energy jets
they sometimes generate. The work on black hole entropy attempts to capitalize
on the tantalizing hints of black hole thermodynamics, to use those hints to
discover principles of that may govern the underlying theory of quantum gravity.
The results of this research will be disseminated through written articles, as
well as seminars, conference talks, and lecture series. The research will help
to train future scientists in both this research area and related fields through
graduate and undergraduate courses taught at the University of Maryland, and
through the supervision of research by undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdocs. In addition the PI will give scientific talks to the public in various
forums, to share the insights and excitement that science has provided about the
universe and our place in it.