* 0903679
* International Workshop on the Status and Participation of Women in STEM Disciplines and Careers
* EHR,DRL
* 08/31/2008,07/31/2010
* Lisa Frehill, Commission on Professionals in Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 07/31/2010
* USD 327,800.00

The Association for Institutional Research will organize and conduct two three-
day workshops, scheduled approximately one year apart, to review the existing
international knowledge base and exemplary policies and programs designed to
enhance the status and participation of women in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines and careers. In brief, the
primary goals of the workshops are to: (1) systematically review relevant
international research literatures to enhance understanding of the barriers and
challenges to the full participation of all women in STEM disciplines and
careers; and (2) identify reliable and credible data sources and data gaps in
order to create a research agenda. Using international comparative data, the
effects of the intersections of gender and race/ethnicity, commonalities and
differences among women in STEM, and strategies, policies, and programs that are
effective in enhancing women?s participation in STEM will be identified.
Intellectual Merit: The project?s intellectual merit lies in its inclusive
systematic approach using intensive and extensive reviews and analyses of the
relevant international comparative research and evaluation literatures to
catalyze interdisciplinary discussion, and serve as a basis for defining a
strategic research agenda. A major component of the workshop will be a guided
discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of extant research on policies,
practices, and programs at the national, regional, and international levels that
enhance women?s full participation in STEM careers. The workshop will identify
critical gaps in the data and research literatures on women in STEM fields, and
identify comparative data on international cultural and structural differences
and commonalities to pinpoint issues and topics for further research on women in
STEM fields that transcend national, political, and cultural boundaries. The
ultimate goal is to design, implement, and evaluate effective programs and
practices to broaden the participation of all women in STEM fields in the U.S.
and abroad. Additional contributions include identifying collaborators and
creating networks for future international collaborations.

Broader Impacts: The project?s broader impact will be realized through the
establishment of a repository for multi-national research and an agenda that
will eventually result in a rich and competitive technical workforce that is
strengthened by the broader participation of all women. The workshop will
propose strategies to attract and retain more women across ability, race, and
ethnic groups not only into the STEM workforce, but also into STEM leadership
positions, thus contributing to achieving the broader goal of strengthening
scientific, technical and economic capabilities.

Workshop outcomes are expected to include a report that: summarizes reviews of
relevant literatures; identifies gaps in research, data collection, and
evaluation; and outlines recommendations for establishing strategic research
agendas. Findings from the report will be disseminated through a workshop
website as well as through presentations at international scientific conferences
and meetings and national workforce policy summits.

