* 0903551
* IGERT - Global Change, Marine Ecosystems, and Society
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,191,896.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) award supports graduate training in global change, marine ecosystems,
and society. The project will combine the extensive climate research at Scripps
Institution of Oceanography with the economic, legal, business, policy and
historical perspectives of other University of California San Diego departments,
the management-based research of National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's Southwest Fisheries Science Center, and the non-profit
Environmental Law Institute. By linking the physical science of global change to
the analysis of economic behavior and social consequences, this project will
empower students to develop strategies for decision-making and communication to
address global challenges. Major research themes are: global change effects of
greenhouse gas drivers from the scientific, economic, legal and political
perspectives; ecosystem impacts of changes in temperature, sea level, runoff,
and ocean acidification; societal impacts of population dislocations, human
health, sustainability of fisheries, transnational legal issues and impacts on
tourism; and impact on public perception, communications strategies and public
policy. These themes will be united by interdisciplinary "process studies" in
which research teams bring expertise to problems at the interface between
climate science and the societal extent of global change. Process studies are
focused in geographic areas where research collaborations exist and where major
themes coalesce. The educational model includes an intensive interdisciplinary
summer course; a new course to guide students to form interdisciplinary teams as
part of their thesis research; coaching in negotiation, ethics, and management
responsibilities; internships where students apply their knowledge in non-
academic settings; and a career seminar that exposes students to alternative
professions. This approach to graduate education facilitates integration of
global change research that is focused on biological, social, economic, and
political issues, marine resource management and conservation. The program is
further dedicated to the expansion of diversity and increasing opportunities for
post-graduate employment in an ever more complex society. IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.