* 0903287
* Widening Information Security Education in Virtual Worlds (WISE Initiative)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Delfina Najera, El Paso County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor P. Piotrowski
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,064.00

Information Science and Systems (33)

This project develops a revision of the existing curriculum at the El Paso
Community College to meet current standards, creates a virtual reality site, and
designs a local cyber-defense competition for students. The project goal is to
improve the ITS Security Option program to assure that students enter employment
in the Information Security field with enhanced technical competencies and soft
skills such as team work, critical thinking and problem-solving. The project
includes creation of a site in Second Life, a virtual 3-dimensional,
synchronous, multi-user world, which provides students with opportunities to
investigate real-life scenarios for Information Security skills development.

The curriculum is improved and enhanced to include more than technical skills
development. By increasing activities that focus on problem solving, creative
thinking, real-world experiences, team work, and communication, students are
more prepared for the workplace. The project emphasizes soft skills that are
necessary in today's rapidly changing knowledge-based economy. In addition, by
using innovative virtual teaching strategies, the project engages different
types of learners.

The proposed improvements in the curriculum lead to additional opportunities for
articulation with four-year institutions such as the University of Texas at El
Paso and with K-12 schools. In addition, by increasing students' opportunity to
develop problem-solving, analytical and creative skills, EPCC becomes a model
for other technology programs. As a Hispanic Serving Institution located in the
border region, EPCC is uniquely positioned to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM career paths.