* 0903748
* SGER:  Rapid Response to California Wildfires:  Effect of Fire on Delivery of Organic Carbon to the Fluvial System
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* Miguel Goni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 52,603.00

Fire causes drastic changes to organic carbon, converting organic materials to
relatively inert fire-derived organic carbon, including charcoal. Additionally,
fire can denude watersheds of vegetation and soil cover, which causes major
increases in flooding and erosion. It has been estimated that 70% of the long-
term sediment yield from rivers in chaparral systems may be a result of fire.
Further, eroded soils and sediments are usually enriched in particles carrying
organic carbon. Therefore, it is possible that >70% of the organic carbon
delivered to the fluvial network of chaparral systems is a result of fire. The
combination of these characteristics makes fire an important agent in delivering
organic carbon to continental margin sediments, where it could reside as a long-
term atmospheric CO2 sink. The Basin Complex and Indians fires in the Salinas
River drainage basin of central California burned nearly 240,000 acres of
chaparral, scrubland, forests, savanna, and grasslands. This project will
address the role of fire in the delivery of organic carbon to rivers from these
fire-prone environments. Combined with ongoing research in the Salinas River,
Monterey Bay, and Pacific Ocean, this research will contribute to the
understanding of fire's role in the delivery of organic carbon from its
terrestrial source to its sink in the marine environment. This project will
support one postdoctoral researcher and one undergraduate student. The
postdoctoral researcher will gain valuable experience developing a research
program, and teaching and mentoring undergraduate students, who will be involved
in all aspects of the field and laboratory work.