* 0903167
* Planning Grant for the Center for Advancing Technological Education for the Deaf
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Ronald Till, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2010
* USD 69,781.00

The National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID), a college of the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) is the planning for the development of a resource
center, the Center for Advancing Technological Education for the Deaf (CATED).
The goal of this center is to increase the number of deaf and hard-of-hearing
(deaf/hh) technicians entering the high-technology fields. The center will serve
as a resource for deaf/hh students, adults, and the high schools and community
colleges that serve them by providing: &lt;br/&gt;1. An on-line clearinghouse
for career information on STEM-related technician programs (including, but not
limited to, the fields of engineering, information technology, computer-assisted
precision machining, computer-aided drafting, digital imaging and laboratory
science) and best teaching practices targeted specifically for deaf/hh students
in high schools and community colleges, and information on working successfully
with deaf/hh technicians for employers and co-workers. &lt;br/&gt;2. A virtual
community of both mentors and peers for deaf/hh students and professionals in
STEM-related technical programs and technician careers. &lt;br/&gt;3. Community
college partnerships that include professional development and faculty-in-
residence and/or exchange programs to help community college faculty improve the
success of their deaf/hh students. &lt;br/&gt;4. Expansion of the ATE-funded
Project Fast Forward: Pathway to an IT Education for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing
Student to other technical disciplines and to more high schools, including
public high schools with isolated mainstreamed deaf students, and creating
agreements with local community colleges to accept the RIT/NTID credit.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Expansion of the ATE-funded Deaf Initiative in Information
Technology project to provide training through distance learning technology for
deaf/hh professionals in STEM-related technician fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are visiting several existing ATE Centers to
determine the best organizational structure and budget requirements for a
Center. Evaluation of career awareness material and determination of how
targeted material can be developed; investigation of web portal development that
supports the virtual learning community and the delivery of dual credit courses
and DIIT workshops through distance learning; and development of partnerships
for collecting and sharing materials, providing career information, and for
mentoring, training, and networking are part of the planning process..
&lt;br/&gt;