* 0903637
* IGERT: Integrative Training in Motor Control and Movement
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Neil Shubin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project
builds links broadly across Chicago's scientific community to develop an
integrative training program for U.S. doctoral students in motor control and
movement. To develop an integrative understanding of movement, it is necessary
to address both the biology and the engineering of the systems involved and how
they work together. Students from graduate programs at the University of Chicago
and Northwestern University will obtain the biological and engineering
backgrounds required to develop the integrative approach needed to take the
field in new directions. Educational tools include a boot camp, a three-quarter
common core curriculum, a discussion series, required laboratory rotations, and
workshops and seminars at the Field Museum. The program will involve outreach to
local Chicago-area schools, with training for students and faculty in the
development and conduct of effective outreach. Mentoring of undergraduate
students by IGERT graduate trainees will be done in close collaboration with
local universities that primarily serve underrepresented minorities in the
Chicago area. A trans-institutional website will highlight opportunities and
results related to this program's IGERT goals and provide resources for teachers
and students. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.