* 0903410
* Beyond LambdaCDM: Theoretical Predictions &amp; Observational Constraints
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Laura Mersini-Houghton, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 25,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two deepest mysteries in our
understanding of nature are: the selection of the initial conditions (IC) of our
universe, and the recent acceleration of the universe, attributed to dark energy
(DE). The PI proposes to study both of these outstanding problems, within a new
framework that extends the conventional approach and which uses observational
analysis for guidance on these phenomena and for the testable predictions of the
program. The radical departure of the PI's approach from the conventional
approach is that it proposes to use the quantum dynamics of the gravitational
and matter fields degrees of, in a multiverse framework, for selecting the IC
and for extracting the cosmological implications of the landscape. The PI
advocates that the only way to address the problem meaningfully is by extending
our investigation to a multiverse framework. This proposal is one way resolving
the puzzle of why our universe had to start with High Energy Big Bang, while
avoiding paradoxes born out of previous attempts. This approach also offers a
multitude of testable predictions, tracked down by superhorizon entanglement
modes, thereby placing it as a strong candidate for a scientific theory of IC.
Three of these predictions are already successfully tested, with the most recent
test being the NASA discovery of a "dark flow" in Sept.2008. Another topic of
research concerns the puzzle: what is Dark Energy? Currently, the best way to
tell is by observationally finding ways to measure its pressure and equation of
state w[z].&lt;br/&gt;Although ranked among the highest priorities in the
community, this measurement has proven difficult so far. The PI proposes a
complementary method, namely the use of Gravitational Waves from SBH binaries
for pinning down w. This method can be quite powerful since it avoids the noise
in the signal that is inherited from the vastness of structure through which the
signal propagates. Besides complementing current large-scale surveys, the
benefit of this method is that we can start taking data immediately and make use
of existing and planned LIGO and LISA experiments. The project has many broader
impacts. The PI shares the excitement of her research by giving a series of
talks nationally and internationally, and by talking to media in order to help
make cutting edge research accessible to a wider audience. Together with Brian
Greene and J.Khoury, the PI has initiated and is co-organizing a series of
conferences, "A Debate in Cosmology", on these outstanding topics, meant not
only to stimulate progress and breakthroughs by bringing together authorities in
the field, but also for disseminating knowledge by having online video-cams of
the talks. She is also co-editing a book on Time's Arrow (NYAS) and co-authoring
invited chapters for Springer's "Frontier" collection meant to disseminate
cutting edge research to the general public.