* 0903872
* Study of Nonlinear Interaction and Turbulence of Alfven Waves in LAPD Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jean Perez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE [OFES
Science report #09ER55049].

The project is devoted to analytic and numerical study of nonlinear interaction
and turbulence of Alfven waves in the Large Plasma Device (LAPD) which is a part
of the Basic Plasma Science Facility (BAPSF) at UCLA. The proposed research is
aimed at extending the results obtained for incompressible magnetohydrodynamic
turbulence to plasma turbulence, and at providing analytic and numerical support
to the experiments on Alfvenic turbulence conducted in LAPD. The research will
be strongly integrated with teaching. It is proposed to develop the new course
onMHD Turbulence on the graduate level, and the new course on Plasma
Astrophysics for graduate and advanced undergraduate students. The courses will
reflect the interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research, and will cater to
students in Physics, Astronomy and Engineering Departments. An essential part of
the project is effective integration of state-of-the art analytic and numerical
methods with laboratory studies, which is indispensable in training graduate and
undergraduate student.

This NSF award provides travel support for the Graduate Research Assistant
involved with this research project.