* 0903230
* Texas State Technical College New Advanced Technical Certificate Program in Nuclear Welding Inspection
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matt Siddens, Texas State Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 285,192.00

The project is upgrading the curriculum in a welding technician program by
adding a new advanced technical certificate in nuclear welding inspection. The
program is utilizing inspection coursework already available in Texas and
developing a new course in welding inspection at nuclear power plants to prepare
students to handle the significant regulatory challenges associated with welding
inspection duties at nuclear reactors. The project includes an in-depth
tasks/skills analysis to determine the critical skill areas needed for nuclear
welding inspectors, professional development for faculty, acquisition of
necessary training aids, and the design of a technical education curriculum
leading to an advanced skills certificate in nuclear welding inspection. The
curriculum (including syllabus, lesson plans with lectures and activities,
ancillary instructional materials, and assessments) is based on the tasks/skills
survey and is being organized into modules that can be utilized by other two-
year college welding programs for both matriculated and continuing education
credit courses. The evaluation effort, under the direction of an independent
evaluator, is monitoring progress toward curriculum development objectives and
is assessing student learning and satisfaction along with employer satisfaction
with the program's graduates. The investigators are disseminating their material
by posting it on their website and on the Weld-Ed ATE Center website, by
presentations at regional and national conferences, including those organized by
the Weld-Ed ATE Center, by making the material available to community and
technical colleges throughout Texas as a part of the state's Workforce Education
Course Manual, and by advertising and offering continuing education to industry
personnel. The broader impacts include the wide dissemination of the
instructional material though established mechanisms supported by the Texas
Technical College System and an existing ATE Center.