* 0903427
* An Integrated Design and CAD Approach for Efficient Power Delivery in Multicore Processors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop solutions that ensure reliable power delivery in high-performance
multicore systems. Technology trends for multicore chips show increased on-chip
noise sources, decreasing supply voltage levels, and reduced headroom for noise:
together these make the problem of on-chip power supply noise, which can cause a
circuit to be nonfunctional, acutely difficult. The approach is based on an
integrated strategy that incorporates novel design techniques, bolstered by
computer-aided design (CAD) strategies to build reliable on-chip power
distribution systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design thrust of the project will
develop novel multicore-specific circuits, including switched decoupling
capacitor (decap) circuits and active decaps, to actively cancel the supply
noise in cores that suffer from large switching current. The modeling and CAD
aspects will focus on analyzing multicore power grids containing a mix of these
novel structures and traditional methods, and optimizing these grids using pre-
silicon. Additionally, the PIs will develop CAD techniques to build adaptive
structures into the circuit in the pre-silicon phase, in order to enable sensor-
driven adaptive post-silicon power grid noise
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions from this research will facilitate
the design of next-generation high-performance, low-voltage systems for
computing and communication applications, and will be demonstrated on prototype
implementations. The PIs plan to transfer technology through direct industrial
collaborations, particularly leveraging this project's connections with the
Semiconductor Research Corporation. The PIs will proactively recruit and nurture
students from under-represented groups and develop new course materials for the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum in the areas of electronics, chip design,
and CAD.