* 0903803
* Collaborative Research: Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Turbulent Transport Control via Shaping of Radial Plasma Flow Profiles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eugenio Schuster-Rosa, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE under
contract number DE-FG02-09ER55022.

This research aims to investigate active control of unstable fluctuations,
including fully developed turbulence and the associated cross-field particle
transport, via manipulation of flow profiles in a magnetized laboratory plasma
device. Fluctuations and particle transport will be monitored by an array of
electrostatic probes, and flow profiles controlled via a set of biased
concentric ring electrodes that terminate the plasma column. The goals of the
proposed research are threefold. 1. to develop a predictive code to simulate
plasma transport in the linear HELCAT (HELicon-CAThode) plasma device at the
University of New Mexico (UNM), where the experimental component of the proposed
research will be carried out. 2. to establish the feasibility of using advanced
model-based control algorithms to control cross-field turbulence-driven particle
transport through appropriate manipulation of radial plasma flow profiles. 3. to
investigate the fundamental nonlinear dynamics of turbulence and transport
physics.

The outcome of the proposed research, although focused on basic plasma physics,
will have a strong impact on the scientific advancements that are needed to make
nuclear fusion a viable source of energy, and will therefore produce a profound
impact on an area of immense importance to the welfare of society. The proposed
research will advance discovery while promoting teaching and learning. Due to
its multidisciplinary nature, the proposed research plan brings together
concepts from plasma physics, computational methods, and controls, with emphasis
on experimental validation of the proposed modeling and control solutions.
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from this unique
multidisciplinary experience that will enhance their ability to conduct advanced
research, think creatively, take advantage of unique facilities making good use
of collaborative arrangements, and work in an individual capacity and as members
of a team. The infrastructure for research and learning will be enhanced in each
one of the collaborating institution. This collaboration will grant access to
graduate and undergraduate students to the HELCAT experimental facility, where
they can conduct experiments to validate the modeling and control solutions that
result from their research, and will expose each one of the participating
students to new research areas.

The undergraduate participation adds a broader educational impact through the
early-year training of students by introducing them to scientific research as a
possible career path.