* 0903768
* Bioinformatics Starter Grant:   Hierarchical Bayesian modeling to investigate climate and land-use drivers in the multi-species ecology of West Nile virus.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Shannon LaDeau, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

The Institute of Ecological Studies is awarded a grant in support of research to
develop and implement methods to integrate ecological data with biological
models at relevant spatial and temporal scales to better understand the ecology
of multi-species systems, including West Nile virus (WNV). The research will
have two primary aims. First, Hierarchical Bayesian (HB) modeling will be used
to integrate data on local temperature and precipitation measures with WNV
activity (in human, horse, and bird samples) to assess how county to region-
scale weather influence epizootic WNV amplification. The results will be used to
implement a fully spatio-temporal model that incorporates the additive and
interacting affects of disease (WNV), climate (winter temperatures and ENSO),
and human land-use on population abundances for twenty native U.S. bird species.
Second, available data describing vector abundance and species composition
across North America will be synthesized from public health, ecological,
entomological, and mosquito control sources; and vector abundance and
composition will be sampled at a sub-county scale from the land-use gradient
sampling network currently implemented in the Baltimore Ecosystem Study Long
Term Ecological Research project. The results of this study will contribute to
an understanding of the complex ecosystem structure that supports arbovirus
(including WNV) amplification and persistence after introduction, and may
additionally provide insight into mosquito abatement in urban versus rural
areas. A final product of this research will be a synthesis of these two aims
that integrates the ecology of both vector and host communities to develop a
forecast model for how climate and land-use change scenarios may affect the
ecology of arthropod-borne viruses (including West Nile virus) and their impact
on native ecosystems.