* 0903359
* Branch-and-Cut Approaches for Nonconvex Nonlinear and Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2008,12/31/2010
* Ismael de Farias, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* michael fu
* 12/31/2010
* USD 43,042.00

This grant provides funds for the development of new theory and computational
methods to solve a number of nonconvex nonlinear and mixed-integer nonlinear
programming problems (NCNLP and MINLP) through the branch-and-cut (B&amp;C)
approach, which are of significant theoretical and practical interest.
Specifically, new formulation, pre-processing, branching scheme, primal
heuristic, and cutting planes will be developed for them. The project will focus
on the following directions: (1) piecewise linear optimization to solve NCNLP
and MINLP approximately; (2) linear complementarity problem to solve nonconvex
quadratic programming; (3) cutting planes for bounded purely integer (as opposed
to mixed-integer) nonlinear programming; (4) specially structured problems,
including bimatrix games and portfolio optimization. Part of the funds will be
applied towards building new undergraduate and graduate curricula and
educational materials in the area of discrete nonlinear optimization for
students in engineering, management, economics, mathematics, and science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to the knowledge of algorithms for
solving such optimization models that combine discrete variables and nonlinear
functions. As such, it will open new venues of research in the combined fields
of discrete and nonlinear optimization. The results of the project will provide
significant enhancements to the optimization tools that are used in practice.
The final outcome will be efficient B&amp;C strategies that will advance our
ability to solve models that stand as some of the most difficult in fields such
as finance, bioinformatics, and data mining, and therefore are at the core of
our economy and welfare. The results and tools developed through the project,
including the new theoretical developments, software, and the new teaching
resources, will be publicly available through a website that will be created for
the project. The development and dissemination of the educational material
related to the project will contribute to the formation of personnel in the
field of operations research who are essential both in industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;