* 0903890
* Modeling Unsteady Reconnection in the Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 09/30/2012
* USD 292,416.00

The onset of reconnection in tail-like plasma configurations is one of the most
fundamental energy transformation processes in space plasmas. It results in
acceleration and heating of plasma particles, new plasma structures and
turbulence. It gives rise to substorms in Earth's magnetosphere. Similar
processes occur in the magnetospheres of Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, other planets
and their moons, in the solar corona and in the laboratory plasmas, including
the laboratory experiments on magnetic reconnection.

This project will examine kinetic models of magnetic reconnection in Earth's
magnetotail. In the magnetotail the onset of reconnection is determined not only
by different motions of ions and electrons but also by different motions of the
electrons trapped inside the current sheet and those passing through the tearing
instability region. It also depends on the structure of the current sheet,
whether the reconnecting current layer is embedded into a thicker plasma sheet
or not. Significant progress in understanding of the magnetotail reconnection
becomes possible because of the availability of( a) nonlocal kinetic stability
analysis codes, (b) new models of thin current sheets embedded into thicker
plasma sheets or split into two current layers, and (c) kinetic particle
simulation codes with open boundaries (as opposed to periodic boundary
conditions) for both fields and particles. The goal of this project is to use
and develop the above tools and models to investigate: 1) the kinetic mechanisms
of the reconnection onset in the magnetotail, 2) different types of thin current
sheets that precede the onset and arise in process of reconnection, and 3) the
regimes of reconnection characteristic of the tail-like, collisionless plasmas.

New regimes of reconnection available in collisionless tail-like systems, are
very different from the standard picture of magnetic reconnection, with the
electron dissipation region at the magnetic X-point and with the fast
reconnection mediated by whistler or kinetic Alfven waves and dominated by the
Hall fields. The project will develop new tools (thin current sheet models and
full-particle simulations with open boundaries) that will be useful in other
areas of plasma physics and astrophysics, magnetic-confinement fusion, solar
physics, and plasma propulsion. The work will also provide hands-on research
training for student summer interns via The Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory summer intern program.