* 0903635
* Active control of nonlocal electron kinetics in low-pressure plasmas using additional electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Vladimir Demidov, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

Proposal Title: Active control of nonlocal electron kinetics in low-pressure
plasmas using additional electrodes&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Demidov,
Vladimir &lt;br/&gt;Institution: West Virginia University Research Corporation
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET-0903635 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
research is to investigate the fundamental phenomena which determine the
electron energy distribution (EED) in plasmas, with a particular emphasis on
partially ionized gases. The critical question posed is to explain why electrons
with energy higher than the confining plasma potential persist in collisionless
and weakly collisional plasmas (the so-called Langmuir paradox). In a
collisionless plasma, the project will (1) provide experimental investigations
of the electron energy distribution (EED) in plasmas of low pressure, (2)
analyze mechanisms for formation of the nonlocal electron energy distribution on
the base of the kinetic equation, (3) provide calculations of the electron
energy distribution and their comparison with experiments, and (4) investigate
the influence of voltage applied to additional electrodes on plasma kinetics. In
a collisional plasma, the project will (1) perform detailed measurements of the
EEDs in plasmas with the existence of a small fraction of energetic electrons,
such as plasmas in afterglow and short discharges, in the presence of additional
charged electrodes, (2) analyze mechanisms of formation of the EEDS for those
cases and (3) investigate the influence of voltage applied to discharge
boundaries on plasma properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-range goals are
to provide the plasma community with a better understanding of electron kinetics
in low pressure collisionless and collisional plasmas and provide a reliable
theoretical approach to calculations of electron energy distributions under
conditions appropriate to the Langmuir paradox and for higher pressures. The
significance of the project is that, historically, a poor understanding of
electron kinetics, and the influence of discharge boundaries on the electron
energy distribution formation, has resulted in an unsatisfactory description of
bounded low-pressure plasmas. This situation has resulted in an inability to
achieve real optimization of many industrial plasma processing devices. The
research will justify the application of a nonlocal approach for similar plasmas
and will allow reliable calculations of electron-energy distributions in those
plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed work will
come from synergy of research and education and training of undergraduate and
graduate students. Broad distribution of the results will be performed via
journal publications, presentations at national and international conferences.
Students will present the results of their work at the annual APS DPP meetings
and will participate in journal publications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;