* 0903612
* CMN STEEP Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Diana Morris, College of the Menominee Nation
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,500,000.00

College of Menominee Nation
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College of Menominee
(CMN) is a current NSF TCUP recipient that recently completed year five of its
Curriculum Enhancement Project. That project has allowed CMN to aggressively
advance its STEM curriculum and program offerings as well as increase the
capacity of the college to act as a positive catalyst for STEM educational
changes within the communities it serves. One current strategic initiative
resulting from the STEM intensive planning and development of the College of
Menominee Nation is the development of a STEM-intensive, standards-based
Elementary Education baccalaureate degree program that will strengthen STEM
learning by bringing STEM education full circle from the start of a child?s
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; CMN will build its capacity in the
implementation phase by achieving the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? Objective one Build CMN?s capacity and
infrastructure to sustain a math, science and technology infused Elementary
Education Baccalaureate degree program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? Objective two:
Implement an Elementary Education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;?
Objective three: Infuse the use of technology into all facets of the Elementary
Education Baccalaureate degree program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? Objective four:
Establish critical student support services to ensure student success in the
elementary education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;