* 0903475
* Stochastic Analysis with Applications to Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Steven Shreve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 651,208.00

This is a three-part proposal. In the first part, the limit order book of an
electronic exchange will be modeled as a queueing system, evolving as a measure-
valued process, where the measure in question is the set of order sizes located
on the price axis. Like many queueing systems, the evolution of the order book
at the level of discrete orders is prohibitively complex. Therefore, the theory
of heavy traffic limits for queueing systems will be used to obtain continuous
approximations to the discrete systems. In the second part of the proposal,
models for asset price volatility will be developed. Local volatility models
currently in use describe volatility as a function of time and the underlying
asset price. We propose to extend this concept to models in which volatility is
a function of time, the underlying asset price, and one or more factors that
determine the payoff of derivative securities written on the underlying asset.
The third part of the proposal continues work on optimal investment and
consumption in the presence of transaction costs. These problems are well
understood and there are closed-form solutions in cases where transaction costs
are zero, but there are no closed-form solutions in the more realistic case when
transaction costs are positive.&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to develop asymptotic
expansions in the small transaction cost parameter of the unknown solution
around the zero-transaction-cost known solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
overview, it is proposed to build mathematical models designed to reduce risk
and increase efficiency in financial markets. Innovations in the financial
markets have changed their structure, and analysis needs to keep pace. In
particular, the advent of order-driven electronic exchanges has spawned the
growth of algorithmic trading, whereby firms trade large quantities of assets
quickly. Does this make markets liquid? Does it dampen or amplify volatility? It
is difficult to answer these questions because we do not have good mathematical
models for these exchanges. Neither can we predict with any accuracy how various
order-matching protocols on these exchanges will affect volatility, bid-ask
spreads, and general market efficiency. A major part of this proposal is the
development of mathematical models for electronic exchanges. A second aspect of
this proposal is to improve mathematical models for asset price volatility. The
celebrated Black-Scholes model assumes that volatility is constant, but
departures from this assumption in financial markets are too significant to
ignore. The third part of this proposal is to better understand the effect of
transaction costs on problems of optimal investment and consumption. This
problem is at the heart of equilibrium analysis of financial markets, but most
studies to date make the unrealistic assumption that transaction costs are zero.