* 0903257
* RUI:  Application of Solid Phase Microextraction to Determine Emission Rates of Sesquiterpenes from Terrestrial Vegetation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Bradly Baker, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2012
* USD 257,795.00

This project furthers the development of Solid Phase Micro-Extraction (SPME)
techniques for the sampling and analysis of biogenic sesquiterpenes (SQTs)
emitted to the atmosphere from terrestrial vegetation. SQTs are an important
precursor to secondary organic aerosols (SOAs), whose sources are poorly
characterized even though SOAs are critical in influencing global climate. SPME
is a simple and relatively inexpensive sampling technique that limits contact
between analyte compounds and surfaces relative to other gas phase sampling and
analysis techniques. This is important for the analysis of SQTs due to their
relatively low volatility and tendency to be lost to surfaces. The research
employs laboratory plant enclosures and leaf cuvettes to determine SQT emissions
rates. Experiments control for environmental conditions including light,
temperature, humidity, and ambient carbon dioxide. SPME technology is tested
systematically with respect to the analysis of SQTs and other biogenic volatile
organic compounds (BVOCs). Emphasis is on determining the appropriate type of
SPME fiber to use for sampling and analysis of various BVOCs, calibration using
SPME, and storage of SPME fibers between sampling and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports one Master's degree student
and one undergraduate student throughout the period of the grant, giving these
students at a non Ph.D. granting institution an opportunity to be involved in
research and have meaningful data to present at regional and national
conferences. The research work improves the resources available to students in
teaching labs, and aids development of new lab experiments for undergraduate
courses involving SPME and atmospheric chemistry. A new gas chromatography -
mass spectrometry instrument is used for sample analysis and is also available
to other users, thus constituting a new departmental resource. This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).