* 0903948
* Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation: Senior Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Dan Wells, University of Houston
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,500,000.00

Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation-Senior
Alliance&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (H-LSAMP) is comprised of the University of Houston,
University of Houston-Downtown, Texas Southern University,Texas State
University, Houston Community College, San Jacinto College, Rice University, and
the Houston Independent School District. During this proposal, the senior
alliance will work to institutionalize the Collaborative Learning Community
system while enhancing the alliance through 1) recruiting and retaining well-
qualified minority Science, Engineering, Technology, and Mathematics majors in
an effort to graduate nearly 1,300&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority STEM
majors annually, 2) developing a mechanism to&lt;br/&gt;increase community
college transfer to 75% of level one students, 3) increasing student research
and internship participation to over 90% of level one students, 4) sending 10 or
more students overseas on meaningful international
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;Student Scholars will receive stipends to support their
efforts in the collaborative learning community including facilitating
workshops, conducting research, providing tutor support, and assisting in
enrichment workshops. Scholars will be mentored by a combination of faculty,
staff, and peers; have access to student support services such as career
centers, writing centers, tutor labs, and academic excellence
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The H-LSAMP proposal is based on strong
student support&lt;br/&gt;systems developed from current research and best
practices, a proven record of&lt;br/&gt;success, and a demonstrated record of
institutionalization. The H-LSAMP program&lt;br/&gt;recruits and supports a
large at-risk and financially disadvantaged minority student population in the
Southeast Texas region. This alliance works because of a balanced and thorough
management plan, with input from all levels of the universities and school
systems it serves. A comprehensive collaborative learning community is being
institutionalized on all campuses. The alliance expects to contribute to the
broader knowledge base by disseminating important new knowledge about the
factors that contribute to retention and recruitment of underrepresented
minorities, primarily Hispanic and African-Americans pursuing STEM
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Texas has a growing economy; while the US
lost over 279,000 jobs from August 2007-August 2008, Texas gained 252,000. This
growth further outlines the need for a diversified STEM workforce, making
programs such as LSAMP even more important, as economically disadvantaged
students have a harder time making inroads into technology driven economies. The
H-LSAMP affects over 550 level one students and an estimated 5,500-6,000 level
two students annually in a comprehensive STEM program. Along with career
guidance, and effective career path counseling programs, the alliance sends
nearly 40% of its graduates into graduate or professional education post
graduation, while placing students in the workforce nationally. With the
increasing trend toward globalization in the STEM fields, the alliance is
seeking to significantly increase the international exposure and cultural
literacy of its&lt;br/&gt;scholars in order to better position them to take up
leadership roles in a globalized workforce. Each round of funding has provided
the resources required to institutionalize parts of the program, now averaging
around $1 million annually. This proposal includes a strong and balanced
diversity program, with numerous points of dissemination, and a multifaceted
evaluation plan.