* 0903701
* IGERT: From Crops to Commuting: Integrating the Social, Technological, and Agricultural Aspects of Renewable and Sustainable Biorefining (I-STAR)
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Peter Pfromm, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,171,485.00

Biofuels and biobased products can improve environmental quality, rural
economies, and national security only through the cross-disciplinary efforts of
scientists and engineers with an appreciation for the complexity of the
societal, technological, and scientific issues involved. This Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project will prepare a
diverse group of new Ph.D.s to have a comprehensive perspective on the
biorefining industry. IGERT graduate student trainees will form
interdisciplinary core teams encompassing the technological, agricultural, and
socioeconomic issues of an aspect of biorefining. Dissertation projects will be
conducted with overlapping faculty supervisory committee membership, regular
joint meetings, and dissertation chapter(s) and publications addressing the
collaborative, integrated research issues and results. New learning
opportunities are provided in the classroom, seminars, workshops, certificate
programs, and field experiences. This learning will be mutually deepened for
trainees and undergraduates through research mentorship opportunities.
International education opportunities will be available with partners in Europe
and Brazil. This project will result in new technologies and practices that will
improve the sustainability of the conversion of biomass to fuels and chemicals.
As a result of this program, decisions regarding biorefining will be guided not
only by technological and/or agricultural feasibility but also by the holistic
impact on society. Graduates of this IGERT program will be uniquely prepared to
have high-impact careers and to contribute to the biorefining industry through
their personal appreciation of the diverse aspects of biorefining. IGERT
trainees will have harvested biomass in the field hands-on, discussed and
advanced technical and engineering issues, and pondered the impact of their
actions on humanity and the environment. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.