* 0903209
* The Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing: Continued Leadership for Systemic Change
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Lauren Kaufman, Connecticut's Community-Tech Colleges' College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2014
* USD 2,799,866.00

This project continues the regional center for next-generation manufacturing
(RCNGM). The Colleges of Technology (COT) represents all 12 public Connecticut
community colleges in partnership with six universities and 17 technical and
comprehensive high schools. Included in this partnership are over 3000
manufacturing firms represented by the CT Business and Industry Association
(CBIA). Over 250 community-college faculty, 75 faculty members of four-year
institutions, along with 500 middle- and high-school teachers, have been engaged
by the COT-RCNGM, directly impacting 59,000 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skilled manufacturing personnel are needed, particularly
in New England, as documented in local, regional, and national manufacturing-
workforce survey data. This problem is especially acute for industries using
next generation manufacturing technologies such as laser manufacturing, fuel-
cell technologies, 3D solid modeling and simulations, rapid prototyping, and 5-
and 6-axis machining centers. The COT-RCNGM continues to address critical
regional workforce needs and impact the 21st century manufacturing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;For regional manufacturers to
remain competitive, prudent but substantial investments must be made in the
latest software, hardware, and equipment developments. Investment is needed in
systems integration collectively known as Computer Integrated Manufacturing
(CIM). CIM is characterized by highly integrated computer systems that support
all aspects of manufacturing across an entire organization and its supply chain.
The COT-RCNGM is well positioned, with experienced staff, faculty and industry
support, to pursue the evolution of CIM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COT-RCNGM's
proven model of mutually reinforcing goals begins with ongoing faculty
development using industry externships to guide successful curriculum
development. This is augmented by strong articulation agreements, culminating in
highly effective recruitment and retention efforts targeting underrepresented
populations. These efforts, driven by industry workforce needs, have had a
marked impact on manufacturing program enrollments; for example, 57 new courses,
nine credit certificates and 12 A.S. degree options in manufacturing and related
technologies have already been developed and implemented. As manufacturing
technologies continue to evolve, the COT-RCNGM is (1) providing professional
development opportunities for faculty members that address 21st century
workforce needs; (2) providing access to next generation curricula to include
modeling, simulation, and CIM; (3) strengthening existing and creating new 2+2+2
articulation agreements; and (4) incorporating new models of student recruitment
and retention that target women and minority
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The RCNGM has
already developed a web presence that includes recruitment materials for
students, parents, and educators. The center is sponsoring faculty members'
papers, presentations and participation at regional and national conferences and
workshops. The center is disseminating educators' career kits, pamphlets,
brochures, and videos at seminars targeting students and their parents. The
center is facilitating recruitment of underrepresented populations based on
synergistic partnerships (e.g., the Girls Scouts and professional associations)
to ensure sustainability. The broader impact is both regional and national since
the center is working with nine other ATE centers and six ATE projects. The
center responds to requests from around the country for recruitment materials to
be adapted or used as a template to create local recruitment efforts. The center
is broadening and strengthening its regional impact by disseminating proven
practices throughout New England. Through collaborating with a network of
community colleges, the center is assisting in the creation of the workforce
essential for the United States to compete globally in the 21st century.