* 0903589
* IPY: Employment &amp; Sustainability in a Time of Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 07/02/2008,07/31/2019
* Hal Salzman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2019
* USD 647,846.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;#0732973&lt;br/&gt;IPY: Employment &amp; Sustainability in a
Time of Transition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary Arctic society is facing
dramatic economic, social, and climate change that challenges existing
strategies of community sustainability and regional economic development.
Trajectories of natural environment change are commonly analyzed, but less
studied is how environment change opens alternative social and economic paths,
which paths are most desirable, and what actions are needed to sustain them. How
do Arctic communities remain viable and what are the implications for human
capital development? Is the Arctic mixed economy, consisting of wage and
subsistence activities, sustainable or is the Arctic transitioning to a
predominantly industrial, wage economy? This project will help communities,
workers, and businesses address these issues through analysis of current and
prospective patterns of human capital development and careers in the major
Arctic industries. As part of the the International Polar Research research
initiative, this project will develop ?linked,? tripartite case studies of
industry, workers, and communities and use videography as both research tool and
as a means for community members to document and analyze ongoing changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the study are the following issues: How do
communities sustain their coherence and even existence in the face of climate
change, of industrial economic development, and of employment and education
opportunities that appear to draw off their younger members? How do individual
workers develop skills and careers in highly seasonal work and/or while
maintaining subsistence activity and traditional community participation? How do
businesses sustain and grow their activities, develop and fully utilize
available human capital, and adapt to changing climate conditions and to
economic growth opportunities? Case studies include: fish processing in St.
Paul/Pribilof Islands and oil and gas field services in the North Slope Borough.
The Tribal Government of St. Paul will partner in the Aleut/fish processing case
study; in the North Slope Borough, Barrow Arctic Science Consortium will partner
in the research and several oilfield service companies have agreed to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important social benefits will be insights
into sustainability of careers, businesses, and communities in the face of
climate, social, and economic change. It will provide multiple perspectives on
the impact of climate change on human and economic activity. Partnering with
Native communities is an integral part of the methodology to document and assess
the role of workforce development in future directions of community development.
Video will be used to document and archive contemporary conditions as part of
the historical record as well as providing raw ?data? for each community and for
future research. The video capability developed in the communities and the
technical assistance and participatory research will support ongoing education
within and between communities as well as outreach to schools and the public
outside the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;