* 0903471
* Heterogeneous Multi-core Architectures from Homogeneous Arrays using Configurable Interconnect
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kevin Skadron, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 347,629.00

Recent trends in microprocessor design are shifting toward incorporation of
heterogeneous core types onto the same die. However, current design techniques
provision only a fixed set of cores and suffer from poor resource utilization
when the workload is not a good match for those resources and the system cannot
efficiently employ all resources simultaneously. Hardware should adapt the
organization of the heterogeneous cores in response to dynamic behavior. This
project lays the groundwork for realizing such a dynamic heterogeneous processor
- the field programmable core array (FPCA) - that is capable of simultaneously
implementing many heterogeneous architectural configurations on a configurable,
homogeneous platform. The required flexibility will be provided through a
combination of architecture, circuit, and EDA advances.

The intellectual merit of this project is the technique of separating a
processor's front end and functional units into homogeneous pools of building
blocks, and development of a programmable interconnect allowing these building
blocks to be coupled and decoupled dynamically, enabling efficient intra- and
inter-core connectivity and the assembly of a variety of heterogeneous
organizations. The broader impact will be the development of a new design
paradigm that allows the same chip to be used for a wider range of markets and
workloads. This reduces design and procurement costs, while improving programmer
productivity - all of which will provide economic and social benefits. This
project also includes education and outreach activities, including improved
teaching of emerging programming models and outreach to high school students and
underrepresented groups.