* 0903004
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Cultural and Contextual Differentiation of Mesoamerican Iconography in the Southern Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Searcy, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 9,246.00

The nature of prehistoric interaction between Mesoamerica and the U.S. Southwest
has been debated for decades and has yet to be clearly defined. This research,
with support from the National Science Foundation, will help to develop a
clearer picture of the relationship between these two regions by examining how
Mesoamerica may have differentially affected sociopolitical organizations in the
Southwest. This will be determined through an iconographical analysis of
Mesoamerican symbols found on pottery that was produced during the late
prehistoric period (A.D. 1200-1450) from the Salado and Chihuahuan traditions,
those who inhabited the southern Southwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to identify variation in the types and distribution of
Mesoamerican symbols associated with hierarchical and non-hierarchical
communities in order to determine if the integration of foreign symbols among
the Salado and Chihuahuan traditions was implemented 1) to promote group
solidarity or 2) to help elites legitimize their authority through symbols of
sacred foreign knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of iconographical
analysis introduces a new avenue of inquiry through which the effect of
Mesoamerican interaction with Southwestern sociopolitical organization can be
explored. The tasks associated with this type of analysis include photographing
around 1000 whole vessels, analyzing the decorated symbols as they appear on the
surface of the pottery, and using provenience data to determine if Mesoamerican
contact differentially influence areas in the southern Southwest. Furthermore,
this project will contribute to previous studies of long-distance interaction,
trade, and the integration of foreign ideologies by offering new insights and
interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Associated with this iconographical
analysis is the integration of advanced touch-screen computer technology and
industry standard graphic design software. These represent an innovative
methodological protocol new to archaeology. A Tablet PC equipped with a special
touch-sensitive screen will be used to digitally draw icons and symbols directly
onto the monitor throughout analysis. This will result in the production of a
vector-based glossary of images that can be accessed and used by other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The southern U.S. border with Mexico has
presented a virtual and intellectual barrier for prehistoric southwestern
studies. Even with one of the largest ceremonial centers ever recorded for the
entire history of the Ancestral Pueblo, Casas Grandes, little research has been
dedicated to the Chihuahuan region of northwest Mexico in comparison to the
prehistory of the southwestern United States. This project will add to the
growing literature on this area and will hopefully stimulate further dialogue
concerning the interaction of peoples in the Southwest with their southern
neighbors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this study will also have broader
impacts, the first being the support of doctoral training for a student at a
university that has been identified as an EPSCoR institution. Second, it meets
the public outreach goals outlined by the Society for American Archaeology by
distributing the results of this study through presentations, in an online
database, and through other publications. Third, this research will provide a
historical perspective for studies of modern societies that participate in
foreign interaction with long-distance neighbors.