* 0903293
* Consortium for Resources in Renewable Energy Technologies
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Barbara Anderegg, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Gul Kremer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 899,921.00

This project is developing a collaborative infrastructure among academic,
industry, and government stakeholders to deliver cutting-edge renewable energy
education for the existing and future technician workforce. The project is
building on CERET's unique renewable energy certificate prototype that includes
both online and face to face courses taught by seasoned renewable energy
experts. To satisfy a national need for flexible delivery courses in renewable
energy technology disciplines, project staff are expanding the model to reach a
much larger number of students and schools. Specifically, the project is
developing a new 15-credit certificate option that can be completed totally
online. The project is also developing a process by which other schools can
adapt the model for their own individual needs. Project staff are encouraging
other schools to create their own certificates, transferring in CERET
certificate courses as needed. These schools are posting their certificates,
courses, and programs on a national renewable energy directory, widening the
number and diversity of nationwide renewable energy course options. A host of
technologies and resources (e.g. webinars, Wiki pages, online discussions,
curricular materials) are being used to support partner schools these efforts.
Finally, resources are being shared with faculty in other disciplines so they
can engage non-traditional and minority students in the renewable energies
field.

The project is also growing the next generation of renewable energy two-year
college and high school educators through a series of Train the Trainer
Academies. These Academies are giving educator participants from across the
nation authentic hands-on renewable energy experiences taught by veteran energy
industry professionals. The Academies are cultivating a learning community of
renewable energy educators and providing a forum for sharing instructional
innovations and exemplary teaching practices. Thus, participating instructors
are being empowered with the academic background and technical skills to drive
change in their home institutions.