* 0903317
* Bio-Link Next Generation National ATE Center for Biotechnology and Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Sandra Porter, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 5,086,040.00

Bio-Link is the national ATE Center for Biotechnology. Bio-Link's mission has
been to (1) increase the number and diversity of well-educated technicians in
the workforce; (2) meet the growing needs of industry for appropriately trained
technicians; and (3) institutionalize community college educational practices
that make high-quality education and training in the concepts, tools, skills,
processes, regulatory structure, and ethics of biotechnology available to all
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although based in the San Francisco Bay Area,
the Center's activities embrace biotechnology education nationwide. The Next
Generation National ATE Center for Biotechnology and Life Sciences is designed
to meet the rapidly changing needs of the biotechnology and related life science
industries and prospective technical workforce. Bio-Link is providing the much
wider range of services and products now necessitated by the swiftly changing
biotech industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link's mission remains the same.
With the current support Bio-Link is expanding the activities to fulfill this
mission in today's new biotechnology environment. The goals of the new National
Center of Excellence are to: (1) strengthen and expand biotechnology education
programs across the nation; (2) enable biotechnology faculty, students, and
technicians to work more efficiently; and (3) support a smoother transition of
students to the technical workforce in the biosciences and related industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve its goals, the new Center is
emphasizing three categories of activities and products: direct services to
faculty, teachers, counselors, students, biotechnology programs, and educational
institutions (includes consulting services, professional development for
educators, maintenance and replication of an Equipment Depot, maintenance and
expansion of the Clearinghouse of Instructional Materials for Biotechnology
Technician Education, the development of "courses in a box," creating a one-stop
shop for online courses, and establishing a faculty internship program);
information sharing and collaboration among students, faculty, industry and
educational institutions (includes networking, developing a Web-based
interactive community, creating an online Technician's Association, documenting
and disseminating science education pipeline models, and documenting and
disseminating models and resources for community college-industry engagement);
and greatly expanded and improved information for students and for life-sciences
and related companies (includes continuing to offer Website information
services, a national biotechnology program survey, developing a matrix of
jobs/careers/skills/programs, and producing video career scenarios for
recruitment). Key partners include Austin Community College, the Bay Area
Biotechnology Education Consortium, the BayBio Institute, Digital World Biology,
Internet Scout at UW-Madison, Madison Area Technical College, SRI International,
and more than 19 other partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposal resides in its focus on biotechnology, an increasingly
interdisciplinary industry that warrants significant attention in today's
climate, one in which threats against homeland security and health loom large
and in which medicine evolves with great speed. Moreover, the industry provides
technicians with opportunities to advance rapidly into high-wage positions.
Through its 10 years of experience as an ATE Center and consultation with a wide
range of stakeholders, Bio-Link possesses the critical expertise and capacity to
continue and expand its work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader
impacts, Bio-Link has influenced science education in general through materials
and techniques developed within its network. With its partners, it has piqued
industry's interest in hiring community college graduates, and has opened doors
for underrepresented populations. Bio-Link is continuing and expanding its broad
dissemination of cutting-edge resources to improve teaching practice,
educational access, and career opportunities.