* 0903727
* High-Fidelity Quantum Information Processing via Dynamical Quantum Error Control
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Lorenza Viola, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Quantum information processing holds the potential to revolutionize our
understanding of computational complexity and solve problems in physics
simulations, combinatorial analysis, and secure communications with
unprecedented efficiency. While the prospect of harnessing such a power is
spurring an intense theoretical and experimental effort worldwide, the
outstanding challenge stems from the fact that quantum information is incredibly
more fragile than its classical counterpart due to decoherence errors, which are
induced by the uncontrollable coupling between the device of interest and its
surrounding environment. Although fundamental advances in the theory of "quantum
fault-tolerance" ensure that arbitrarily accurate quantum information processing
is possible in principle if the error in manipulating quantum bits is
sufficiently small, the corresponding architectures remain impractical due to
the prohibitive resource requirements they involve. Dynamical quantum error
control techniques provide a strategy to decoherence mitigation which avoids
auxiliary memory and measurement overheads, while remaining applicable to a
large class of physical systems. The central theme of our research is to push
dynamical error control to its full capabilities as a framework for analysis,
synthesis, and optimization of high-fidelity quantum gates for realistic
devices. The key advance stems from building suitable "dynamically corrected
gates," in such a way that the net decoherence is substantially reduced,
compared to the one suffered by uncorrected gates. Our program aims at obtaining
a full control-theoretical characterization of dynamical quantum error control
methods, and at benchmarking their performance in open systems of direct
relevance to quantum information processing technologies.

The scientific impact of the project will be twofold. In the short term, it will
provide a low-level error control strategy for reducing physical errors per
gate, with the potentially immediate implication of reducing overheads in
quantum fault-tolerant architectures. Beside reliable quantum computation, tools
for precisely implementing desired unitary dynamics could be beneficial for
applications ranging from quantum simulation to quantum metrology. From a
broader longer-term perspective, spin-offs of ideas developed in the course of
this work will also provide additional insight into issues at the very heart of
quantum information physics and engineering including the ultimate performance
limits of "feedback-free" control procedures, and fundamental trade-offs between
available information, achievable control,and complexity in quantum-dynamical
systems.