* 0903579
* Assessing Atmospheric Extreme Events in a Stochastic Framework
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Philip Sura, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2013
* USD 366,378.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a detailed
assessment of non-Gaussian atmospheric variability in order to understand and
predict the probability of extreme events in the atmosphere. In non-technical
terms, an extreme event is a high-impact, hard-to-predict phenomenon that is
beyond our normal (Gaussian bell curve) expectations. In technical terms, an
extreme event is often defined as the non-normal (non-Gaussian) tail of the
probability density function of the data. Understanding extremes has become an
important objective in climate variability research, because climate and weather
risk assessment depends on knowing the probability of extreme events such as
hurricanes and windstorms. Until recently the study of extreme meteorological
events has been largely empirical. That is, most investigators used observations
or model output to estimate the probabilities of, for example, extreme winds and
temperatures, without actually addressing the detailed dynamical/physical reason
for the shape of the probability density functions. A recently developed
dynamical theory, however, predicts the characteristics of non-Gaussian
statistics in the atmosphere from first dynamical principles. This theory
attributes extreme atmospheric flow anomalies to stochastically forced linear
dynamics, where the strength of the stochastic forcing depends on the flow
itself (multiplicative noise). Because stochastic theory makes clear and
testable predictions about non-Gaussian variability, the multiplicative noise
hypothesis can be verified by analyzing the detailed non-Gaussian statistics of
atmospheric variability. While compelling evidence for the validity of the
multiplicative noise theory already exists, the validation has, so far, not been
done systematically. Therefore, the main focus of this work is to systematically
map and analyze, guided by stochastic theory, the non-Gaussianity of dynamically
relevant atmospheric variables (e.g., pressure, geopotential height, vorticity,
temperature, winds) from observations and from
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts or this research potentially extend
to educational, and risk-management activities. As the study is aimed at gaining
a better, detailed understanding of extreme events in climate, it is anticipated
that the multiplicative noise approach has the potential to influence how non-
Gaussian atmospheric variability and extreme events are viewed. The results
should be of interest for both climate diagnostics and modeling and may have a
significant impact on weather and climate risk management, potentially
benefiting businesses, consumers and public policy makers.