* 0903491
* Collaborative Research: Formal Analysis of Multicore Communication APIs and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eric Mercer, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 125,533.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCF - 0903408
&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research - MCDA: Formal Analysis of Multicore
Communication APIs and Applications&lt;br/&gt;Gopalakrishnan, Ganesh L.
&lt;br/&gt;University of Utah &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCF - 0903491
&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Formal Analysis of Multicore Communication
APIs and Applications&lt;br/&gt;Mercer, Eric G. &lt;br/&gt;Brigham Young
Univ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSRTACT&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes
tools to engineer future information processing systems so that they operate
reliably and efficiently. Given that many of these systems will be produced on
single micro-chips, and given the increasing demands for rapid turn-around times
of designs, manufacturers are standardizing on methods by which the central
processing units in these chips may communicate. Such standards will eliminate
duplication of labor and allow components originating from different
manufacturers to be mixed and matched. Since such standards will govern the
construction of millions of future systems, one has to apply rigorous
engineering principles accompanied by mathematically sound analysis methods to
ensure that the standards are not flawed. This is one of the important goals of
this project. The other key goals are to ensure that the manufacturing of these
systems proceeds as per the standard definition and that testing methods to
check the correctness of manufacture will be in place in a timely manner. The
complementary strengths of the principal investigators, one of whom is from the
School of Computing, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, and the other from
Brigham Young University in Provo Utah will help drive this project forward in
unique ways. The first year of this project will investigate rigorous
specification methods for this standard called MCAPI. The second year will
involve the research design of a variety of analysis tools for programs written
using MCAPI. The third year will involve pilot testing of our tools at the
manufacturer sites of systems on chips.