* 0903714
* IGERT: Nitrogen Systems: Policy-oriented Integrated Research & Education (NSPIRE)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kristin Johnson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,030,702.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Managing reactive nitrogen is one of the great scientific
and social challenges of the 21st century. Translating technical understanding
to public policy may be even more challenging. The goal of this Integrative
Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award is to produce
graduates who have rigorous training in nitrogen cycling and an integrated view
of nitrogen science to promote effective communication with public policy
makers. The curriculum consists of an integrated nitrogen cycle course; an
interdisciplinary nitrogen methods workshop; a systems dynamics modeling course;
a new and unique public policy studio course; a four month internship with a
policy formulating organization; and individual integrated dissertation
research. The studio course will immerse students in major policy issues by
applying system models to policy evaluation while interacting directly with
policy stakeholders. The internship will serve as a capstone experience and
allow application of interdisciplinary training to real world situations. This
program will integrate research and teaching through research on student
learning, the methods workshop in which students will participate in ongoing
research projects, and the development and application of systems models for
policy applications. Underrepresented groups will be aggressively recruited to
diversify graduate training programs within sciences and engineering. As these
students and their mentors develop the ability to integrate their research
within a broader policy context, society as a whole will benefit as public
policy decisions begin to reflect the best available scientific understanding of
the integrated nitrogen cycle. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.