* 0903340
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of the Magneto-Rayleigh-Taylor Instabilities
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Ronald Gilgenbach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE under
contract Michigan (Science report #09ER55047). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is a controlled study of the Magneto-Rayleigh-Taylor instability (MRT)
on thin foils, driven by the mega-ampere linear transformer driver (LTD) that
was recently demonstrated in the Investigators' laboratory. This project
involves theory, simulations, and experiments in which MRT scaling laws will be
explored. This LTD is dedicated to physics experiments which are being designed
and run by students, under close supervision of the faculty. Quite a few of the
topics will be in unexplored territory; including the performance and
characterization of the state-of-the-art LTD driving dynamical loads.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will include the development of phenomenology of MRT
that is ubiquitous in magnetized target fusion, and equation-of-state studies
using flyer plates or isentropic compression techniques. The proposed studies
are at the forefront of high-energy density plasma physics. Foils might be
necessary to achieve the required mass for high current x-ray sources, and the
proposed study addresses the most fundamental physics issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The additional $5,000 per year funding from NSF will
permit increased student involvement in this research. Specifically, additional
funding is included for an undergraduate student to participate in this
research. Funding for student travel to technical conferences (APS-DPP and IEEE
International Conference on Plasma Science) is also included. This type of
student travel experience is important for students to learn about other
research and to begin to network with other scientists.