* 0903091
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Territory and Identity in the Borderlands: The Moldovan Case
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 06/30/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines how competing government efforts to define and control
Moldovan territory affect the people in the border zones of Romania,
Transnistria, and Ukraine. Doctoral student Adam Levy, under the supervision of
Dr. John O'Loughlin, will explore these border zones and how they have become
key sites of government intervention aimed at re-establishing national
sovereignty.

This project will analyze the key tensions underlying uncertainties about
Moldovan citizenship and identity. These tensions indicate that while
governments are attempting to re-territorialize these border regions, informally
individuals are experiencing de-territorialization of these regions because of
fragmented visa and labor restrictions. The key research question is: What does
Moldovan citizenship mean to people in the border zones and how does their view
compare to governmental perspectives?

This project uses mixed methods including interviews, surveys, focus groups, and
participant observation to understand how people who may or may not identify as
Moldovan respond to new governmental regulations, like EU migration policies or
Romanian passport controls. This approach will enable a comparison of formal
ideas and attitudes about state- and region-building with those of the people
who live in these regions. Data collected for the project will chart perceptions
of nations/states, allegiances to ethno-linguistic communities, household
migration histories, and ideas about iconic landscapes as measures of identity
and attachment to places. The research will also show how ethno-national
identity and regional geopolitical events are understood across generations. The
findings will thus address basic questions about how European relations and
post-Soviet identities are forged.

The broader impacts of this study highlight Moldova's Romanian and Ukrainian
frontiers to show where and how states like Moldova are situated within economic
and security communities like the European Union (EU) or NATO. Practical
political applications of this project include better understandings about how
borders are imagined and administered across Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Unlike analyses of Moldovan nationalism and EU/NATO "double enlargement", this
project will focus on people living in and traversing border zones - not just
the governing officials of these regions. Working with borderland stakeholders
defined as different generations of government officials, students, teachers,
farmers, traders, activists, pensioners, politicians and return-migrants, this
research will highlight the real and conceptual distance between formal and
informal understandings of national identity to study how such views relate to
conceptions of citizenship. Focusing on informal understandings in contrast to
formal ones, this approach will detail exactly how the transformation of
authority and identity is experienced and contested in borderlands. As such,
this study contributes answers to key geopolitical questions about how nations,
states, and territory are consolidated. Additional contributions will improve
knowledge about how borders are made, managed, and perceived in traditional
"crush zones" like the Black Sea region. Academics, policy-makers, and
administrators interested in EU/NATO divisions and migration management will
profit from these findings. This project will generate fresh answers to big
social and political questions about exactly where and how efforts to mark the
limits of European countires are unfolding.