* 0903406
* Nanophotonic Interconnect CAD: Automated Design for Nanophotonic Enabled Interconnect in Multicore Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Keren Bergman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 07/31/2013
* USD 470,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The objective of this research is to develop an automated design environment for
enabling the integration of emerging nanoscale silicon photonic optical
interconnect device technologies in next-generation multicore computing
architectures. The approach includes a comprehensive simulation framework
capable of capturing low-level physical details of both optical and electronic
components including, layout footprint, optical losses, and the energy
consumption, while maintaining a cycle-accurate functional network simulation.

Intellectual Merit: The photonic technologies used to create interconnection
networks are fundamentally different from electronic counterparts in how they
are designed and perform to achieve interconnect and routing functionalities.
Therefore, to exploit the potential advantages of photonic interconnection
networks in multicore architectures, a novel design methodology and toolset is
developed from scratch in a manner that incorporates the physically different
behavior of photonics and provides accurate performance modeling for future
multicore systems. Unique to this effort, the physical layer parameters are
derived from the design, fabrication, and characterization of real passive and
active silicon nanophotonic building blocks devices.

Broader Impact: The program advances multiple cross-disciplinary areas in
networking, multicore computing architecture, interconnect capabilities and
nanoscale silicon photonics. Included in the program are diversity outreach and
educational training efforts that emphasize the cross-disciplinary nature of the
field. The proposed suite of CAD tools will be made publicly available in an
effort to improve the speed and realized complexity of nanophotonic enabled
interconnection network development that are able to transform an abstract
design concept into a physically-accurate, verified, complex photonic on-chip
networks for multicore chip multiprocessors.