* 0903479
* IGERT: Evaluating Resilience of Ecological and Social Systems in Changing Landscapes: A Doctoral Research and Education Program in Idaho and Costa Rica
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Lisette Waits, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,200,000.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports an interdisciplinary, international graduate research and education
program on resilience of ecological and social systems in fragmented landscapes
that are subject to human-induced and natural change. The program is being
implemented jointly by the University of Idaho and the Tropical Agricultural
Research and Higher Education Center (CATIE), in Costa Rica. The aim of the
program is to offer doctoral students the skills necessary to work in
interdisciplinary teams that address research questions relevant to the social,
political, economic, biological, and physical factors that influence change in
ecological and social systems, and to manage the ecological and social
challenges arising from such change. Students in the program work in
interdisciplinary teams in six geographic regions in Idaho and Costa Rica
characterized by human-induced landscape change. These regions illustrate
conditions worldwide. The program builds upon the expertise of numerous
educators and researchers in diverse disciplines at the University of Idaho and
CATIE. It offers a unique graduate experience that includes faculty mentors and
course work at two institutions, interdisciplinary student teams that address
similar research questions in temperate and tropical ecosystems, jointly-
authored publications, and professional development activities including
international research experience, annual meetings, interaction with
stakeholders, and interdisciplinary training workshops. The program will advance
theory and develop new methods and tools for interdisciplinary education, and
broaden participation from underrepresented groups. It will also produce future
professionals with expertise to address scientific problems concerning landscape
change, and the cross-cultural experience required to enhance their global
perspective. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.