* 0903208
* The Northeast Biomanufacturing Center and Collaborative:  Building Local Community College-Biomanufacturer Partnerships to Provide A Sustainable Infrastructure for Biomanufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mary Kurtz, Montgomery County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,694,236.00

Biomanufacturers are building and expanding throughout the nation. The resulting
commercial biomanufacturing facilities hire between 400 and 600 employees, at
least fifty percent of whom are technicians in ten biomanufacturing jobs; the
industry reports a ten to fifteen percent attrition rate per year. Community
college-biomanufacturer partnerships create a stable, local supply of entry
level and replacement technicians and an articulated career pathway that begins
in high school, continues to community college and then to university, with
opportunities for apprenticeships, internships and employment. The partnership
can also provide for incumbent technician training for the biomanufacturer at
the neighboring community college that can sustain both the biomanufacturer and
the biomanufacturing program. Finally, related crossover industries that use the
same skill set have developed in the last few years including the biomanufacture
of biofuels, replacement organs, and stem cells. Working together, community
college-biomanufacturer partnerships provide support for a local bioeconomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NBC2 has been working for over three years to develop
the local biomanufacturing education and training and workforce infrastructure
in six Hubs throughout the northeast. The center has developed hands-on
instructional materials for the ten biomanufacturing jobs based on global
biopharmaceutical manufacturing industry skill standards. It has developed
BIOMAN, an annual biomanufacturing conference for faculty and teacher
participants. There is a website at www.biomanufacturing.org for dissemination
of activities and products. The center has mentored the establishment of
biomanufacturing programs and courses at community colleges, high schools and
universities in the northeast and nation. Its relationships with
biomanufacturers can sustain the biomanufacturing programs that have been built.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this renewal of the NBC2, the center is taking
curriculum and instructional materials for the ten biomanufacturing jobs to the
next level, by creating a hands-on laboratory manual, an industry-written
textbook, short courses for incumbent technicians, and instructional
ancillaries. It continues to expand the website, adding a career website, and
continues to offer the BIOMAN conference. It is aggressively building local
biomanufacturing infrastructure by focusing on high school students through
Introduction to Biomanufacturing teachers' workshops in a partnership with Bio-
Rad, and incumbent technician training through short courses offered by the
NBC2's National Biomanufacturing Institute (NBI). The center is bringing in new
resources by expanding partnerships to include biomanufacturers and community
colleges throughout the nation in southern, mid-western and western clusters
directed by community college faculty with expertise in biopharmaceutical
biomanufacturing. Through a partnership with the National Institute for Work and
Learning of the Academy for Educational Development it is collecting employment
data to show the influence of the activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This includes: 1) the development of local learning communities to
support the biopharmaceutical manufacturing company's need for biomanufacturing
technicians and the student's need for a biomanufacturing educational pathway
from high school to community college to universities; 2) a Global
Biomanufacturing Curriculum repository based on harmonized biopharmaceutical
manufacturing industry skill standards ready for deposit or withdrawal and
linked to the Bio-Link Clearinghouse; 3) the use of video, 2nd Life, and gaming
technologies to give students a better understanding of large-scale
biomanufacturing; 4) the use of skills in biopharmaceutical manufacturing to
support the development of local crossover industries such as the biomanufacture
of replacement organs, biofuels and stem cells; 5) data on the expansion of
biomanufacturing programs, the number of students in these programs and the
growth of jobs within the bio-based economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This includes: 1) creation of strong biomanufacturer-community college
partnerships to provide sustainability for the community college program and a
local pipeline of employees for the biomanufacturer; 2) emphasis on high school
biomanufacturing courses and programs to develop the local pipeline for
biomanufacturing; 3) use of new technologies to highlight the differences
between large-scale and lab-scale biomanufacturing; 4) on-the-job training for
students in 21st century advanced technology apprenticeships and internships;
and 5) the creation of a self-sustaining infrastructure for biomanufacturing
education and training and the biomanufacturing workforce that supports a
growing bioeconomy.