* 0903485
* Thermal-Aware GPU-Based Design Engine for On-Chip Power Delivery in Power-Efficient Multi-Core Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peng Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 254,985.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
address the computational challenges in multi-core power distribution design by
leveraging recent advances in single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) graphics
processing units (GPUs). The approach is to develop a massively parallel GPU-
accelerated design engine to facilitate the analysis, design and verification of
power-gated multi-core on-chip power delivery networks encompassing both
electrical and thermal integrity issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Aggressive fine-grained power gating is essential to pushing the
performance vs. power envelope of current and future multi-core chip designs.
This need introduces significant challenges in the design and verification of
power delivery networks under complex power gating scenarios. While the recent
GPU advances provide a potentially promising computing solution, the effective
use of such SIMD compute power requires rethinking computed-aided design. In
this work, GPU-specific computing paradigms, algorithms and implementations will
be developed to address multi-core power distribution design and associated
full-chip thermal challenges via efficient parallel computing on low-cost SIMD
graphics processors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work exploits
recent SIMD GPU based massively parallel platforms for addressing CAD
challenges. The acquired experience is likely to contribute to computing
advances in other science and engineering fields. The PI will promote the
research participation from undergraduate students and students from
underrepresented groups. The outcomes of this work will be integrated into the
PI's graduate-level VLSI courses to provide educational and research experiences
to students. The developed algorithms and methodologies will be disseminated in
the research community at large and major semiconductor and EDA companies for
potential industrial application.