* 0903622
* IGERT: Neuroengineering-A Unified Educational Program for Systems Engineering and Neuroscience
* EHR,DGE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Todd Coleman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,992,413.00

This Integrative Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project will educate
a diverse cadre of neuroscientists and engineers at the University of Illinois
with an advanced understanding of both neuroscience and engineering, enabling
them to engage in both sophisticated collaboration and independent research
across the traditional gap between these domains. Many of the most important and
exciting scientific and technological challenges for the future are centered on
neuroscience, the study of the brain. Many recent (and most future) advances in
understanding the brain depend on engineering new technologies for sensing,
imaging, and analyzing the brain and their innovative use by neuroscientists.
Similarly, some of the greatest and most important technological challenges,
such as creating neural prostheses for the disabled, require engineers with a
profound understanding of neuroscience. IGERT students will thus carry out
innovative interdisciplinary research on neuroscience areas of great scientific
and engineering importance, such as speech and audition, brain and imaging, and
neural implants that may lead to revolutionary advances in understanding the
brain and in new technologies such as neural prostheses for the disabled. IGERT
trainees will also receive training in leadership, communication skills, and the
responsible conduct of research as well as preparation for academic or
industrial careers. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.