* 0903168
* A Quality Assurance Training Program for Biological and Chemical Science Technicians
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Judith Fitzpatrick, Bergen Community College
* Standard Grant
* David Brown
* 08/31/2013
* USD 557,785.00

Bergen Community College is developing seventy-five (75) interactive
instructional modules that constitute a five-course certificate leading to
immediate employment and/or an Associate Degree in Science. The program is
increasing students' math and computer skills, basic laboratory skills,
technical understanding of instrumentation, protocol writing, written and verbal
communication skills as well as critical thinking skills. The courses are
delivered via 8 hour labs supplemented by Adobe Acrobat Pro hosted webinar
classes. Students learn Biomanufacturing technical skills as identified by an
NSF supported survey and virtually all of the skills in the first four ladders
of the U.S. Department of Labor's Advanced Manufacturing Competency Model using
hands-on methods. The program is incorporating computer based training
(Electronic Laboratory Notebooks) that ensures students are skilled in
documentation and computer applications as required under FDA regulation 21 CFR
Section 11. The Quality Assurance (QA) Technician Certificate program retrains
and upgrades skills for incumbent workers and also provides a science pathway
from secondary school to community college and higher education, meeting the
Quality Control and Quality Assurance workforce needs of New Jersey's highly
regulated and growing pharmaceutical, chemical, fragrance, food, and personal
care industries. High school teachers are being trained to deliver QA courses in
secondary schools for dual enrollment. Project partners include industry
leaders, American Society for Quality, the Tri-County WIBs and One-Stop Career
Centers, BioLink, BioMan, and others.