* 0903513
* System-level Design of Streaming Applications on Domain Specific Multi-core Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Goran Konjevod, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 233,014.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Domain specific
multi-core processors (DSMPs) are aimed at high performance embedded system
applications (image/signal processing, networking, graphics, medical
instrumentation, and so on). DSMPs incorporate several architectural innovations
including symmetric multi-processing, block multi-threading, hardware
accelerators, scratch-pad memories and support for inter-processor
communication. However, there is a lack of application development tools which
requires the designer to manually divide the functionality among threads and
processors, and determine the data mapping on the memory elements. This low
level approach to programming leads to increased design time in the best case,
and poor quality designs in the worst case. Further, with increasing power
densities in each successive generation of processors, it is expected that
eventually performance optimization on DSMPs would have to consider power and
thermal constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims to address two
research issues. First is the development of system-level design techniques for
programming on DSMPs. The techniques will take a streaming application
description and target processor features as inputs, and automatically generate
a mapping of the application on the DSMP with an objective of maximizing the
performance. The second task focuses on development of power and thermal-aware
design techniques for DSMPs. The power and thermal-aware design techniques will
perform automated system-level application mapping on DSMP architectures under
respective peak power and temperature constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As DSMP
architectures are aimed at embedded system applications, the research will have
an impact on many interfaces of human-computer interaction. Education activities
will include training of graduate students, dissemination of research outcomes,
and incorporation of the results in undergraduate/graduate coursework.