* 0903694
* Conference Grant: 35th Northeast Bioengineering Conference in Boston, MA from April 3-5, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Jeffrey Karp, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

0903694&lt;br/&gt;Karp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the 35th
Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference (Harvard University, April 3-5,
2009). The 35th NEBEC will disseminate the state of the art in Bioengineering
research at all levels, discuss potential career choices that effectively
prepare students for the workforce, and share information across
interdisciplinary barriers. The broad tracks of the conference are biomaterials,
biomechanics, tissue engineering, nanotechnology and diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader goals of the conference are: (1) to expose
students to exciting, cutting edge research in biomedical engineering, (2) to
encourage students to pursue careers in biomedical sciences, (3) to introduce
students to research leaders and encourage interactions, and (4) to stimulate
new interactions between research groups in the Northeast. The 35th Annual
Northeast Bioengineering Conference will educate the next generation of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in bioengineering by bringing
together a number of respected researchers to inform and inspire students about
progress and research opportunities in the biomedical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 35th NEBEC will have broad impact for the northeast
bioengineering community and for engineering education. Usually 55% of attendees
are students at the Northeast Biomedical Engineering conferences. Typically this
conference brings together researchers from over 40 institutions in the
Northeast. The knowledge gained and experiences shared from the conference will
be captured electronically and broadly disseminated via abstract books, CD ROMS,
and via the IEEE website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;