* 0903670
* IGERT: The Solar Economy (SEIGERT)
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Robert Birkmire, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,100,000.00

The Solar Economy Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) project supports the development of a multidisciplinary, multi-
institutional graduate training program of education and research in a
sustainable solar economy at the Purdue University in collaboration with
University of Delaware, University of Texas at El Paso, Sandia National
Laboratory, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Fraunhofer Institute for
Solar Energy Systems, Helmholtz Centre Berlin for Materials and Energy, Monash
University and several industrial partners. We use the term "solar economy" to
refer to a future state of affairs where nearly all the energy needed for
electricity, transportation, heat, chemicals and food is based on sustainable
supply of sunlight. To enable such a future state, this IGERT is primarily
rooted in finding interdisciplinary technical solutions to the most important
challenges of sun-to-electricity and sun-to-fuel within the context of
harmonious coexistence with other uses of solar energy. In order to identify
breakthrough technical solutions and gain a thorough insight into the complexity
of a solar economy, a large number of interdisciplinary solutions will be
generated and rapidly assessed for their system-wide impact. The IGERT
establishes a new vision and program for integrating education and training that
will reveal the complexity of this system to individuals from the diverse
backgrounds necessary to address the future key energy challenges. The
transition away from fossil fuels to a new solar economy necessitates major
changes to the U.S. infrastructure and redefines the skill set required by our
workforce. The IGERT program will address this need by developing lectures,
course modules, training modules, and simulation tools that will define a new
paradigm for interdisciplinary education and training in renewable energy. IGERT
is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.