* 0903900
* Experimental Investigation of Reconnection in a Line-tied Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Cary Forest, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 523,762.00

In this work, magnetic reconnection phenomena will be investigated in a line-
tied pinch experiment. There is a long history of experimental studies in
periodic, toroidal configurations which has built up an understanding of
reconnection based on the existence of mode rational (or mode-resonant)surfaces
where the parallel wave number k_|| vanishes. However, it is common in
astrophysics to observe or infer reconnection in bounded systems with line-tying
in which a vanishing k_ll is absent. Thus, there remain major, mostly uncharted
questions of how reconnection occurs, how it differs from periodic reconnection,
and what concepts will replace the k_ll identification with reconnection. It is
a topic arguably of comparable scope to periodic reconnection, yet research in
this area has been scarce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, a diagnostic will
be constructed for observing the large,localized current and resulting
reconnection predicted to exist in the saturated phase of the line-tied kink
instability. This will be carried out in two different magnetic equilibria. The
first is a simple linear pinch in which instability has already been
experimentally observed. The second will be in a zero net current equilibrium,
one similar to the line-tied equilibria of flux tubes emerging from the solar
corona and twisted by vortical motion of the flux tube footpoints. The
experiments will be carried out in the Rotating Wall Machine (which also has a
fusion science mission, supported by the DoE). The experiment is a linear screw
pinch and uses electrostatic plasma guns for producing a current carrying
column. Its primary mission is to investigate the stabilization of the resistive
wall mode by moving metal walls. An internal kink instability has been observed
to grow and saturate in the the experiment. Detailed measurements showed that an
ideal,line-tied kink mode begins growing when the effective safety factor (which
measures the field line twist) drops below 1 inside the plasma; the saturated
state corresponds to a rotating helical equilibrium. In addition to the ideal
mode, reconnection events were observed to periodically flatten the current
profile and change the magnetic topology. The reconnection events strongly
resemble the reconnection phenomena described in numerical simulations of a
nearly identical geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations predict
the existence of a large, localized current which gives rise to reconnection.
These current sheets differ significantly from the current sheets predicted in
toroidal experiments: their eigenfunctions have structure in the axial direction
as well as in the radial direction. We propose to install a 2D array of magnetic
probes on a 6 x 6 grid at the axial midpoint of the plasma column to discover
whether this current sheet exists or not. We also propose to modify the plasma
gun geometry such that the central gun injects current in the opposite direction
to the surrounding 7 guns. This geometry more closely resembles the type of
current profiles expected in the flux tubes emerging from the surface of the
sun. The results will be compared to analytical theory and to a numerical model
of the experiment implemented in the NIMROD code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the
Divisions of Physics and Astronomical Sciences of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.