* 0903667
* IGERT: Video Bioinformatics
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2016
* Prudence Talbot, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 12/31/2016
* USD 3,000,000.00

The Video Bioinformatics Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship
(IGERT) brings together expertise from engineering, information technology and
life sciences to open new doors by enabling the study of continuous and dynamic
biological processes in living systems that are captured live by video in real-
life experiments. Traditionally, living systems have been studied as static
images; scientists must infer the processes that produce growth, disease,
healing, and death. The scientific community does not yet have a systematic way
of examining moving biological images and understanding their dynamics. This
IGERT addresses the need by bringing experts from widely divergent backgrounds
and by integrating multiple imaging modalities with computational techniques for
video data mining, knowledge discovery and visualization. Each student will
participate in an intensive summer workshop before the first year of graduate
study. A new interdisciplinary curriculum will train the next generation of
engineers and scientists to solve old and new biological and computational
problems. Information technology students will learn about the unique needs of
studying living systems, and develop methods to enhance the study of these
systems. Students in the life sciences will learn how to develop and apply
effective computing techniques to dynamic biological problems. Interdisciplinary
project-oriented team-taught courses and group projects are important
educational elements. The program provides continuous mentoring, teaching and
leadership opportunities, internship in industry or government, weekly seminars,
yearly retreats, and workshops on ethics and communication skills. The program
will aggressively recruit students from groups underrepresented in science and
engineering. The research impacts a large number of fields where one must
analyze massive video datasets and need highly efficient and effective ways to
retrieve information. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.