* 0903517
* Graph-Based Codes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Judy Walker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 176,419.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Walker, Judy L. Proposal Number: DMS - 0903517
Institution: University of Nebraska-Lincoln Title: Graph-Based Codes

Generally speaking, the goal of coding theory is to enable reliable transmission
of data. This proposal considers both channel coding, i.e., reliable
transmission of data across a noisy channel, and network coding, i.e., reliable
transmission of data through a network. Channel coding is the appropriate model
for most traditional applications, such as the transmission of satellite
pictures from outer space, the storage (and retrieval) of computer data on a
disk drive, and the transmission of a voice (or data) signal for a land line
telephone. In each of these situations, information can be thought of as being
put into a channel so that the (possibly corrupted) information comes out of the
other end of the channel. Network coding, on the other hand, involves more
complicated relaying, and possibly combining, of information. This is the
correct model for a variety of more modern applications, such as cellular
telephone networks (with their system of towers), sensor networks, camera
surveillance networks, and peer-to-peer networks. In both (modern) channel
coding and network coding, graph theory plays a crucial role.

This proposal considers two types of channel codes based on graphs: codes
defined by Tanner graphs and codes defined by tail-biting trellises. In each
case, the codes come equipped with an iterative message-passing decoding
algorithm that operates on the associated graph, that is extremely efficient,
and that corrects, with high probability, many more error patterns than are
guaranteed by the code's minimum Hamming distance. However, in both cases, the
relevant algorithm's performance is hindered by the existence of
pseudocodewords, which are objects that arise in similar ways as do codewords
and which compromise the decoder. Thus to understand the performance of the
algorithms, one must understand the pseudocodewords; most of the problems
described in this proposal relating to channel coding stem from this
observation. In network coding, the network over which we want to send
information is modeled by a network, in the graph theory sense of the word. This
proposal concerns both lossless networks, where one assumes any information
transmitted is received without errors, and lossy networks, where one assumes
that errors and/or erasures can occur. The problem in the lossless case is
therefore not how to encode the information, but rather, given a network with
its sources and sinks and given a desire to simultaneously transmit certain
pieces of information from the sources to the sinks, how does one designate what
information should be carried across each of the edges of the network? In the
lossy case, one must consider this question along with the questions of how to
ensure low error rates and how to guarantee robustness of the network.