* 0903879
* Experimental and Computational Investigation of the Dynamics of Fluctuation Suppression by Controlled Flow Shear
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Newman, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this research is to investigate experimentally the detailed dynamics
of transitions between states of unstable drift fluctuations (including
broadband turbulence), and fluctuation-suppressed states in a controlled
laboratory environment. These experiments will be complemented by direct
comparisons with a nonlinear fluid turbulence code, adapted specifically to
model this experiment. The proposed experiments will take place in the dual-
source HELCAT (HELicon-CAThode) device at the University of New Mexico (UNM).
HELCAT is a flexible device that provides unique capabilities important to these
experiments. The two plasma sources- operated independently or simultaneously -
can generate plasmas with edge fluctuations ranging from single drift modes to
broadband drift turbulence. Additionally, plasma biasing to affect Er Ã— Bz flow
profiles has been demonstrated, and collisionality, important in drift wave
damping, has been varied by more than an order of magnitude. The numerical code
developed by the co-PI at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, a 2-D fluid slab
model of electrostatic fluctuations with detailed diagnostics to understand the
dynamics of the interaction between the fluctuating modes, will be modified to
allow the drive to mimic the experimental drive. The code has an external flow
that can be turned on to look at the impact of flow on the fluctuating
modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research facility is well suited for training
students for careers in fusion energy or studying turbulent transport in
plasmas, a process important in space and astrophysical plasma as well as
magnetically confined laboratory plasmas. The research could have a significant
impact on efforts to create predictive models for turbulent transport in
plasmas. This research is relevant to basic plasma physics, complex dynamics,
space plasmas and magnetically confined plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded by the
Division of Physics of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.