* 0903822
* Experimental and Numerical Investigation of the Current Filamentation Instability
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Patric Muggli, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2012
* USD 295,577.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current filamentation instability
(CFI, akin to the Weibel instability) may play an important role in
astrophysical phenomena, such as gamma ray burst (GRBs) and magnetic field
generation, as well as in inertial confinement fusion (ICF), where fluxes of hot
electron have to propagate through dense plasmas. Understanding and possibly
controlling this instability is therefore crucial. CFI and the Weibel
instability are also fundamental plasma instabilities. Conducting laboratory
experiments relevant to astrophysics is critical to validate theories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CFI has never been unambiguously observed in
experiments. The project will study in detail the occurrence of the CFI in very
controlled experiments by using a well-diagnosed and controlled electron beam
and plasma source. The appearance of the instability as a function of the beam
and plasma parameters will be determined. Preliminary simulations predict that
the CFI will be unambiguously observed. In addition, the radiation associated
with the instability will be assessed as a possible diagnostic for its
appearance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will be done in collaboration
with the Accelerator Test Facility at the Brookhaven National Laboratory (ATF-
BNL). Also numerical simulations in collaboration with Prof. L. Silva and his
group from the IST in Portugal will extensively study the CFI to better
understand it, and to predict and verify the experimental results. They are part
of the UCLA/IST/USC consortium that develops the codes OSIRIS and QuickPIC, and
have implemented a package to calculate the radiation emitted by the beam
particles along their intricate trajectories in the plasma. Simulation support
will also be provided for another CFI experiment at the CUOS, University of
Michigan, specifically oriented toward ICF by using laser produced electron
beams and led by Dr. A. Maksimchuk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program supports
one graduate student at USC and will include graduate students from the
University of Michigan, as well as from the IST in
Portugal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE
Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This
award is being funded by the Plasma Physics Program in the Division of Physics.