* 0903295
* Collaborative Research: Energy-Aware Memory Synchronization for Embedded Multicore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Tali Moreshet, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 42,381.00

High-end embedded systems such as smart phones, game consoles, GPS-enabled
automotive systems, home entertainment centers, and other ?ambient intelligence?
systems are becoming increasingly important in everyday life. Making such
systems energy-efficient presents new challenges with broad implications for the
economy and the environment. Such high-end embedded systems are multicore
architectures, which require management of resources such as memory connectivity
and scheduling. This proposal investigates the energy implications of system-
level concurrency issues in high-end embedded systems that are not limited by
real-time constraints. In particular, it aims to develop energy-efficient
techniques of synchronizing memory accesses, and tries to understand the optimal
division of tasks between hardware and software.

Embedded systems are an integral component of modern life, and is a continually
growing market. As the computational needs of the products in this market
becomes more sophisticated, there will be more challenges in meeting the tight
constraints imposed by these systems. Improvements in the performance and in
particular the energy efficiency of such devices would have a substantial impact
in terms of improved functionality, device longevity, and resource conservation.
This proposal involves collaboration between two disciplines, computer
engineering and computer science, and two institutions. Broader impacts of the
proposal include development of workshops focused on multicore and parallel
computing with special emphasis on encouraging women and under-represented
minorities to participate. In addition, the findings of this project will be
integrated into existing courses, specifically aiming to introduce cross-cutting
issues between the computer science and engineering courses.