* 0903128
* Partnership for Advanced Marine and Environmental Science Training for Pacific Islanders
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Patrick Tellei, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 986,470.00

The Partnership for Advanced Marine and Environmental Science Training for
Pacific Islanders improves technological education at the undergraduate and
secondary school levels through the community colleges of the Pacific Islands by
supporting regionally relevant curriculum development, the professional
development of community college faculty and secondary school teachers,
internships and field experiences for faculty, teachers, and students, and by
strengthening the scientific infrastructure of the participating institutions.
The activities include workshops that provide both training and the necessary
tools to perform relevant research, development of articulation agreements
between marine and environmental sciences programs at regional two-year colleges
and minority-serving universities, research experiences and collaborations,
secondary school teacher and student support, and will build on existing
programs supported by NSF and NOAA to address the scientific and technical needs
of the U.S.-Affiliated Pacific Islands: American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of
the Marshall Islands and the Republic of Palau. The Pacific Islands contain
highly diverse and unique coral reef and terrestrial ecosystems that are under
elevated levels of stress and degradation due to development pressures, the
effects of overfishing, and coastal pollution from sedimentation and the
increased use of agrochemicals. The future of the Islands and their populations
depends on the technical skills and knowledge available to local resource
managers, policy makers and stakeholders. An effective means of providing
critical access to accurate and adequate information, in a culturally
appropriate manner, is to strengthen the capacity of the local institutions of
higher education: American Samoa Community College, the College of Micronesia -
FSM, the College of the Marshall Islands, Northern Marianas College, and Palau
Community College. Input from local agencies, businesses and stakeholders will
identify the skills needed by community college graduates to fill positions
within the government and private sector.