* 0903449
* Collaborative Research: Targeting  Multi-Core Clock Performance Gains in the face of Extreme Process Variations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* GEORGE HADDAD
* 08/31/2013
* USD 153,846.00

The objective of this research is to overcome barriers limiting multicore
processor clock frequencies and to achieve faster clock and data throughput
rates with technology scaling than currently possible. The approach is to design
hardware and software infrastructure into multicore processors that enables low
cost comparison testing of the individual processor cores and test driven tuning
of processor circuitry for high-speed core operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work lies in the ability of the underlying test and
adaptation algorithms to extract the maximum amount of performance from the
process cores that they are capable of delivering under inter and intra die
process variations and electrical field degradation. Such adaptation is achieved
with limited test and diagnosis cost while allowing possible "test escapes" to
be handled in a fail-safe manner that does not result in a system crash. The
diagnostics information generated is used to tune individual processor core
circuitry for speed purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research include the ability to run advanced applications on multicore
processors in, for example, future 4G mobile wireless systems including high
definition video, interactive displays, image processing, data mining algorithms
and other pervasive computing tasks that demand high processor throughput at low
power for low heat dissipation and high device reliability. The project will
also enable training of students and industry personnel in a new
interdisciplinary field that involves fundamental concepts from electrical
engineering, device physics and computer science through prototype
demonstrations, seminars, workshops, cooperative research and student
internships in industry.&lt;br/&gt;