* 0903510
* IGERT: Multidisciplinary, Team-Based Training in Watershed Science and Policy
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Nicholas Pinter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,198,836.00

The U.S. faces increasing water management challenges in the 21st century.
Traditional single-discipline graduate education fails to meet the needs of
complex water and watershed-management issues in the 21st century. The goal of
the Integrative Graduate Educational and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program at
Southern Illinois University Carbondale in watershed science and policy is to
recruit, mentor, and train a diverse group of outstanding Ph.D. students to
become the scientists, managers, and leaders who will tackle tomorrow?s
interconnected scientific, environmental, social, economic, and technical
challenges at watershed and river basin scales. The central approach will be to
train each year?s IGERT class as a collaborative, interdisciplinary cadre. Each
cadre will collaborate to construct a comprehensive assessment and management
plan for one river basin. Features of the proposed IGERT program include: (1)
team-based collaboration; (2) a from-the-ground-up emphasis on multidisciplinary
watershed issues and solutions; (3) integration of underrepresented groups as
students, mentors, and trainees; (4) model-based data synthesis and policy; (5)
practical experience via extended internships and mentored teaching experiences;
(6) exposure to transboundary rivers and international watershed-management
issues; and (7) graduates with training in national and international best
practice in integrated watershed science and management. The program?s primary
goal is to cultivate a new generation of watershed science and management
graduates trained in solving complex, real-world problems. In so doing, a new
model for graduate education centered on team-based collaboration across
traditional disciplinary boundaries will be developed. IGERT is an NSF-wide
program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.