* 0903514
* U.S.-Japan Planning Visit:  Collaborations in Functional Ceramic Thin Film Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Junghyun Cho, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Mook
* 08/31/2010
* USD 19,961.00

This award supports a US-Japan planning visit by Prof. Junghyun Cho and his two
team members (doctoral student and postdoctoral researcher) of State University
of New York at Binghamton. The foreign hosts are Profs. Jeffrey Cross and Kazuo
Shinozaki of Tokyo Institute of Technology. The primary purpose is to identify
key research areas and locate available resources to organize an international
research team in the area of high k (dielectric constant) oxide films. Profs.
Cross and Shinozaki have been working on processing and characterization of
electroceramic films for many years. With their expertise combined with Prof.
Cho?s interest in microstructure design, the proposed research will explore
enabling materials for current innovations in
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;Participating students and researchers at both
institutions will benefit from international experiences of the intended
research and education, along with the highly specialized, complementary
expertise of the collaborating research groups. While in Japan, Prof. Cho?s
group will also have a chance to visit other universities, national
laboratories, and industrial sectors for additional collaboration opportunities.
The collaborative research, once established through this initial visit, will
catalyze the long-term international partnership and produce numerous research
and educational opportunities for US students and researchers. &lt;br/&gt;