* 0903660
* Quantum state discrimination and quantum walks
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Janos Bergou, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 07/31/2013
* USD 478,583.00

This proposal is about quantum walks and about quantum state discrimination. A
preliminary study indicates that it should be possible to distinguish between
different types of graphs by applying unambiguous state discrimination to the
output state of a quantum walk (a quantum version of a classical random walk),
which can take place on an arbitrary graph. The scattering quantum walk will be
used, in which the particle making the walk resides on the edges of the graph,
and scatters at the vertices at each time step. Quantum searches on graphs will
be studied in order to find how the number of steps necessary to find a
distinguished vertex depends on the structure of the graph. One goal is to
determine how the presence of a distinguished vertex affects the S matrix of a
graph, and whether this can be used to detect the presence of a distinguished
vertex. Another goal is to compare graphs by placing them in parallel into a
larger graph. Theoretical research will be done in the area of quantum state
discrimination, an emerging subfield in quantum information and quantum
computing. To discriminate two known quantum states the states can be hard-wired
into the discriminating device. It is possible, however, to discriminate two
completely unknown states when the states are provided in some form of program
for the state discriminator [J. Bergou and M. Hillery, PRL 94, 160501 (2005)].
Programmable state discriminators will be examined in order to optimize the
read-out of quantum computers for applications to operator testing and quantum
algorithms. Their optical implementations and connection to the discrimination
of mixed quantum states will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
proposal will be in the training of graduate students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;