* 0903291
* Topology and Topological Phases  in Strongly Interacting Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Stone, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrey Dobrynin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Mathematical
Sciences Division contribute funds to this award. It provides support for
theoretical research and education on strongly interacting condensed matter
many-body systems. The principal objective is to gain insight into the origin
and behavior of topological phases. These phases are states of matter that are
not the product of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and therefore do not have an
order-parameter, but possess instead ?quantum order? in which the ground state
degeneracy is determined by the topology of the space in which they live. Such
topological phases have potential applications in quantum computing where the
massive parallelism inherent in quantum time evolution provides fast solutions
for problems that would require exponential time on conventional machines.

The PI will further explore the correspondence between Calogero-Sutherland
models and quantum Hall fluids with an aim to understanding the relation between
edge and bulk states in non-abelian quantum fluids. The PI will explore new
ideas for how to directly observe anionic statistics in the abelian quantum Hall
effect through experiments. Research will also extend to the interplay of
curvature and electronic structure in graphene. The specific aims of the
research are three-fold: to understand how the local properties of the many-body
wave-functions conspire to produce the global ground-state degeneracy that
characterizes these systems, to explore possible applications of these systems
for the construction of quantum computation devices, and to investigate novel
systems that may, by design or by suitable engineering, possess the desired
topological properties.

Quantum field theory of many-body systems will be used to carry the research
along with the representation theory of infinite dimensional current algebras,
and index theorems that, under suitable circumstances, guarantee the existence
of solutions of differential equations with desirable properties.

This project contributes to the long-term goal of building a quantum computer,
but also provides training of graduate students. These students will integrate
research and education by acquiring valuable mathematical and computational
skills, along with physical insight, that will prepare them for research careers
in academia, industry, and the national laboratories.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Mathematical
Sciences Division contribute funds to this award. It provides support for
theoretical research and education at the interface of condensed matter physics
and mathematics. The PI will use advanced theoretical methods, and mathematical
and physical concepts to explore the notion of a new kind of spontaneous
organization that appears in quantum mechanical systems. Well known is the
notion of ordered states like the spontaneous organization of atoms in a regular
array to form perfect crystalline materials. The ordered crystal state has a
lower symmetry than the melt from which the crystal grows. In quantum mechanical
systems, a new kind of order is possible in which there is no change in symmetry
upon going to the organized state. Rather, the organization is reflected more
abstractly in the topological properties of the quantum mechanical wavefunction.
This notion became apparent from the study of a gas of electrons confined to a
plane in a perpendicular magnetic field.

The PI will use advanced theoretical techniques and mathematical concepts to
further study this idea and to determine if a new topological quantum state of
matter appears and can be directly observed in experiments. The exciting
possibility is that this state of matter can be manipulated to perform
computational operations that are intrinsically parallel and can execute certain
algorithms at much higher speed than existing and foreseeable supercomputers.
This research contributes to the intellectual foundations of quantum computing
and toward its experimental realization.

This award also supports education. Students will integrate research and
education by acquiring valuable mathematical and computational skills, along
with physical insight, that will prepare them to join the workforce of the 21st
century.

