* 0903090
* Integrating Internet Security with Law Enforcement Through Digital Computer Forensic Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Scott Adams, Elgin Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2013
* USD 148,938.00

This project is developing a model program to prepare students as information
technology professionals with strong digital forensics skills used in
occupations in government, industry, and criminal justice. Combining criminal
justice and computer science in a collaborative approach to forensics, the
curriculum includes certificates and an associate degree in digital forensics,
with the option of transferring to a four-year degree program in either computer
science or criminal justice with a computer forensics concentration. The
investigators are developing the curriculum in partnership with the Cyber
Security Education Consortium (CSEC), an ATE regional center based at the
University of Tulsa, and with DeVry University in Illinois, Champlain College in
Vermont, and Defiance College in Ohio.

Expected outcomes include: * new curricula that add to the body of knowledge in
forensic science, combining criminal justice and computer science into a
collaborative approach to forensics; * increased student enrollment in digital
computer forensic certificate and degree programs; * increased participation of
students from area high school career and technical programs and the college's
diversity programs for underrepresented minorities and women; and * improved
preparation for students to gain employment or advancement in IT security
fields.