* 0903331
* Targeted Research on Technician Education: Community College Partnership Models for Workforce Education Sustainability and Integrated Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Steven Wendel, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

Community College Partnership Models for Workforce Education Sustainability and
Integrated Instruction

SRI International's Center for Technology in Learning, Ames & Associates, and
four Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Centers (The National Workforce
Center for Emerging Technologies (NWCET) at Bellevue Community College in
Washington, the National Center for Manufacturing Education (NCME) at Sinclair
Community College in Ohio, the National Center for Information and
Communications Technologies (ICT) Center at Springfield Technical Community
College in Massachusetts, and the Center for Information Technology Education
(CITE) in Nashville, Tennessee) join forces in a four-year research study. The
goals of the targeted research study are to (1) describe partnership models to
integrate industry goals in the classroom; (2) characterize approaches for
guiding and transforming instruction; (3) disseminate useable tools and
materials for partnership building and workforce-integrated instruction; and (4)
create a framework to inform future research into the mechanism that lead to a
learning college culture. Intellectual Merit: The targeted research study takes
a multi-method, multi-site approach to examine the effectiveness of industry-
community college partnerships and workplace relevance of ATE-sponsored
instructional approaches. The results of the research have the potential of
producing an analytic framework to guide the design of future studies into the
mechanisms that community colleges use to support continuous improvement in
curriculum and instruction. Broader Impact: This effort results in the
production of usable tools and materials for practitioners to deepen industry-
community college partnerships and to integrate industry goals into both
technician and transfer-credit classrooms through specific instructional
techniques. The addition of case studies provides an in-depth examination of how
industry-community college partnerships prioritize the needs of underrepresented
groups and address them through classroom instructional practices.