* 0903495
* IGERT: The Dynamics of Brain-Body-Environment Systems in Behavior and Cognition
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Randall Beer, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,124,368.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) award
supports a training program on the dynamics of brain-body-environment
interaction in behavior and cognition at Indiana University. The purpose of the
training program is to create a new kind of scientist with expertise in both the
experimental and theoretical tools necessary to analyze intelligence as an
emergent property of a complex dynamic system. The training program includes new
courses, a professional development seminar, a colloquium series that provides
opportunities for extended interactions between students and top researchers,
research internships, and opportunities for international collaboration. The
program also includes a detailed assessment plan and a summer program for
undergraduates from underrepresented groups run in partnership with Indiana
University Northwest, approximately 80% of whose students come from minority,
first-generation college, female or low socioeconomic categories. Broader
impacts of this program include recruiting new students from underrepresented
groups into cognitive science and providing graduate students with the
opportunity to participate in cutting-edge multidisciplinary research. All
materials produced by this program will be made freely available on the web.
More generally, this program will foster new kinds of discourse between the
various disciplines that make up cognitive science. Finally, by placing
cognition within its proper embodied and situated context, the proposed training
program may impact how society fosters and measures cognitive ability. IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.