* 0903080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Voluntary Desegregation and Educational Outcomes.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Kendra Bischoff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2011
* USD 9,580.00

SES-0903080&lt;br/&gt;Sean Reardon&lt;br/&gt;Kendra Bischoff&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Racial and ethnic disparities in academic
achievement and social outcomes are persistent features of the U.S. educational
landscape. One prominent legal and policy remedy for these disparities is school
desegregation. It is unclear, however, to what extent inequalities stem from
differences in school environments or from differences in family background and
other extra-school attributes. In this research, the investigators exploit a
random assignment of students to a desegregation program to answer the question,
"Given the same family background, what is the effect on minority students of
attending a more integrated, higher-achieving school?" The analysis uses data
from a voluntary interdistrict desegregation plan that allows minority students
to transfer from a largely minority and low-income district into neighboring,
mostly white and upper middle-class districts. The project will use three
sources of data to assess the outcomes of interest: 1) School district
administrative records to assess academic outcomes; 2) Student and parent
surveys to assess social outcomes; and 3) In-depth parent and student interviews
to test the mechanisms that connect school context to student outcomes. Prior
research has primarily focused on the effect of schools on academic outcomes;
however, some of the most profound effects of school context are likely social--
reflected in students' attitudes, friendships, level of civic engagement, and
racial and ethnic identities. This mixed-method approach will provide an
opportunity to explore the processes that drive the observed outcomes, something
that has been lost on previous research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This research has implications for the educational opportunities for minority
and low-income youth. Racial achievement gaps have proven to be stubborn,
despite the sweeping changes in accountability procedures brought about by the
No Child Left Behind legislation. There is very little good evidence on the ways
in which desegregation in schools may alleviate achievement gaps or how it may
socially prepare minority and low-income students for future participation in
mainstream settings, such as diverse 4-year colleges or white-collar jobs. By
broadly disseminating the findings from this study to academics, policy makers,
and school practitioners, findings could potentially inform school assignment
decisions.