* 0903726
* VHPL:  Virtual Hybrid Particle Laboratory for End-to-End Simulation of High-Beta Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Homayoun Karimabadi, SciberQuest
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 10/31/2012
* USD 361,316.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Prior NSF support was used to develop a multi-dimensional discrete-event
software infrastructure, Simulation Time Operating System (STOS), which enables
effective separation of physics applications ("drivers") from a generic event
processing component ("kernel"). The proposed activity will focus on applying
the new technology to an important plasma modeling paradigm: quasi-neutral
hybrid particle simulation. This approximation extends magnetohydrodynamics
(MHD) by treating ions are as kinetic species (macro-particles) and electrons as
a massless fluid. This proposal pursues three main goals: (1) build a robust
virtual laboratory for hybrid plasma simulations (VHPL) with performance and
accuracy capabilities unmatched by conventional hybrid codes, (2) perform end-
to-end 3D simulations in support of the on-going experiment on spheromak merging
at Swarthmore College (SSX), and (3) develop a robust educational version of
VHPL for teaching fundamentals of plasma physics to undergraduate students at
Swarthmore.

The methods developed will make possible simulation of large systems with
inclusion of small scale kinetic effects. These methods might be useful for
including micro-turbulent effects into Fusion transport codes. Swarthmore
undergraduate students will be trained to use simulation tools developed and be
involved in modeling the Swarthmore experiments.

This proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the
Plasma and Computational Physics Programs in the Division of Physics.