* 0903371
* IGERT: Food Systems and Poverty Reduction
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,187,165.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5). This Integrative Graduate Education and
Research Traineeship (IGERT) award supports the development of a
multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research in food
systems as they relate to poverty reduction. Most people suffering chronic
extreme poverty live in rural areas in developing countries and rely heavily on
food systems - the human-managed biophysical systems that regulate the
production, distribution and consumption of food - as producers, consumers
and/or workers. Food systems improvements have stimulated long-term improvements
in human well-being yet these improvements elude people currently suffering
extreme poverty. This program provides graduate students with the conceptual and
methodological tools necessary for understanding the structure and dynamics of
complex systems that perpetuate extreme rural poverty. This rich understanding
of the larger context into which their own disciplinary studies fit enhances
students' ability to assess the implications, potential and impact of
discipline-specific scientific discoveries. A distinguishing feature of this
program is that students work in interdisciplinary research teams at shared
research sites in East Africa, organized around intellectually challenging,
ecologically complex and socioeconomically important problems that drive extreme
poverty and require broadly informed science and policies to address. The
resulting training will build a diverse cadre of skilled natural and social
scientists able to integrate information from diverse sub-systems to conduct
scientifically sound, systems-based research to help spur the development of
food system interventions and strategies that can reduce extreme poverty
worldwide. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.