* 0903562
* CNH: Assessing and Adaptively Managing Wildfire Risk in the Wildland-Urban Interface
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Gamini Herath, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,496,273.00

This project aims to enhance the capacity of stakeholders (land and wildland
fire management agencies, homeowners, land developers/homebuilders, and
community/regional planners) in Flathead County, Montana to assess and manage
wildfire risk in the wildland-urban interface (WUI) in light of future climate
change and future residential expansion into wildland areas. The project will
also improve knowledge and understanding among the broader community (middle
school students, high school students, persons in youth and adult environmental
education courses, and information personnel) about the nature, benefits, and
risks of wildfire in the WUI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research objectives of the
project are to: (1) develop a wildfire-climate model called FIRECLIM that
simulates the complex interactions among climate change, expansion of
residential development into wildland areas, and wildfire risk in the WUI; (2)
demonstrate how the FIRECLIM model can be used by local stakeholders to make
optimal ex ante wildfire-related decisions under alternative climate change and
economic growth scenarios for the next 50 years (2008 to 2058); (3) test several
hypotheses about how future climate change, future residential expansion into
wildland areas, and changes in land use policy are likely to influence future
wildfires and future wildfire risk in the WUI; (4) develop an ex post decision
framework that the community of interest can use to adaptively manage future
wildfire risk in the WUI; and (5) construct a Web-based, interactive, spatial
decision support tool that facilitates application of the ex ante and ex post
decision frameworks by the community of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational objectives of the project are to: (1) train
future practitioners and scientists in interdisciplinary modeling and analysis
of a coupled natural-human system for managing future wildfire risk; (2) improve
the capacity of the community of interest to assess and manage wildfire risk in
the WUI under alternative climate change, economic growth futures, and land use
policy futures; and (3) incorporate the research results into educational
products that increase the broader community?s understanding and knowledge of
wildfire and wildfire risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIRECLIM model integrates
a landscape fire dynamics simulation model, a structure ignition assessment
model, agent-based behavioral models, and climate change and economic growth
futures. We will establish and collaborate with four agent panels composed of
representatives of the community of interest to identify alternative decisions
for either minimizing net wildfire risk or maximizing expected return on
investment in defensive fire measures. Our measure of net wildfire risk is
somewhat unique because it accounts for both the expected losses and expected
benefits of wildfires. We will evaluate how agents can adapt their wildfire-
related decisions to future climate change and future expansion of residential
development into wildland areas using an adaptive management framework that
employs Bayesian statistical analysis for the risk case and the minimax regret
criterion for the uncertainty case. Climate change futures will be based on IPCC
scenarios, and residential development into wildland areas for alternative
economic growth and land use policy futures will be simulated using the
Ecosystem Landscape Modeling System. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is the
first study of its kind to assess how future climate change and future expansion
of residential development into wildland areas influences wildfire and wildfire
risk in the WUI. Dissemination of project results will be facilitated by
incorporating research results into five products designed to improve the
broader community?s knowledge and understanding of wildfire and wildfire risk
management: (1) a decision support tool that facilitates adaptive management of
future wildfire risk by the community of interest; (2) educational programs that
enable the community of interest to learn about the interactions among wildfire
risk, climate change, land use change, and economic development; (3) a new, one-
to two-day, adult environmental education course on the role of wildfire in
ecosystems; (4) an interactive, computer simulation program that allows users to
interactively simulate wildfire-related decisions for alternative future changes
in climate and economic growth in a hypothetical WUI; and (5) a book tentatively
titled Managing Future Wildfire Risk in the Wildland-Urban Interface. In
addition, the project will train future practitioners and scientists in ways to
manage future wildfire risk and involve an international researcher and graduate
student from Australia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project personnel include
scientists from Deakin University (Australia), Lindenwood University (Missouri),
The University of Montana, University of Missouri, the U.S. Forest Service, and
the U.S. Geological Survey. Institutional collaborators include the Confederated
Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Flathead County Office
of Emergency Services, Flathead County Planning and Zoning, Flathead National
Forest, Glacier National Park, Montana Department of Natural Resources and
Conservation, and the Glacier Institute. &lt;br/&gt;