* 0903467
* The notion of mass in general relativity and Riemannian geometry, and other topics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Dan Lee, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 93,901.00

Given an asymptotically flat manifold of nonnegative scalar curvature containing
a black hole, the Riemannian Penrose inequality gives a lower bound for the mass
in terms of the area of the black hole. In joint work with H. Bray, the PI
extended the Riemannian Penrose inequality from the previously known case of
three space dimensions to all dimensions less than eight. The PI intends to use
a singular version of Bray's conformal flow in order to generalize the result to
all dimensions. Another major goal of this project is to prove an analog of the
Penrose inequality for asymptotically hyperbolic Riemannian manifolds, again
using a novel version of Bray's conformal flow. The PI's work on the Penrose
inequality is related to the problem of "small mass." The equality case of the
Positive Mass Theorem states that Euclidean space is the only asymptotically
flat manifold of nonnegative scalar curvature and zero mass. Building on earlier
work of the PI, this project will explore the following question: In what sense
must an asymptotically flat manifold of nonnegative scalar curvature and "small"
mass be "close" to Euclidean space? Ultimately, the Penrose inequality is likely
to be a component of any theory that adequately addresses this question.

The underlying goal of this project is to improve our understanding of the role
of mass in general relativity. Although Einstein's theory of general relativity
is a mature theory, there are still many mysteries concerning the total mass of
a gravitational system. This difficulty arises from the nonlinearity of
Einstein's theory: Unlike in Newtonian gravity, the physically relevant notion
of the "total mass" of a gravitational system is not simply the sum of the
masses of the particles that constitute the system. For example, a Schwarzschild
black hole is an example of a gravitational system that has no matter at all and
yet still has total mass greater than zero. This example suggests that a black
hole somehow contributes to the total mass; the Penrose inequality is a precise
statement that captures this idea. Some of the ideas in this project are
accessible to high school students, and the PI intends to share these ideas with
them. The PI hopes to use students' natural curiosities about the nature of the
universe as a means of encouraging greater interest in mathematics.

