* 0903945
* Photonic Quantum Networking of Trapped Ion Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Monroe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

This project will push experimental limits in the local and nonlocal networking
of quantum information. It is generally accepted that future quantum networks
will require both stable quantum memories and appropriate quantum channels that
can traverse macroscopic distances. We concentrate on the use of hyperfine
ground states of trapped ions as quantum memories, and individual photons as the
quantum communication channel. Building on previous work from our group in the
Yb+ system, we will investigate (a) larger numbers of ions at each network node,
(b) enhanced probabilities of heralded gate operations with nearby optical
elements, (c) larger distances between trapped ion nodes by exploiting infrared
transitions in the Yb+ system. These directions represent promising routes
toward a variety of quantum information and quantum communication protocols,
including distributed quantum computing and long-distance quantum repeaters
circuits. This research may also lead to an attractive method for observing a
"loophole-free" Bell inequality test, where the entangled ions are space-like
separated with respect to the qubit measurement time. Finally, the ion/photon
interfaces discussed here are not necessarily specific to trapped ions memories,
and may be applied to other systems such as quantum dots in a semiconductor or
doped glass host.&lt;br/&gt;This work is at the heart of laboratory quantum
information science, and it is expected to attract great interest from students
at all levels and backgrounds from a variety of disciplines in physics, computer
science, and engineering. The results of this research will be widely
disseminated at meetings and workshops, and also through lectures at primarily
undergraduate institutions. As part of an internal initiative at U. Maryland to
attract the best high school science students in the area to College Park, this
work will be aggressively presented at local high schools. &lt;br/&gt;Where
possible, the presentation of this research to young students and other
newcomers to the field will be rooted in a particular approach to the
foundations of quantum mechanics that relies more on information theoretic
viewpoints such as entropy and measurement and less on wave mechanics,
differential equations, and complex mathematics.