* 0903742
* International Conference on Ethical Issues in Biomedical Engineering to be held in New York April 3-5, 2009.
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Subrata Saha, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 02/28/2010
* USD 10,000.00

CBET 0903742&lt;br/&gt;S. Saha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the 5th International Conference on Ethical Issues in Biomedical
Engineering that will be hosted by The SUNY Downstate Medical Center in
collaboration with the Polytechnic Institute of New York during April 3-5, 2009.
The conference will bring together faculty, researchers and students in the
rapidly growing interdisciplinary field of biomedical engineering to discuss the
challenging ethical issues faced by biomedical engineers in their research and
practice. Biomedical engineering is responsible for many of the dramatic
advances in modern medicine. However, biomedical technology has also contributed
to dilemmas and has challenged some of our moral values. These include ethical
issues in stem cell research &amp; cloning, privacy and bioinformatics,
nanobiotechnology, conflicts of interest, allocation of scarce resources,
research misconduct, animal experimentation, clinical trials and marketing of
new medical devices and many other new emerging issues. In addition to the
conference sessions, there will be two panel discussions (1) Surgeon-Industry
Interactions: Ethical Challenges and (2) Ethics Education in Biomedical
Engineering. The conference will raise awareness and will promote discussions on
ethical issues in the broader and interdisciplinary field of Biomedical
Engineering. The conference is expected to have a broad spectrum of attendees
(faculty, scientists, philosophers, students, physicians, lawyers and industry
representatives). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;