* 0903051
* Problem-Based Learning (PBL) for Sustainable Technology: Increasing the STEM Pipeline (STEM PBL)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Massa, New England Board of Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* Yvette Weatherton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 899,594.00

This ATE curriculum and professional development project, "Problem-Based
Learning (PBL) for Sustainable Technology: Increasing the STEM Pipeline" is
building on a strong foundation from previous projects including PHOTON PBL
(DUE#0603143). Using Problem-Based Learning (PBL), they are developing active
hands-on learning resources that challenge students to explore new and emerging
technologies, to "think outside the box," and to apply their knowledge, skills
and creativity in solving authentic real-world problems. This project is 1)
expanding the scope of PHOTON PBL multimedia instructional materials to address
additional STEM disciplines with a focus on sustainable technologies such as
alternative energy, lighting, sensors, environmental protection, nanotechnology
and biotechnology; 2) creating and implementing a web-based professional
development course for the PHOTON PBL; and 3) developing a model one-semester
classroom course in problem-based instructional methods for use in pre-service
Technology and Engineering Education programs. They are also conducting research
on the efficacy of Problem-Based Learning in STEM education. Their results are
being disseminated through the project website (www.photonprojects.org),
listserve, annual newsletter, presentations at professional organization
meetings, and publications in professional journals.