* 0903450
* Symposium on Nanostructured Materials for Future Therapy; ACS National Meeting; Salt Lake City, UT; March 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Xinqiao Jia, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 12/31/2009
* USD 4,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0903450 PI: Yeo, Yoon ORG: Purdue University

Title: Nanostructured Materials for Future Therapy

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A symposium entitled ?Nanostructured Materials for Future
Therapy? is being organized to be held at the 237th American Chemical Society
(ACS) National Meeting between March 22nd and 26th, 2009, in Salt Lake City, UT.
The symposium is sponsored by the Division of Polymer Chemistry (POLY) within
the ACS. This symposium will address recent advances and issues in development,
characterization, and application of nanostructured materials with health-
related promises. The proposed symposium will discuss four thrust areas,
focusing on polymeric systems that are assembled to nanometer-scale and whose
specific biological functions largely arise from such structure: (i) Novel
polymeric systems with controlled cellular responses; (ii) Novel nanostructured
systems with therapeutic potential; (iii) Interfacing tissues with bioactive
surfaces; and (iv) Innovative measurement tools. The goal of this symposium is
to provide opportunities for both leaders and young investigators working in
these focus areas to share their recent advances, ideas, challenges, and
solutions with the expectation that innovative approaches being developed in one
area can directly impact and facilitate advances in the others. The objectives
of the symposium are: (1) To highlight recent advances in the design, synthesis
and characterization of nanostructured biomaterials for fundamental
understanding of cell biology and practical applications in biomedical
engineering; (2) To promote dialogues between polymer scientists, chemists,
bioengineers, pharmaceutical scientists, and biologists, establish contacts and
exchange ideas among different areas; and (3) To provide opportunities for young
investigators including junior faculty, post-doctoral fellows, and graduate
students to present their most updated research results. Advances in novel
polymer design and nanotechnology have provided unprecedented opportunities to
design and organize new nanostructured materials. New methodologies and tools
have facilitated understanding the influence of the nanostructured materials on
biological processes. Collaborative efforts among these areas hold great
promises in developing new future therapy. The four focus areas of the symposium
have shared interests in understanding the biological consequences of the
nanostructured materials and approaches to addressing chemical and engineering
challenges. As the lines between the scientific disciplines began to blur in
recent years, it has become vital to showcase the advances of eminent cross-
disciplinary investigators while training young scientists of the next
generation in such an environment. This symposium will bring together many of
the strongest and most promising researchers in this active field and promote
their communications and collaborations toward development of new future
therapy.

BROADER IMPACTS: This symposium will positively affect human health by
fostering synergistic interactions between polymer scientists, chemists,
bioengineers, pharmaceutical scientists, and biologists, who are working toward
development of new nanostructured materials for future therapy. This grant will
contribute to broad dissemination of the proposed symposium by encouraging a
large attendance of next-generation scientists through travel awards.



