* 0903278
* Summer school and conference on geometric representation theory and extended affine Lie algebras
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Weiqiang Wang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 02/28/2010
* USD 24,000.00

From June 15-27, 2009, a summer school will take place at the University of
Ottawa in Ottawa, Canada. It will be followed by a conference from June 28 to
July 3. Both the conference and the summer school will focus on the topics of
geometric representation theory and extended affine Lie algebras. The summer
school will be aimed at graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior
faculty working in the field of Lie algebras and will consist of six one-week
courses spread over two weeks. The conference will bring together mathematicians
working in the above-mentioned fields and will feature approximately 20 lectures
by experts in these areas.

The summer school will provide an excellent opportunity for young mathematicians
to gain access to the active and flourishing fields of geometric representation
theory and extended affine Lie algebras. While these topics are currently very
popular among research mathematicians, they are not often taught in typical
graduate courses. It is expected that the majority of students attending the
summer school will stay for the conference to follow. The conference will expose
students to current research related to the subjects of the courses they
attended in the preceding two weeks. It will also bring together researchers in
these fields and provide a forum for them to discuss their work. This grant
supports participation of U.S. based mathematicians in both the summer school
and conference. The majority of the funds will be used to support women,
minority, and young scientists (including graduate students).

