* 0903991
* Theoretical Investigations in Hadron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Peter Tandy, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This three-year theoretical physics research program isolates and analyzes a
variety of physical mechanisms underlying the structure of subatomic matter at
the very small distances where quarks and gluons can be discerned.
Interpretation of experiments at national facilities such as the CEBAF
accelerator at the Jefferson Laboratory (JLab) and Brookhaven's Relativistic
Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) requires the identification of dominant physical
mechanisms as grounded in the relativistic quantum field theory known as Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). In many cases, the time-consuming direct numerical
simulation of this theory by lattice computational methods must be complemented
by continuum models built on the integral and differential equations of the
field theory. The present project extends the reach of one of the most
successful continuum models of QCD by generalizing it into new domains of
physical measurements and phenomena. These include flavor mixing in pseudoscalar
mesons influenced by the axial anomaly, masses, decays and transition form
factors of mesons containing one or two heavy quarks, and the quark structure
functions of pions, kaons, and nucleons as measured by deep inelastic lepton
scattering. Broader impacts include the cross-fertilization of nuclear and
particle physics, a return on the investment in the experimental facilities at
JLab and RHIC, and integration of research and education through the research
training of graduate students in connection with undergraduate teaching. The
interactions of graduate students with scientists who are prominent nationally
and internationally is a contribution to the nation's infrastructure for
research and education. The PI uses examples from this research program to
illustrate key elements of core graduate classes in Quantum Mechanics and
Nuclear and Particle Physics. The PI and a colleague supervise an informal
seminar course for graduate students and postdoctoral associates to discuss and
present aspects of QCD and field theory that underlie this research program. An
existing Linkage Collaboration with Australian scientists, together with NSF
funding for the U.S.-Mexican bilateral collaboration from the Office of
International Science and Engineering, will enhance international cooperation in
science research and education.