* 0903913
* Studies of turbulence, transport and flows in the Large Plasma Device
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* James Maggs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 01/31/2013
* USD 402,276.00

The goal of this project is to gain understanding of the interaction between
flows, turbulence, and transport in a laboratory plasma. Experiments will be
performed using the Large Plasma Device (LAPD), which is part of the Basic
Plasma Science Facility at UCLA. The work would build on the recent observation
of a particle confinement transition triggered by bias-driven rotation in LAPD.
In the proposed work, focus will be given to the role of parallel boundary
conditions in turbulence, transport and flows in LAPD. A set of limiters will be
constructed in order to establish well-defined, yet changeable, parallel
boundary conditions in the edge of LAPD. Modifications in turbulence, transport,
and driven and spontaneous flows with parallel boundary conditions will be
investigated. A second focus will be on angular momentum transport and flow
generation in LAPD, emphasizing a study of the role of intermittent convection
in these processes. In addition, a set of topics for alternate lines of research
are discussed, including studies of the scaling of the transition threshold with
plasma parameters, and the axial dependence of driven flows and the confinement
transition. The intellectual merit of the proposed research stems from the
fundamental importance of turbulence, transport, and flows in a wide range of
plasmas. The proposed detailed study of the interplay between transport,
turbulence and flows will have an impact on a wide range of subfields of plasma
physics, including magnetic confinement fusion, and space and astrophysical
plasma physics.

The broader impacts of the proposed work would be realized in both the research
and educational activites. A major focus of the proposal is the training of one
graduate student, working toward a PhD, and one undergraduate student. The
proposed work will complement an existing effort in collaboration with LLNL to
compare measurements in LAPD to predictions of the 3D Braginskii fluid code
BOUT. The detailed measurements possible in LAPD provide a significant test of
the predictive capabilities of a simulation code such as BOUT. Establishing a
predictive capability in turbulence and transport in magnetized plasmas is
important in advancing understanding of fundamental plasma processes in a
variety of settings, but is especially critical to progress in magnetic fusion
energy research. The work proposed here will, in part, help establish LAPD as an
experimental platform for testing the capabilities of current (e.g., BOUT) and
planned (e.g., edge kinetic simulation) massively-parallel turbulence simulation
codes.

This proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded by the Plasma
Physics Program in the Division of Physics.