* 0903877
* Fundamental Processes in Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Thomas O'Neil, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 06/30/2014
* USD 2,000,000.00

Fundamental Processes in Plasmas&lt;br/&gt;T.M. O'Neil, C.F. Driscoll and D.H.E.
Dubin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration of 3 UCSD faculty will address a
broad range of fundamental processes in plasmas, and will emphasize problems for
which precise experimental tests of theory can be obtained. The experiments will
be performed on camera-diagnosed pure-electron plasmas and laser-diagnosed pure-
ion plasmas. &lt;br/&gt;The research will include work in 6 general
areas:&lt;br/&gt;1) Theory work on anti-hydrogen formation and relaxation via
plasma collisions will continue, ranging from O'Neil's "Guiding Center Atom"
regime to the more deeply-bound chaotic regimes.&lt;br/&gt;2) Experiments have
now measured the Salpeter enhancement of perp-to-parallel collisions in strongly
correlated plasmas, and future work will quantitatively test theory ideas and
apply them to "burn-front" propagation dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;3) Experiments and
theory on long-range ExB drift interactions will continue, characterizing heat
transport, viscosity, and particle transport limited by background shear flows,
utilizing laser-tagging to image the elusive thermally-excited convection
cells.&lt;br/&gt;4) Experiments will quantify the wave-coherent particle
distribution function in the novel "Electron Acoustic Mode", with theory support
to understand the extreme frequency-variability of these nonlinear
waves.&lt;br/&gt;5) Experiments and theory will continue on 2D fluid vortex
dynamics, inviscid wave damping, and "vortex crystals," including statistical
mechanics descriptions of these novel states.&lt;br/&gt;6) Experiments and
theory will develop the new "chaotic scattering" regime of neoclassical
transport, which occurs when theta-rippled trapping separatrices are driven by
plasma rotation. This work may be "transformative", given the broad range of
wave damping, nonlinear wave coupling, and particle transport effects which are
being observed and analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research environment is
ideal for graduate student and post-doctoral training. The research has strong
interdisciplinary connections with atomic physics, fluid dynamics, and
statistical mechanics, as well as relevance to fusion plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;This
research is also funded by DoE under a separate award under the NSF-DoE
Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;