* 0903754
* Physics of Non-Neutral and Electron-Positron Plasmas Confined on Magnetic Surfaces
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Allen Boozer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2010
* USD 30,121.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The primary focus of this theory program is on pure electron plasmas, in
particular the properties of low density electron plasma equilibria. The
theories developed are now being tested in several devices, not only on the
Columbia Nonneutral Torus (CNT) but also on two devices in Japan. Some of the
key predictions from theory have been experimentally verified, but many
phenomena in CNT are still inadequately understood. The existing computational
tools will be refined and applied in preparation for the next phase of the
experiment, the creation of electron-positron plasmas.

The development of an understanding of non-neutral plasmas confined on magnetic
surfaces will be a valuable addition to basic plasma physics. It is also
important for the future electron-positron (pair) plasma experiments. Electron-
positron plasmas are theoretically the simplest quasi-neutral plasmas that one
can study, and hence, a pair plasma experiment would provide a stringent test of
our understanding of basic plasma physics. The proposed program supports one
doctoral student, and it involves substantial participation by undergraduate
students as well as high school students, and will continue to do so in the
future.