* 0903949
* Collaborative Research:   Integrated Analysis of In-Flight Collision Avoidance Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tayfun Tezduyar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 237,339.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

All animals rely on the integration of sensory, postural and environmental
information to generate complex motor behaviors such as swimming, diving or
flying. This collaborative project will study how the nervous system transforms
information gathered by the senses into motor commands, based on the
biomechanical properties of the muscles as well as the mechanical and
environmental constraints imposed on the body by the outside world through the
laws of physics. A favorable model system to study these complex aspects of
behavior is the generation of collision avoidance maneuvers in flying insects,
as much is known about their nervous system and the aerodynamic mechanisms
underlying insect flight. The three research teams that will collaborate on this
project are based at Baylor College of Medicine, Rice University and the
University of Arizona and will bring complementary expertise in neurophysiology,
advanced computer modeling, and aerodynamic engineering, respectively. This work
will provide a comprehensive description of in-flight collision avoidance in
response to visual threats and will thus contribute to an integrated
understanding of the basis of complex sensory-motor transformations underlying
behavior. The new insights that will be gathered over the course of the work
could be applied to the design of real-time artificial vision systems and
collision avoidance systems for various vehicles. This project will also provide
research training at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels by
creating opportunities to gain interdisciplinary research experience. Students
and research associates involved in the project at Rice University will learn
more about computational aerodynamics, fluid-structure interaction modeling, and
data visualization and animation.