* 0903708
* Energetic Consequences of Fast Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Dana Longcope, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 302,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to model the basic
process by which magnetic reconnection releases energy in a magnetically
dominated plasma. Since it was first proposed to explain sudden rapid energy
conversion in solar flares, most investigations of magnetic reconnection in the
abstract have focused on the local electric fields it requires. The results have
been self-consistent local models of plasma flows and electric fields arising
through small-scale phenomena such as collisions between, or dynamical
separation of, electrons and ions. A small-scale electric field of this kind can
produce topological changes to magnetic field lines from which the term
"reconnection" derives, but cannot directly affect the magnetic energy since
that is distributed throughout the large-scale magnetized volume. The research
herein proposed will address the challenge, largely unaddressed to date, of how
topological changes on small scales release magnetic energy stored on large
scales.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will, through two complementary lines of
theoretical investigation, model the dynamical response of the entire system to
the sudden, localized topological change after assuming the change to have
occurred. It is through this large-scale response that the magnetic field will
actually achieve its lower energy state. Energy conservation demands that the
dynamics somehow convert magnetic energy into other forms such as heat or bulk
motion.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will develop novel time-dependent
models, both analytic and numerical, from which it will be possible to answer
the following questions.&lt;br/&gt;_ What fraction of the energy released by
reconnection becomes kinetic energy versus heat?&lt;br/&gt;_ Are Alfven waves
initiated by the reconnection, and if so how much energy do they
contain?&lt;br/&gt;_ How do large-scale dynamics react back on the small
scales?&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic reconnection occurs in a wide variety of magnetized
plasmas including the Earth's magnetosphere (as a substorm), the solar corona
(as a flare), laboratory reactor experiments (as a sawtooth crash) and
astrophysical accretion disks (as a jet). Due to their disparate parameters,
different small-scale processes are probably responsible for the localized
electric field in these different plasmas. Nevertheless, their large-scale
response to small-scale topological change will probably all be very similar,
since they are all described by the same physics at these scales.&lt;br/&gt;All
work will be conducted by Physics graduate students as part of their doctoral
thesis research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE
Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This
award is being funded jointly by the Divisions of Physics and Astronomical
Sciences of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.