* 0903653
* IGERT:  A Graduate Traineeship in Materials for a Sustainable Future
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Paul McEuen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,200,000.00

The development of the materials necessary for a sustainable future is an area
of profound global and scientific importance. This Integrative Graduate
Education and Research Traineeship program (IGERT) combines an interdisciplinary
research experience with a formal education program designed to apply basic
scientific knowledge to real problems in sustainable materials drawn from
industrial interactions. Cornell faculty and student participants are united
from 7 diverse departments of science and engineering and the Johnson School of
Management and will have the opportunity to augment their research efforts with
international collaborators. Intellectual merit includes the development of
materials from renewable resources, including plant products, exploration of
new, high performance materials for energy storage and conversion and the
discovery of new methods for the synthesis and processing of materials with
reduced environmental impact. Educational efforts feature a module-based course
that will introduce students to the principles of sustainable design and the
formidable energy challenges facing our society. Students will also gain
familiarity with business thinking, industrial practices and business
opportunities and challenges related to sustainability. The broader impacts of
this IGERT program include partnerships with two Historically Black
Colleges/Universities and an undergraduate summer research program will address
the issue of underrepresented groups in the materials field. The IGERT program
will also develop a freely available web-based archive of the seminar series on
Materials for a Sustainable Future. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries.