* 0903711
* IGERT:  Biological and Bio-inspired Motion Systems Operating in Complex Environments
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Robert Dudley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,195,091.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program
will train biology and engineering students to learn from natural design - a
process termed biological inspiration. In particular, trainees will discover
principles that underlie how organisms move in complex environments, and learn
to use those principles as inspiration to design human-engineered systems. Four
focus areas for research opportunities include the mechanics of systems that
locomote, their control mechanisms, the structure and function of their
materials, and their evolution. A three-stage training program integrates with
the research focus and is facilitated by a new Berkeley center - CiBER - the
Center for interdisciplinary Biological-inspiration in Education and Research.
Stage 1offers a customized core curriculum to develop a common scientific
language, and to discover opportunities to contribute to and benefit from bio-
and bio-inspired motion systems. Trainees will participate in a new research-
based teaching laboratory where teams of biology and engineering students work
together to make original biomechanical discoveries. This experience transitions
them into Stage 2 where they begin research rotations and international
experiences at leading European institutes guided by a "Bionics" network. In
Stage 3, students learn the application of discovery through entrepreneurship
courses and internships. Developing direct pipelines to a diverse group of
undergraduates will encourage participation of women and underrepresented
groups. Trainees in this IGERT will advance the field of motion science with
research leading to novel inventions that may never have been considered by
engineers such as gecko-inspired hairy adhesives, artificial muscles, new
prostheses, and search-and-rescue robots. By sharing these advances with the
public, non-scientists will see more clearly why we must preserve the diversity
of species and their environments - before their secrets are lost forever. IGERT
is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.