* 0903861
* Magnetic and Magnetoelectric Interactions at Interfaces in Ideal Antiferromagnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Lederman, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 230,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Fundamental research
in magnetic nanostructures has led to devices with new functionality due to the
development of the ability to use the spin of the electron to transmit
information and thus make novel electronic devices (spintronics). In recent
years there has been much interest in using multiferroic materials, which are
simultaneously magnetic and ferroelectric, to further control spintronic devices
with electric fields. Most intrinsic multiferroic materials are oxide insulators
with a weak magnetic-ferroelectric coupling, and therefore there is a need to
study alternative multiferroic systems. Here, BaMF4 (M = transition metal)
multiferroic thin films will be studied. Because it is relatively easy to modify
the magnetic structure of these materials while keeping their crystalline
structure unchanged, the nature of the magnetic-ferroelectric coupling within
the bulk of the film and at the interfaces will be discerned and optimized. In
addition to standard magnetometry and ferroelectric measurements, neutron
scattering will be used to determine the magnetic structure of these
antiferromagnetic and multiferroic materials. Tunnel junctions of these
materials will also be studied in an attempt to perform spectroscopic
measurements of their magnetic and magnetoelectric excitations. This project
will contribute to the effort of maintaining American competititveness in
science and technology fields by participating in educational and outreach
programs at West Virginia University geared towards attracting and retaining
underrepresented minority students at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
These include summer research programs for both undergraduate and graduate
students as well as recruiting outstanding minority graduate students for year-
long fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Magnetic nanostructures have
been the basis of several recent technological innovations that have led to
small, more efficient data storage and electronic devices. Recently, there has
been much interest developing new materials, called multiferroics, that not only
have a strong magnetic response, but also respond to a change in voltage, which
would enable the fabrication of electronic devices with multiple
functionalities; that is, devices that respond to both electronic and magnetic
signals. This project will consist of fabricating multiferroic nanostructures,
based on fluoride compounds rather than the usual oxides, and studying their
magnetic and electronic properties. By optimizing the magnetic response of these
materials to applied voltages, electronic and data storage devices that are
faster and more power efficient than current devices will be developed. This
project will contribute to the effort of maintaining American competititveness
in science and technology fields by participating in educational and outreach
programs at West Virginia University geared towards attracting and retaining
underrepresented minority students at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
These include summer research programs for both undergraduate and graduate
students as well as recruiting outstanding minority graduate students for year-
long fellowships.