* 0903871
* Experimental and Computational Studies of High Energy Density Plasma Streams Ablated from Fine Wires
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Greenly, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE under
contract number (Science report #09ER55048).

Wire-array Z-pinches are presently the highest energy and power pulsed
X-radiation sources available; the Z-pinch geometry can also be used for basic
High Energy Density physics studies. The performance of these pinches depends
fundamentally upon the ablation stream physics. Wire ablation streams will also
be used in geometries other than cylindrical Z-pinches to produce high-beta
(>1), high Mach number plasmas to investigate a variety of basic physical
processes in radiation dominated plasmas with mm-cm scale lengths as well as
shocks and driven magnetic reconnection in high energy density plasma. The
proposed experiments and simulations will investigate a wide range of
configurations that may allow controlled variation of the basic stream
parameters: mass density, velocity, and, especially, advected magnetic field,
current density, and plasma beta. The proposed research on Cornell University's
COBRA Facility includes training of graduate students on a state of the art
pulsed power generator with advanced electro-optical diagnostic systems and
enables undergraduates to work with advanced graduate students and participate
in research using such equipment. As the COBRA Facility is available for use by
outside research groups, participants in the proposed research will be
interacting with researchers from several universities. The proposed project
will also be ideal for inclusion of Cadet-interns from the U.S. Military Academy
(USMA), West Point as part of an informal program that is just getting started
between Cornell's Laboratory of Plasma Studies and the Nuclear Science and
Engineering Research Center at the USMA, Colonel Jeffrey Musk, Director.

The undergraduate participation adds a broader educational impact through the
early-year training of students by introducing them to scientific research as a
possible career path.