* 0903088
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Girls' Education as a Globalized Priority: A Case Study of  Corporate Philanthropic Investment in Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Ananya Roy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ezekiel Kalipeni
* 09/30/2010
* USD 11,848.00

Over the past two decades, a globalized priority for girls' education emerged
within the international development regime. This study examines a new set of
actors operating within this globalized priority: transnational corporations and
their foundations. Employing a case study methodology, this research examines
the following research questions: 1) What is the genesis, development, and
current nature of the globalized priority in girls' education? 2) How are
transnational corporations and their foundations investing in girls' education
in regards to this priority? 3) What are the implications of these investments
for adolescent girls, and also for transnational corporations and their
foundations? Using methods of participant observation, interviews, and archival
research, this study will examine how the investments of a corporate foundation
are constituted through partnerships with non-governmental organizations in
Brazil in an effort to elucidate the foundation's broader practice of investing
in adolescent girls. The research findings, based on ethnographic and discourse
analytic methods, will be situated within a larger constellation of development
discourse and practice in girls' education. The intellectual merit of this
project lies in its contribution to better understanding international
development. The research poses a new set of theoretical questions regarding the
processes of development, globalization, and education. It suggests that
adolescent girls and transnational corporations and their foundations are
significant actors within these processes. It is the first empirical study on
why a diverse set of development actors are making girls' education a globalized
priority, and how transnational corporations and their foundations are emerging
as critical actors within this broad coalition. The research will also
contribute to knowledge of the practices and implications of corporate-sponsored
development and can provide a nuanced understanding of the relationship among a
corporation, its philanthropic arm, and its partnering development
organizations. The proposed study will have two broader impacts within academic,
policy, and practice-oriented communities through its wide dissemination in the
U.S. and Brazil. First, it will influence future policy and practice by
informing the public discourse on the promotion of girls' education for the
purposes of economic development and poverty alleviation, and, second, it will
indicate the strengths and limitations of corporate-sponsored development.