* 0903155
* 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Liquid Crystals; Colby Sawyer College; New London, New Hampshire on Summer 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Peter Collings, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 11/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2009 Gordon Research Conference on
Liquid Crystals (June 14-19, 2009) addresses current issues in liquid crystal
science, applications of liquid crystals, and areas of biology and medicine in
which liquid crystal concepts are important. The coverage of the Conference is
extremely broad, ranging from the latest fundamental theories and experiments
into the nature of liquid crystals to the cutting-edge work on the role liquid
crystals play in biological systems. Discussion topics include the synthesis and
characterization of new liquid crystals, liquid crystal systems containing
nanoparticles of various kinds, self-assembly and molecular aggregation in
liquid crystals, state-of-the-art simulation and modeling, biaxial nematics,
elastomers, liquid crystal ordering and biological function, bio-inspired
materials, and modern uses of liquid crystals in biomedical imaging, photonics,
lasing, electro-optics, and sensors. Invited speakers representing both academia
and industry come from a wide range of disciplines, including biology,
chemistry, engineering, medicine, and physics. This collection of leading
investigators discusses the latest (often unpublished) results within this broad
array of disciplines and explores the most pressing questions still to be
answered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2009 Gordon Research Conference on Liquid Crystals (June 14-19, 2009) addresses
current issues in liquid crystal science, applications of liquid crystals, and
areas of biology and medicine in which liquid crystal concepts are important.
The coverage of the Conference is extremely broad, ranging from the latest
fundamental theories and experiments into the nature of liquid crystals to the
cutting-edge work on the role liquid crystals play in biological systems.
Although there have always been a good number of participants from outside of
the U.S., this biennial conference serves as the only dedicated gathering within
the United States of top scientists and engineers in the field of soft matter
investigating liquid crystals or related systems. Among these participants are
members of the biomedical, nanoscience, and sensor communities, who are applying
liquid crystal concepts and techniques in new ways. Also, significant funds are
earmarked to support the participation of researchers early in their careers and
researchers from traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;