* 0903889
* Large Parallel Cosmic String Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ken Olum, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2012
* USD 60,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Cosmic strings connect fundamental theories of basic physics with observation of
the universe on the largest scales. Cosmic strings are infinitesimally thin or
even fundamental objects of cosmological length. They can arise from symmetry
breaking in field theory or they can be the fundamental strings of string theory
or 1-dimensional "D-branes". They can produce observational signatures in the
cosmic microwave background, in cosmic rays, in ultra-high-energy neutrinos, or
in gravity waves. If cosmic strings are detected, they will provide a window
onto fundamental physics and energies beyond the reach of any accelerator. To
interpret a cosmic string observation or to set limits on cosmic string
properties from non-observation requires a quantitative understanding of the
cosmic string network. In particular, since most cosmic string signatures arise
from string loops, it is vital to know the density, sizes, and shapes of the
loops whose effects might be detected. Because of the highly nonlinear nature of
cosmic string processes, accurate understanding of the string network requires
numerical simulation. This project will develop a new parallel simulation code,
using algorithms adapted to parallel computing, and with more flexibility in
generating initial conditions and analyzing the simulation data than previous
codes. Parallel computing will provide for a simulation volume hundreds, perhaps
a thousand times larger than has been simulated before, and an increase in the
simulated time interval of up to factor of 10. This will allow much more time
for initial condition artifacts to be damped out and for the string network to
assume its final scaling form, from which the important network parameters can
be extracted. The project will have a broader impact through the involvement of
graduate undergraduate students and through opportunities for students from
under-represented groups to participate in research. Its results will be broadly
disseminated through publication in journals and made available to the public on
the World Wide Web. It will benefit society by further connecting studies of the
universe with studies of the fundamental laws of nature.