* 0903266
* Planning Grant for a Midwest Center of Excellence in Wind Energy &amp; Biofuel Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Richard Johnson, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2011
* USD 70,000.00

The project is to begin planning to develop a Midwest Center of Excellence for
Technician Education that will specialize in the training of wind energy and
biofuel plant technicians. The center, beginning with a university and two
partner community colleges, is likely to undertake a wide range of technician
education activities associated with wind turbines and biofuel plants,
including: 1. Improving programs and professional development for educators; 2.
Developing a consortium of community colleges and universities to assess
technician certification needs and career pathways; 3. Recruiting industry
partners who will assist the center in sustainability models, certification
standards, and develop internships and job opportunities for technicians; 4.
Collecting, adapting, and implementing existing proven curricula materials, and
assisting partners in the development of new materials as required; 5.
Partnering with regional economic development agencies to promote the economic
value of a trained technician pool; 6. Leading the implementation and upgrading
of sustainable energy technician programs at many of the 2-year post-secondary
institutions in the Midwest, and developing articulation agreements with select
4-year institutions; and 7. Expanding existing outreach efforts to help recruit
underrepresented students to green energy careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
the planning phase the partners are 1) establishing agreements with academic and
industry partners, 2) developing a sustainability model, 3) defining the
existing resource gap, 4) articulating the role that the center can play in
closing the gap, 5) benchmarking best practices of other ATE Centers, and 6)
identifying potential members of a National Visiting Committee.