* 0903921
* Laser-Driven Collisionless Shocks in the Large Plasma Device
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christoph Niemann, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 08/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. This award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by DoE.

The experimental high-energy laser-capability developed during the last two
years at the Large Plasmas Device (LPD) will be used to create collisionless
shocks in a controlled laboratory setting and study their structure, dissipation
mechanisms, and effect on the particle velocity distribution in great detail. In
addition, the dynamics of large diamagnetic cavities in the presence of an
ambient plasma,will be studied, as well as their coupling to large amplitude
shear Alfvén waves. Recent experiments with an energetic laser-produced plasma
have already compressed the external magnetic field at the edge of a 20 cm large
diamagnetic cavity by more than 50%. Ongoing upgrades to both the laser driver
and the plasma source will extend the experiments to time-scales of the order of
the ion-gyroperiod, providing enough time for a shock to form. Collisionless
shocks are ubiquitous in space and influence energy transport and the particle
distribution throughout the cosmos. These shocks are formed, for example, in
supernova remnants, coronal mass ejections, or planetary bow-shocks, and are a
source of cosmic rays. Unlike a hydrodynamic shock, which dissipates its energy
through binary collisions, a collisionless shock forms in a tenuous plasma where
the energy transfer proceeds through collective electromagnetic effects. The
experiments will be modeled using a parallel, three-dimensional hybrid plasma
code.

The broader impacts of this work are that, with the addition of the large
ambient plasma, these laser-experiments will fill an important gap that has
limited the relevance of previous laser laboratory astrophysics experiments in
vacuum. This project will also help to establish laser-laboratory astrophysics
as an important area of research. In addition, the synergism between basic
plasma science and high-energy density physics will lead to new findings
important to a number of scientific disciplines. It is envisioned that a new
generation of researchers will be trained who will acquire a solid background in
both fields.

The additional funding from NSF will permit increased student involvement, in
this case specifically an undergraduate student, in this research.