* 0903804
* Beyond the 2010 Initiative: Partnerships for Competitiveness
* O/D,EPS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* James Rice, South Dakota State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Audrey Levine
* 07/31/2014
* USD 20,000,000.00

Proposal Title: Beyond the 2010 Initiative: Partnerships for Competitiveness

Institution: South Dakota State University

Energy generation and conversion are critical issues at the core of this major
project involving nine institutions in South Dakota: South Dakota State (lead),
Augustana, Black Hills, Dakota State, Oglala Lakota, Sinte Gleska, Sisseton
Wahpeton, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, and the University of
South Dakota (USD) Main Campus. The researchers will create new devices called
Photo-Active Nanoscale Systems (PANS). PANS research focuses on photovoltaic and
solar energy, directwrite electronics, and the use of nanostructured materials
for converting solar energy into chemical fuels. The project involves a series
of Grand Opportunities, each addressing research questions through a
multidisciplinary approach. These include: Cost Effective Solar Cells; New
Generation Luminescent Solar Concentrators (LSC) based on Metal-Surface
Enhancement; Reconfigurable Antennas on Flexible Substrates-Broadband Multilayer
Filters; Upconverter Based Cost-effective High Efficiency Solar Cells; Novel
Tandem Polymer Photovoltaics using Printing or Roll-to-Roll Processing;
Fabrications of Electrodes for Next Generation Solar Cells; and Conversion of
Solar Energy into Chemical Fuels using Nanostructured Materials

Intellectual Merit The project addresses the development of novel photoactive
materials, including investigations at the atomic level as well as applications
of these materials. Modeling, synthesis and fabrication of novel composites will
result in solar cell materials designed for performance, with a view to
economics as well. Shape and size of the composites will be optimized along with
tailored chemical composition by working at the nanoscale. Biomedical
applications such as photoactive therapies will be addressed as well.

Broader Impacts Workforce development is a primary objective of South Dakota and
this project. An innovative partnership will facilitate the faculty at Tribal
Colleges and Universities (TCUs) in pursuing terminal degrees. The RII project
will support the planning for a state-wide initiative for middle school, Science
in the Middle. This initiative will provide teacher professional development to
establish a cohort of qualified master science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) teachers. Connections will be established with the Deep
Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL), including a virtual
DUSEL (vDUSEL), which will provide outreach and education accessible to K-12
students and the community.