* 0903797
* Energy Transfer in Collisionless Astrophysical Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chuang Ren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 465,608.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on two frontiers
of plasma physics where particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations can help elucidate
underlying principles of energy transfer in plasmas: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Motivated by
collisionless accretion disks, we will study whether a faster-than-Coulomb
energy transfer between ions and electrons can occur in a two-temperature plasma
with an anisotropic ion temperature much higher than the electron temperature.
Electron-proton coupling via waves generated by bulk sheared flows, Weibel, two-
stream, and other collisionless MHD instabilities will be considered. The
presence or absence of a faster-than-Columb coupling will place rigorous
constraints on the viability of two-temperature accretion flows such as
advection dominated accretion flows as a paradigm for the radiatively
inefficient accretion flows of some galactic nuclei, and states of X-ray
binaries. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Motivated by the fundamental role of the current-driven
Weibel-type instabilities in both astrophysically motivated shocks and laser-
driven shocks, researchers will study and compare the formation and magnetic
field generation in both types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates will be
involved in the data analysis and visualization. Support for an ongoing
undergraduate radio show at the University of Rochester will be expanded. The
show highlights a few science and engineering developments biweekly for a short,
but repeated 3-4 minute broadcasts to the Rochester area. A course on PIC
simulations is being developed at UR for graduate and undergraduate students
from physics, astrophysics, and engineering. Lectures on PIC will also be given
at the Summer Schools organized by the UR DOE Fusion Science Center. This
project will generate new teaching materials to demonstrate how PIC simulations
can be applied to new research areas. The project will also train graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers with interdisciplinary expertise in plasma
physics, astrophysics, and PIC simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and Engineering joint
solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the Divisions of
Physics and Astronomical Sciences of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;