* 0903335
* SNO+ and DArTPC Collaboration Activities in Underground Particle Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Dan Durben, Black Hills State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2014
* USD 444,000.00

This award addresses two world-class experiments in areas identified as high
priority questions in fundamental physics, one in search of neutrinoless double
beta decay and one in search of dark matter. Firstly, this award provides
support for the group's involvement in the SNO+ Collaboration. SNO+ is the
conversion of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory detector, a heavy water Cherenkov
detector located 6800 feet underground in a working nickel mine near Sudbury,
Ontario, Canada, into a new experiment by replacing the heavy water in the
acrylic vessel with linear alkylbenzene, a liquid scintillator. This will yield
enhanced sensitivity at lower energies enabling the SNO+ experiment to address
several interesting scientific questions. By adding the double beta decay
emitter 150-Nd to the liquid scintillator, SNO+ has the potential to lead the
field of neutrinoless double beta decay experiments. Secondly, this award
provides funds for the group to build a trace gas analyzer based on cavity ring-
down spectroscopy technology.

The broader impact of the program includes providing opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students from Idaho and South Dakota, including
under-represented Native American students, to participate in world-class
international experiments in the exciting setting of underground particle
physics. Working with BHSU's Center for the Advancement of Math and Science
Education and the Education and Outreach arm of the Sanford Lab, education and
outreach activities are planned which will involve undergraduate students as
well as area high school students and their teachers.