* 0903964
* Particle Acceleration during Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rachel Walker-Kulzick
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,000.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process underlying important phenomena in
nature, including solar flares, magnetospheric substorms and disruptions in
laboratory fusion experiments. Classical resistivity is not adequate to explain
the observed energization of particles during reconnection events. An important
recent discovery is that for a given set of plasma parameters, reconnection can
proceed in two distinct modes: a slow mode known as Sweet-Parker reconnection,
and a fast mode that involves electric and magnetic fields produced by the Hall
effect. The catastrophic transition between these two modes can explain the
sudden onset of fast reconnection in resistive systems such as the solar corona
and laboratory reconnection experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine the structure of the reconnection region near the magnetic x-line and
determine how the structure is related to the rate of magnetic reconnection. It
will focus on the development of a new model of particle heating in which
electrons circulating in contracting magnetic islands undergo Fermi-like
acceleration. The model will link the energy gain by electrons to the magnetic
energy released during reconnection. Ions, whose thermal speeds are typically
comparable to or much smaller than the Alfven speed, are too slow to undergo
Fermi reflection and some other process must be invoked to explain their
energization. This project will explore a seed mechanism in which super-Alfvenic
ions entering in reconnection exhausts act like pickup particles and gain a
thermal energy equal to the exhaust velocity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic
particle, Hall magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) and test particle simulations will be
used to address the key issues related to electron and ion acceleration during
reconnection. Collaborations will be continued with scientists working on
laboratory reconnection experiments and with satellite data to benchmark the
theoretical predictions with observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploration
of the dynamics of reconnection and particularly the development of a predictive
capability for energetic particle spectra has broad importance for assessing
both the safety of astronauts and our country's space-based technological
assets. The active involvement of undergraduate students in research under this
program and support for female graduate students will further the educational
goals of NSF.