* 0903556
* Multi-Dimensional Simulations of Double Layers, Ion Phase Space Holes, and Ion Acoustic Solutions Observed in the Magnetosphere and Ionosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Main, John Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 74,521.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Localized bipolar electric field pulses have been observed
by many satellite missions throughout Earth's plasma environment including the
auroral ionosphere, regions of the magnetosphere (e.g., the cusp, the
magnetosheath, and the magnetotail), and in the solar wind. The research effort
proposed here will address the structure and evolution of ion holes,double
layers, and ion acoustic solitons in plasma conditions relevant to the auroral
upward current region. Using a multidimensional particle-in-cell code, The PI
will address some long-standing questions regarding the stability of oblique
double layers in a magnetic field in multiple phase space dimensions, including
an investigation of how perpendicular ion heating affects the evolution of the
double layer and whether a 2D double layer is quasi-stable. Finally, the
evolution of ion holes and ion acoustic solitons will be studied in relation to
the double layer evolution. The research opportunities presented in this
proposal will be accessible to math and science undergraduate students at John
Brown University (JBU). These opportunities will allow students to engage in
world class research, attend national conferences and interact with researchers
at national laboratories, larger research universities, and those in industry.
Furthermore, this research provides a bridge between JBU, a liberal arts
university devoted primarily to undergraduate education, and the University of
Colorado, Boulder through the PIs collaborators. Finally, the PIC code that is
developed as a results of this research will have a broader impact since the PI
will use the code to solve problems related to basic electrodynamics and
incorporate these results into some of the physics courses at JBU.