* 0903715
* IGERT: Nanobiosensors, Nanomaterials, and Microfluidics
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Henry White, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Tankersley
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,000,000.00

The development of ultra-sensitive biological and chemical sensors is one of the
grand scientific, engineering, and educational challenges of the 21st century.
Under the broad heading of NanoBioSensors (NBS), this Integrative Graduate
Education and Traineeship (IGERT) program will address these challenges through
an innovative integration of materials for the recognition of target pathogens
using sensor platforms that exploit breakthroughs in nanomaterials,
miniaturization, sample collection and preparation strategies, and signal
detection. It will focus on the development of advanced systems for the rapid,
ultra-sensitive detection of pathogens responsible for disease as well as those
central to food safety and security and the environment. This program will be
strongly embedded in the new, statewide USTAR (Utah Science, Technology, and
Research) initiative focused on advancing research and development in NBS,
nanomaterials, and biodiagnostic devices. The next generation of research
leaders in these areas will require high levels of training in several
traditional science and engineering disciplines. This IGERT is designed to
lessen longstanding boundaries separating these fields, and establish or expand
collaborative ventures in ultra-high sensitivity detection, molecular
recognition, surface characterization, interfacial reactivity, micro- and nano-
fabrication, and microfluidics. These experiences will be augmented by
internships as well as instruction in ethics, creativity, communication,
teamwork, and entrepreneurship, all of which play an increasingly vital role in
the rapidly evolving scientific and business environments. A diverse group of
trainees will be aggressively recruited and actively mentored. IGERT is an NSF-
wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists
and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen
discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;