* 0903668
* IGERT - An Integrated Program on Development and Inequality in the Global South
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Andrew Foster, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 3,130,872.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project
supports interdisciplinary training for doctoral students in anthropology,
economics, political science, and sociology at Brown University to study
development and inequality in the global south. Scholars and policymakers have
become increasingly concerned about the causes and consequences of economic,
social, and political inequality. While a large amount of research has been
devoted to the topic in the United States and Europe, much less progress has
been made in developing countries - where the problems are much more severe. To
help deal with this issue, the IGERT project combines advanced measurement and
analytical techniques with grounded understanding of local contexts in the
developing world within a framework that integrates faculty, graduate students,
and international collaborators. On campus, training will include
interdisciplinary course requirements, participation in research community
activities, and active faculty mentoring. Students will also spend two summers
in a developing country, the first as apprentices in an ongoing faculty project,
and the second as independent researchers collecting data for their
dissertations. Broader impacts will be of several types. First, an innovative
training program will be developed. Second, new data will be collected and new
analytical approaches designed for understanding and mitigating inequality in
the developing world; the findings will be widely disseminated both to academics
and policy-makers. Third, the scholarly community will be strengthened. In the
United States, underrepresented groups will be incorporated into the project; in
the developing world, ties with collaborating institutions will be
institutionalized and the capacity of their younger researchers will be
increased. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.