* 0903261
* Advanced Industrial Integrated Technology (AIIT) Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Daniel Claiborne, U of Kentucky Madisonville Community College
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 06/30/2013
* USD 575,681.00

The project is working to increase the number of multi-skilled maintenance
technicians using an Advanced Industrial Integrated Technology (AIIT)
curriculum. The curriculum integrates content from different technical areas
within courses in order to align with the way work is actually performed in a
modern "integrated systems" manufacturing environment. The investigators are: 1)
completing the modularization of AIIT courses using spiral and authentic
assessment instructional design principles; 2) designing effective on-line
delivery of those courses using research-based e-learning principles and best
practices; 3) adapting SCATE ATE Center's curriculum materials to develop a high
school technology gateway course to recruit neglected majority students; 4)
developing effective on-line and traditional academic support services to ensure
academic success; and 5) creating a career pathway from high school, to
associate degree, to baccalaureate degree in a high demand technical occupation.
The investigators are partnering with two four-year schools, the local school
district, the Kentucky Community and Technical College System (KCTCS), the SCATE
ATE Center, the Automotive Manufacturing Technical Education Collaborative
(AMTEC), and local industry representatives. The evaluation effort, under the
direction of an independent evaluator, is monitoring progress toward the
project's objectives and is examining the impact of the program on enrollment,
employment opportunities, student competence in integrated systems problem
solving and in critical thinking skills, and the students' use of the
instructional material. The project team is disseminating their instructional
material and results through established mechanisms in the KCTCS and AMTEC and
through presentation at national conferences on technology education. Broader
impacts include the extensive dissemination of the materials. the connection to
secondary schools, to non-traditional students, and to dislocated and low-income
workers.