* 0903685
* IGERT: Nanostructured Solar Cells: Materials, Processes and Devices
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Ranjit Koodali, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 08/31/2016
* USD 3,030,253.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project
develops a novel, collaborative multidisciplinary program involving The
University of South Dakota, South Dakota State University, The South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology, and the National Center for Photovoltaics at the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Participating students will work
toward the development of the next generation of solar energy devices, based on
a broad background of academic training in chemistry, materials engineering, and
electrical engineering. Student research opportunities include extended research
rotations among the collaborating institutions and internships at NREL and in
the solar energy industry. The goal of this program is to prepare students for
leadership roles in education, research and development, and science-policy
formulation. Reflecting this goal, the curriculum will include formal training
in research ethics, public communication, and educational outreach. The South
Dakota IGERT will produce a technical workforce in the critically important area
of renewable energy and develop science leaders who are broadly trained within a
culture of solving large-scale problems through an interdisciplinary,
collaborative approach. This IGERT will recruit and retain students in groups
underrepresented in science and engineering through interactions with a site for
Research Experiences for Undergraduates, interactions with the Northern Plains
Undergraduate Research Center, and though a partnership with Sinte Gleska
University. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.