* 0903456
* MCDA: Collaborative Research: A Multi-Element and Multi-Objective Optimization Approach for Allocating tasks to Multi-Core Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ishfaq Ahmad, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 07/31/2012
* USD 170,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to design innovative algorithms and
tools for energy-aware scheduling and mapping of tasks onto homogeneous and
heterogeneous multi-core processor (HeMP) architectures. The research proposes
to develop a new theoretical and experimental framework, called multi-element
and multi-objective (MEMO) optimization, that will simultaneously and flexibly
optimize the goals of energy minimization and performance maximization while
taking into account constraints due to multiple architectural elements such as
cores and caches of current and emerging multi-core processors. The project will
develop CorePac, a toolkit that will provide a flexible and friendly environment
to schedule task-parallel applications on HeMPs under various performance/energy
trade-offs and demonstrate the usefulness of the algorithms and CorePac.
Benchmarking of the algorithms will be conducted using a diverse suite of
scientific, multimedia, and bioinformatics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its production of new algorithms and
software toolkit, this work will have a direct and immediate impact on a number
of communities. At the collaborating institutions, this project will have an
educational impact by involving undergraduate and graduate students. This
situation also presents excellent opportunities for interaction with
postdoctoral researchers as well as with colleagues in academic, government and
industry research labs. The CorePac software toolkit will be the basis for
subsequent development of production quality software for energy-performance
tradeoffs. Developing means to manage energy consumption in computers is
imperative from both environmental and economical perspectives.