* 0903806
* Phase VI: Climate Change and Energy: Basic Science, Impacts, and Mitigation
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2017
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2017
* USD 23,000,000.00

Proposal Title: Phase VI: Climate Change and Energy: Basic Science, Impacts,
and Mitigation Science Initiative

Institution: University of Kansas Center for Research Inc. The project deals
with two challenging problems, the accelerating impacts of global climate change
and the pressing need for renewable energy sources. The impact of global climate
change is critically important for grasslands, which provide food, fiber, and
environmental services to human societies. The challenge of renewable energy
relates closely to and strongly impacts the first challenge. Understanding these
two interrelated phenomena and their consequences is critical to managing
natural resources, growing economies, enhancing human health, and improving the
quality of life. This proposal is a multi-institutional, multi-sector
partnership. It links four universities in the State of Kansas: Kansas State
University (KSU), University of Kansas (KU), Wichita State University (WSU), and
Haskell Indian Nations University; two economic growth organizations: Kansas
Technology Enterprise Corporation (KTEC) and the Kansas Bioscience Authority
(KBA); four Kansas-based companies: Abengoa Bioenergy, MGP Ingredients, White
Energy, and Nanoscale; and two companies outside of Kansas: ADM (IL) and
Netcrystals (CA). Intellectual Merit. Four Target areas are described by the
Basic Science working group. Social scientists will model climate variables and
human variables. Target 1 addressed the climate variables, including evaluating
the effect of human land cover change on the climate system. Target 2 addressed
the impact emanating from crop decisions made by farmers. Information provided
in Targets 1 and 2 leads to the natural scientists? evaluation of an
agricultural product closely tied to climate issues, biomass, and its conversion
to biofuels, and the basic science fundamentals of solar energy conversion by
photosynthesis and manmade technologies, Targets 3 and 4. The Impacts Working
Group will assess the impacts of climate changes on farmlands in Kansas,
including indigenous farmlands, a less studied area. A life cycle analysis will
be used to examine how both biofuels and solar energy-derived electricity can be
interfaced or leveraged to achieve a greater balance of alternative energy
sources. In the Mitigation Working Group, the foundations laid by the other two
Working Groups will provide for more efficient, next-level answers to climate
and energy issues. Broader Impacts. The initial focus of the study is pertinent
to both the economic as well as the science and technology goals of the State of
Kansas, the outputs and outcomes of these studies are expected to be of interest
globally: the climate modeling and assessment linked with the improved
cyberinfrastructure development, the new photovoltaic devices for generation of
electricity, and the improved engineering technology for the efficient
utilization of biomass. The project will also broaden the nation?s science and
technology workforce by educating young aspiring scientists and by training them
to be tomorrow?s scientists and engineers. As part of the education initiatives,
underrepresented groups comprise a significant part of the program, including
the underprivileged students of the McNair program and the Native American
students and tribal college faculty of the Pathways program. One goal of the
project is to establish the State of Kansas as a leader and a preeminent
international center for knowledge and technology in global climate change and
renewable energy.