* 0903794
* Gyrokinetic Electron and Fully Kinetic Ion Particle Simulation of Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Yu Lin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This research continues investigation of 2-D and 3-D current sheet instabilities
with a finite guide field, as in reality, and further extends and validates a
gyrokinetic electon and fully kinetic ion model for the magnetic reconnection
process. Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process in laboratory as well
space plasmas, attributed to be the underlying physical mechanism for major or
minor disruptions of tokamak plasmas. The following specific science questions
will be answered: (1) What are the linear eigenmode structure and spectral
properties of instabilities generated in current sheet with various guide
fields. (2) What are the properties of nonlinear instabilities and their roles
in the anomalous resistivity in current sheet. How is the reconnection triggered
locally in the presence of the guide field. (3) How does the reconnection
evolve, and what is the reconnection rate in a large system, 2-D for now, that
allows the presence of and interaction between multiple magnetic islands? Can
the basic solutions of the Riemann problem, for structure of quasi-steady
reconnection, be reached in system with various sizes and under various boundary
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The innovative and advanced simulation tools developed for
this research will have a much broader application to simulations of various
nonlinear waves and wave-particle interaction in laboratory plasmas and physics
of solar flares and transport in the magnetosphere. Since magnetic reconnection
is one of the fundamental processes in magnetically confined plasmas, this
research will certainly have an impact on research of fusion interest, where
kinetic analyses of transport processes due to electromagnetic fluctuations in
low-collisionality conditions is one of the challenging problems.&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted to the NSF-DoE Partnership in Plasma Science and
Engineering joint solicitation 08-589. This award is being funded jointly by the
Division of Physics of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and by
Atmospheric Sciences Division of the Geosciences Directorate