* 0903956
* Universal Quantum Few-Body Codes for Research and Education
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Michael Cavagnero, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Public software and an appropriate user-friendly interface
will be developed and released for performing accurate quantum mechanical
calculations of fundamental three-body processes. This new computational tool
will permit scientists from many different fields to study reactions and
internal structure of quantum three-body systems important to molecular,
chemical, and nuclear physics on the basis of user-provided interactions. The
software will use existing effective and reliable codes for solving Faddeev
equations in configuration space. The computational procedure has been carefully
tested in calculations of extremely sensitive helium-3 bound states, and of
helium on helium-2 scattering processes, with excellent performance. It is fast,
straightforward and does not involve manual fine-tuning, in contrast to other
methods.

Several emerging areas of physics and astronomy are dependent on reliable and
accurate theoretical models of few-body interactions. Few-body processes play a
central role in myriad areas of physics and astronomy, including
telecommunications, atmospheric, environmental and energy sciences. Examples of
recent importance include collective phenomena in dilute, ultra-cold atomic
gases, structural properties of van der Waals clusters, and precision
measurements of trapped ensembles of atoms or molecules. The software and
interface resulting from this research will also provide an ideal learning
environment for undergraduate and graduate students studying the implications of
the rules of quantum mechanics for both real and model systems. Accordingly, it
will contribute to the education of both students and researchers in a variety
of areas of modern science.