* 0903016
* Collaborative Research: A high-resolution middle Pleistocene paleoclimate record from the Valles Caldera, New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* R. Scott Anderson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 201,932.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a collaborative
project between the University of New Mexico, Northern Arizona University and
the University of Minnesota, Duluth which will conduct detailed analyses of a
unique 82-m long lacustrine sediment core (VC-3) from the Valles Caldera, in
northern New Mexico. This core represents a critical time interval in the past
that is similar to the modern. As such, an understanding of climatic changes
observed in the core will lead to the most detailed assessment of expected
future climate variability in the southwest ever
recorded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In May 2004, the GLAD5
drilling project recovered an 82-m deep lacustrine sediment core from the Valles
Caldera, New Mexico. Ar-Ar age estimates from a tephra near the base of the core
(552Â±3 ka), two distinct glacial terminations (VI and V) in multiple proxies,
and the identification of a two geomagnetic polarity "events", correlated to
globally recognized events (14a; and 11a) constrain these lake sediments to the
middle Pleistocene (MIS 14 to MIS 10). Initial work by this group shows an
intriguing relationship between temperature and hydroclimate during the two long
interglacials present in the core (MIS 11 and MIS 13). Peak interglacial
temperatures (MBT proxy, pollen) correlate well with extended dry periods in the
core (mudcrack intervals). This is consistent with recent predictions of
extended drought in SW North America in response to global warming by a marked
reduction in winter precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;To better understand this critical
relationship, the team will conduct more detailed sampling of the VC-3 core at
intervals of ~10 cm or less to analyze for temperature (MBT proxy, pollen), lake
productivity (organic carbon, Si/Ti ratios, biogenic silica), hydroclimate
(del-18O of diatom silica, core sedimentologic characteristics, and pollen and
charcoal). Specifically, they will test the hypothesis that during long
interglacials, warming leads to extended dry climates with reduced winter
frontal precipitation. Additional analyses to be conducted include remanence and
rock magnetic properties, major and minor element geochemistry, XRD, XRF scanner
analyses, carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes and C/N ratios, and plant
macrofossils, all of which will aid in refining paleoclimate proxies. In
conjunction with this work, LANL collaborators will conduct compound specific
del-D analyses and obtain U&amp;#8208;series dates to improve the chronology at
no cost to NSF. Results from this work will shed light on two important
paleoclimate questions: the relationship between peak interglacial temperatures
and extended dry conditions, and the nature of orbital- to millennial-scale
climate change during the middle Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This study will further our understanding about the nature of climate
change in southwestern North America and its impact on montane ecosystems. This
project involves collaborations between four research institutions, UNM, NAU,
UMD, and Los Alamos National Lab. Both graduate students and faculty will
benefit from interactions with the other institutions and the different
expertise that collaborators at each institution bring to bear on the project.
The results of this study will be available to the general public using displays
and outreach programs through the newly created Valles Caldera National
Preserve. This information will include not only the timing of lakes forming in
the Valles Caldera and the paleoclimatic records derived from them, but also
information about the materials preserved at depth in the Valles Caldera and the
nature of the interactions between volcanic processes in the caldera and
surficial processes. The project will involve education and training of several
graduate students at UNM, NAU and UMD. UNM graduate students include a female
Hispanic pursuing a PhD and another female graduate student. The results of this
study will be integrated into several courses offered at the participating
institutions.