* 0903867
* 2009 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (U.S., Japan-America, and German-American)
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2010
* USD 110,000.00

Proposal: EFRI-0903867&lt;br/&gt;PI: Janet Hunziker &lt;br/&gt;Organization:
National Academy of Engineering &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award partially
supports a series of three national and international Frontiers of Engineering
(FOE) Symposia by the National Academy of Engineering: German-American FOE
(April 23-25, 2009, in Potsdam, Germany), U.S. FOE (September 8-10, 2009, in
Irvine, CA), and Japan-America FOE (November 9-11, 2009, in Irvine, CA). Each
symposium focuses on four topical areas. Topics for 2009 include engineering
tools for scientific discovery, health informatics and health care delivery
systems, frontier optical micro and nano devices and materials, resilient and
sustainable infrastructures, breakthrough technologies in brain science,
modeling global climate change, novel materials for industrial applications,
state-of-the-art technologies for knowledge management, complex systems design
and control, renewable energy, biosystems engineering, and materials for extreme
environments. Between 60 and 100 outstanding, early-career scientists and
engineers participate in each symposium. Sessions consist of presentations by
speakers on leading edge research, emerging technologies, and opportunities for
collaboration across science and engineering fields. The symposia foster
interdisciplinary and international collaborations and serve as a reference
point for many of the emerging frontiers in research and innovation in the U.S.
Presentations from the U.S. FOE seminar will be posted on the NAE FOE web site.