* 0903218
* Planning Grant for a Regional Cyber Education Center: Protecting the Future of Cyber: technological education for an expanding workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* GB Cazes, Cyber Innovation Center
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2011
* USD 69,196.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant for a Regional
Cyber Education Center is focusing on the 150 mile region surrounding Bossier
City, Louisiana. The project is lead by the Cyber Innovation Center (CIC) of
Bossier City and Bossier Parish Community College (BPCC) and is supported by a
consortium of community colleges, 4-year universities, a local high school,
industry, and government from northwest Louisiana and east Texas. The goals
include expanding partnerships with regional academic institutions, industry and
government; forging pathways for students from high schools through community
colleges to 4-year institutions; and developing degree programs to align with
professional certifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary team is
working with academic institutions, private industry, and existing ATE Centers
to foster a diverse technological workforce in the Arkansas-Louisiana-Texas
region. The PIs are using innovative approaches to technician education with
substantial involvement of industry and with open dialogue among community
stakeholders. One of the immediate outcomes of this stage of the project is a
new Cyber Security course developed in collaboration with existing ATE Centers
that is responsive to industry needs and approved by a multidisciplinary 12
person Advisory Board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing a
recruitment and retention plan that addresses methods of supporting diversity of
applicants enrolling in technological education and the participation of
minority and under served populations in programming. The PIs are collaborating
with industry representatives and develop a plan for internship programs for
secondary and post-secondary school students pursuing STEM related disciplines.