* 0903619
* The First Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals, May 17, 2009 Tempe, AZ
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,07/31/2009
* Ming Xu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2009
* USD 37,886.00

0903619&lt;br/&gt;B. Allenby&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "The First Symposium on
Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals" is designed and organized by young
professionals (e.g., graduate students and post-doctoral researchers), including
members of the Student Chapter of the International Society for Industrial
Ecology (ISIE). The focus of the symposium is research and application in the
area of Industrial Ecology, emphasizing sustainability. The symposium, to be
held at Arizona State University on May 17, 2009, will immediately precede the
joint international conference at the same site for the IEEE International
Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST ' 09, formally the annual
International Symposium on Electronics and the Environment) and the annual
International Symposium on Technology and Society (ISTAS ' 09). Both ISSST ' 09
and ISTAS ' 09 are closely related to industrial ecology. The primary goal of
the symposium for young professionals is to provide an opportunity for them to
present ongoing research, receive constructive feedback, and network with senior
professionals in the field. Additionally, the event will enable young
professional in the U.S. to establish a national network of young industrial
ecology researchers for ongoing exchange and future collaborations. Research
foci will include Material and Substance Flow Analysis (MFA/SFA), Life Cycle
Assessment and Management (LCA/LCM), design for the environment, resource
productivity, energy efficiency, and industrial symbiosis. The award of travel
funds and accommodation subsidy will enable a number of young professionals,
including women and minorities, to attend the symposium when they otherwise
would be unable to do so. For this event, the faculty PI is Braden Allenby
(Arizona State University [ASU] and Immediate Past President, ISIE), and the
faculty co-PIs are Roland Geyer (University of California, Santa Barbara) and
Eric Williams (ASU). Additionally, Prof. Clinton Andrews (Rutgers U.) serves on
the Technical Committee for the symposium.