* 0903571
* Collaborative Research: Human Resources for Computational High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Carleton DeTar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This is a group project in computational high energy physics
being carried out by physicsts at the University of Arizona, University of
California, Santa Barbara, University of Utah, and the American Physical
Society. Postdoctoral research associates are trained in software development
and algorithms needed to effectively use the teraflop and even petaflop scale
computers that are now or will be made available to working scientists. The very
large-scale numerical calculations that are required are widely recognized as
one of the grand challenges of computational science. Specifically, the
following new initiatives will be launched: (1) a new, highly improved algorithm
for treating light quarks, which will significantly improve the precision of
these calculations, (2) a new, accurate determination of the strange quark mass,
(3) the development of an improved algorithm for treating heavy quarks, and (4)
a high-precision determination of the energy levels of bound states of a charm
quark and an anticharm quark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
fundamental questions in high energy and nuclear physics, such as finding
fundamental parameters like the masses of the quarks, or the behavior of strong
interactions at extreme temperatures such as those found in heavy ion collisons
or in the very early universe. This work is directly related to major
experimental programs in high energy and nuclear physics including RHIC at
Brookhaven, experiments at Jefferson Laboratory, and at the large hadron
collider. The codes developed by this program are publicly available and are
used by several other groups worldwide. Some of the codes and algorithms
developed, such as those for solving very large systems of equations, may be
applied in other large scientific simulations. Postdoctoral research associates
in this project develop skills in large-scale massively parallel computations
and state-of-the-art statistical analysis of data.