* 0903549
* Architectures for Highly-Efficient 1000+ Core Chips for Compute and Data-Intensive Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Bevan Baas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 317,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many emerging and future electronics
applications require large amounts of digital signal processing, and operate
with very limited power budgets. Examples include: many types of wireless
communications, medical imaging such as ultrasound, sensor networks, and
portable multimedia devices. A very promising solution for the processing of
these workloads is a single-chip platform containing one thousand or more simple
and highly-efficient programmable processors. The goals of this project are to:
develop architectural hardware concepts and software tools that enable high-
performance and energy-efficient computational platforms, introduce results into
several courses at UC Davis, and make results and tools widely and easily
available to other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project
goals will be achieved by exploring: 1) novel inter-processor connection
topologies and processor shapes, 2) new algorithms for mapping large collections
of software tasks onto processor arrays, 3) specialized hardware processors for
common tasks, and 4) architectures for efficient shared and configurable
memories. The PIs are active in several campus-wide and national organizations
that work to attract and retain members of under-represented groups to engage in
research and complete graduate degrees in science and engineering. Research
effort and results will be instrumental in the cross-disciplinary training of
future scientists and engineers in the design of massive processing arrays.