* 0903420
* Polynomial Mappings and Related Matters
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Zieve, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 159,799.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate several
aspects of polynomial mappings and&lt;br/&gt;related matters. One topic involves
orbits of complex polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;The proposer will study when the
cartesian product of finitely many such&lt;br/&gt;orbits has infinitely many
points in common with an algebraic subvariety of&lt;br/&gt;affine space. This is
a dynamical analogue of the Mordell--Lang conjecture&lt;br/&gt;about
intersections of subgroups and subvarieties of group
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;Another topic is to determine the polynomials over a
field&lt;br/&gt;of positive characteristic inducing mappings with certain
properties;&lt;br/&gt;these properties can be recorded in the monodromy group of
the polynomial,&lt;br/&gt;so the problem is to determine polynomials with
prescribed monodromy group.&lt;br/&gt;Via a splitting field construction,
polynomials with unusual monodromy groups&lt;br/&gt;give rise to curves with
large automorphism group. Such polynomials could&lt;br/&gt;thus be classified if
one could classify curves with large automorphism&lt;br/&gt;group over an
algebraically closed field of positive characteristic, which&lt;br/&gt;is the
next topic the PI will study. A fourth topic is the&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and
algorithmic analysis of the problem of computing the intersection&lt;br/&gt;of
two subfields of the field of rational functions, along with
generalizations&lt;br/&gt;to mappings between curves. A final topic addresses
connections between&lt;br/&gt;discrete mathematics and algebraic geometry, for
instance via connecting certain&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial objects (Kloosterman
sums) with parameter spaces (Shimura curves).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;The classical topic of dynamical systems
studies the orbit of&lt;br/&gt;a number under a polynomial,&lt;br/&gt;which is
the collection of numbers obtained by repeatedly applying&lt;br/&gt;the
polynomial to the number. For instance, the orbit of the number
1&lt;br/&gt;under the polynomial f(x)=3x+1 is 1, 4, 13, 40, and so
on.&lt;br/&gt;One question is when one such orbit can contain infinitely many
numbers&lt;br/&gt;whose square is in an orbit of another polynomial. More
generally, the&lt;br/&gt;PI will study when there is a polynomial relationship
between infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many points in one orbit and infinitely many in
another. The proposer&lt;br/&gt;intends to determine all examples of this
phenomenon by proving new&lt;br/&gt;results about certain types of identities of
the form a(b(x))=c(d(x)),&lt;br/&gt;where a, b, c and d are rational functions
(i.e., ratios of polynomials).&lt;br/&gt;