* 0903652
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement :Influences of Materials Properties and Biomechanics on Stone Tool Production
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Erin Williams, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,984.00

In contrast to their great ape relatives, humans have spread from their original
home in a limited region of Africa to occupy and even dominate almost all
terrestrial habitats. Their success has in part been attributed to the use of,
and dependence on, technology of which stone tools represent the earliest
evidence. The form of stone tools, together with data on their use and
manufacture (knapping), also provide a long record of human cognitive
development. Since the early period of tool production corresponds to major
changes in the morphology of the hand, wrist and arm, researchers have suggested
that increasing use of stone tools played a role in shaping modern human upper
limb anatomy. The fracture mechanics involved in producing stone tools in
different raw materials and the biomechanics of the upper limb during stone tool
production, however, are not well understood. The interactive relationship of
fracture mechanics and upper limb morphology on the resulting stone tool is also
unclear. This project addresses these issues from an interdisciplinary
perspective that integrates lithic analysis with experiments in fracture
mechanics and biomechanics. Two main hypotheses will be tested: 1.) magnitude
and direction of knapping forces required to produce specific flake morphologies
can be predicted from raw material properties (i.e., toughness) and core shape,
and, 2.) evolved upper limb morphology in Homo plays a key role in efficient
stone tool production.&lt;br/&gt; The research design involves fracture
mechanics experiments on relevant raw materials, followed by a two phase
analysis of knapping motions using a digital motion analysis system to study
upper limb motion patterns and forces acting across the hand and wrist. The
motion analysis study will involve ten experienced knappers replicating stone
flakes and tools in two different raw materials from four different successive
tool traditions (Oldowan, Acheulian, Levallois and Middle Stone Age). The two
phases will involve the same tasks but in the second phase the knappers' wrists
will be restrained to ~30Â° of anterior-posterior motion to simulate the
primitive condition found in African apes and early hominins. Flakes and tools
from the two phases will be compared and analyzed for the accuracy and
efficiency of motions during the natural vs. the restrained condition. The goal
of this study is to determine how fundamental variables involved in stone tool
production (material toughness, fracture behavior, core shape and upper limb
kinematics) interact to determine flake morphology, knapping accuracy, and
energetic efficiency. The study will provide new insights into the advent and
development of stone tool production and the evolution of the human upper limb.
This in turn has significant clinical implications for understanding upper limb
joint motions, variations in morphology, and the impact of injuries and
degenerative bone diseases.