* 0903243
* Simulations for Performance Assessments that Report on Knowledge and Skills (SPARKS)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Paul Horwitz, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2013
* USD 942,501.00

This project is a three year project that is a collaboration between the Concord
Consortium and CORD and that extends earlier ATE funded work on assessment of
competencies with electronic circuits and test equipment. The new assessments
provide finer grain analysis about student understanding and misconceptions,
thus enabling specific and well targeted individual interventions. Each
assessment challenges the user to accomplish some task, such as making a
measurement or troubleshooting a circuit. The computer monitors the student and
generates reports for use by the student, the instructor, or both. The project
aims to improve learning by providing timely and informative feedback on
students? progress, as inferred from their performance on realistic tasks.

The PI has found that students? scores on question-and-answer tests are not
reliable predictors of their ability to perform a cognitively demanding task, as
shown by their performance on simulation-based assessments. In particular, the
PI has shown that there must be a serious reconceptualization of the assessment
tools used to evaluate students? learning if they are to constitute reliable
measures of the targeted knowledge and skills. By extension, the project
investigates the central question of how to evaluate whether a student has
learned something.