* 0903876
* Assessment of Proton Deflectometry for Exploding Wire Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Farhat Beg, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DoE under
contract UCSD (Science report #09ER55038).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates strongly driven MHD systems and the influence of magnetic field
topology on plasma evolution in pulsed-power driven plasmas. This will be
examined using an advanced diagnostic method, namely proton probing, and
involves both experimental and computational work. The experimental campaign to
assess and optimize proton deflectometry will be done for various exploding wire
configurations on the 1MA ZEBRA generator at the Nevada Terawatt Facility using
the 50TW Leopard laser, with data interpretation by use of the 3D resistive MHD
GORGON and 3D hybrid-PIC LSP codes. The experimental program involves intense
field-matter interaction in the generation of the proton probe, as well as the
generation of plasma subjected to MG scale magnetic fields. The computational
aspect will apply two well documented plasma simulation codes, one 3D resistive
MHD and one 3D Particle-in-Cell (PIC), in combination for the first time to
provide accurate interpretation of the experimental results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes 2 graduate students, one at UCSD
and one at NTF, who will be involved with both the experimental physics work and
the MHD and PIC modeling of the system. Data resulting from the research program
will be broadly disseminated by publication in scientific journals, and
presentation at international and national conferences and workshops. Graduate
and undergraduate students will present results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
support of undergraduate participation adds a broader educational impact through
the early-year training of students by introducing them to scientific research
as a possible career path.