* 0903024
* Testing the deformable-bed hypothesis for the Mid-Pleistocene Transition with Plio-Pleistocene tills exposed in the Eastern Canadian Arctic.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2012
* USD 305,887.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Miller 0903024 University of Colorado

Proxies in continuous deep-sea sedimentary archives document slow cooling
through much of the Cenozoic until a threshold was crossed leading to the onset
of Northern Hemisphere continental glaciation ca. 2.8 Ma ago. Glacial cyclicity
followed the obliquity (tilt) orbital frequency, ~41 ka, until the mid-
Pleistocene, when it transitioned to a higher-amplitude, ~100-ka period. This
enigmatic change from ~41ka to ~100-ka climate variability, known as the mid-
Pleistocene transition (MPT), is of particular interest because it reflects a
fundamental reorganization of the climate system, independent of
orbital/radiative forcing. Hypotheses to explain the MPT must meet geological
constraints showing that the aerial extent of the earliest Laurentide Ice Sheet
(LIS) ice advances were as large or larger than after the MPT, despite smaller
ice volumes. A promising hypothesis is the gradual removal of deformable, pre-
glacial regolith by LIS erosion. Prior to the MPT, deformable sediment reduced
basal shear stresses, allowing the LIS to flow more rapidly, producing a thinner
ice sheet that responded linearly to orbital forcing. As regolith was removed,
basal shear stresses and ice thickness increased, resulting in a non-linear
response to orbital forcing.

This project exploits two exceptional sedimentary archives that preserve
superposed glacial and marine sediment deposited over the past 2.5 Ma on coastal
lowlands of the Eastern Canadian Arctic to test the deformable-bed hypothesis
for the MPT. Recent advances in instrumentation and techniques provide a battery
of new dating and geochemical tools that allow key proxies to be extracted from
the sediment. These tools allow reliable dating of the tills, assessment of
changes in flow lines delivering till from the interior of the ice sheet since
the late Pliocene, assessment of changes in sea surface temperatures, and
quantification of weathering products carried by the ice sheet over time that
will allow rigorous testing of the deformable-bed hypothesis.