* 0903457
* Time Evolving Block Decimation: Entangled Quantum Dynamics with Ultracold Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2012
* USD 352,676.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will create and support an open source computer
code for entangled quantum many-body dynamics called Time-Evolving Block
Decimation (TEBD). Such open source efforts have had a tremendous impact on the
solution of complex quantum problems; for example, when density functional
theory (an important, now standard numerical solution method in quantum
mechanics, quite different in aim and scope than TEBD), became open source, it
led to a rapid development of advanced materials for renewable energy and other
sectors of key national interest. TEBD uses entanglement as a convergence
parameter to yield a huge advantage in solving quantum problems such as design
of nano-systems in reduced dimensions. A goal of this research is to massively
parallelize this method for use on the NSF-supported high performance computing
(HPC) cluster at the Colorado School of Mines. The specific application focuses
on ultracold heteronuclear polar molecules in optical lattices and simulations
of these systems to aid experiments designed to explore their use for quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several undergraduate researchers will be
trained in HPC and quantum many body theory, with the goal of co-authoring
publications on ultracold molecules. This will be done through CSM's senior
thesis program, through summer REUs, and through the joint 5 year Engineering
Physics BS / Mathematical and Computational Sciences MS program at CSM. Graduate
student diversity will be increased through explicit recruiting programs in
Africa and South America, as well as of Hispanic-Americans in the US. The award
supports graduate students.