* 0903712
* Development of Renewable Biofuels Technology by Transcriptomic Analysis and Metabolic Engineering of Diatoms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Hildebrand, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

0903712 Hildebrand

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this project is to develop metabolic engineering approaches for
diatoms to enable induction of lipid accumulation by controllable manipulation
of intracellular processes rather than from external environmental conditions,
and to manipulate carbon partitioning within the cell between lipid and
carbohydrate synthesis to enable both abundant biomass and lipid accumulation.

There are four specific objectives: 1) To perform comparative transcriptomic
analyses in diatoms of lipid accumulation resulting from silicon, nitrogen, and
selenium limitation, to identify key regulatory steps involved in controlling
lipid accumulation and carbon partitioning. 2) To metabolically engineer the
diatom cell to enable repression of silicon transport by simple manipulations,
as a means to artificially starve the cells for silicon to trigger lipid
accumulation. 3) To metabolically engineer the cell to enable repression of
nitrate transport by simple manipulations, as a means to artificially starve the
cells for nitrogen to trigger lipid accumulation. 4) To metabolically engineer
the cell to alter carbon partitioning to enable abundant lipid accumulation
along with high biomass production, without the need for nutrient limitation.

Intellectual Merit: The significance of this project is that it will enable
greater control over lipid accumulation in diatoms for biofuels production by
using manipulable intracellular processes rather than depending on variable
environmental conditions, and it will possibly enable lipid accumulation under
normal growth conditions. In microalgae, lipid accumulation generally occurs
under nutrient limiting conditions, which are subject to environmental
variability, and which prevents high biomass accumulation. Transferring control
of lipid induction to intracellular processes will eliminate the variability,
and identifying the key regulatory steps involved in controlling carbon
partitioning in the cell coupled with metabolic engineering should enable
greater partitioning of carbon into lipids during non-limiting nutrient growth
conditions. These approaches are expected to have a substantial impact on the
development of renewable biofuels technology.

Broader Impact: The involvement of undergraduate and high school students in
this project will enable them to experience "hands on" laboratory research. This
is critical in the development of a young person's mind, to be able to
appreciate the practical and dynamic aspects of discovery, as apposed to just
assimilating information via lectures or reading. This importance of this cannot
be overemphasized, because it develops an appreciation for the level of effort
and commitment that must be applied to any successful endeavor. The students
will participate as part of local training programs that emphasize the
involvement of underrepresented minorities. The societal benefits of the
proposed research will be realized through the technological application of
developing diatoms as a source of renewable fuels. The potential benefits
include reduced CO2 production and subsequent benefit to climate change,
decreased dependence on oil imports, and establishment of new jobs in this
emerging technology industry.