* 0903936
* WORKSHOP on Manufactured Nanoparticle Environmental Impacts and Behavior to be held March 9-10, 2009 in Houston, TX
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 01/31/2010
* USD 19,998.00

0903936&lt;br/&gt;Kulinowski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice University will host an
international workshop on environmental nanotechnology, to contribute towards a
sound, science-based document that identifies the tools and practices needed to
assess and mitigate the potential impacts of engineered nanoparticles (NPs) in
the environment and inform eco-responsible design and disposal. This workshop,
tentatively scheduled for March 9-10, 2009, will be partially sponsored by the
British Consulate General-Houston, the TX-UK Collaborative, and the
International Council on Nanotechnology. The workshop will address issues of
research &amp; education in a meaningful and focused dialogue through an
integrated experience that will provide valuable mentorship and international
networking opportunities to emerging leaders in this rapidly growing field. The
goal of this workshop is to distill information on environmental impacts of NPs
into a format that can&lt;br/&gt;direct research efforts toward the most
critical issues in the next five to ten years and lead to methodologies to
predict their environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As governments
overcome barriers to international collaboration, new funding streams are
becoming available to researchers interested in engaging with their counterparts
abroad. Therefore the workshop will have an explicit emphasis on stimulating
trans-Atlantic and trans-Pacific research collaboration and will recruit
talented junior faculty to the workshop, both to benefit from their fresh
perspectives and to connect them with potential collaborators here in the US and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extrinsic merit of this workshop emanates from
its design and participation. This workshop will engage members of the
environmental, toxicological, nanotechnology and legal communities in a
meaningful and focused dialogue through a unique, integrated, and holistic
experience. This experience will foster dialogue among diverse participants
around the most pressing questions related to understanding the impacts of
engineered NPs. The broader impacts will result from the active engagement of
the workshop's participants. This engagement will enhance and strengthen the
opportunities for and interest in international, interdisciplinary collaboration
on NPs and the environment. In addition, the workshop will provide a solid
foundation for the academic communitys future collaboration in research and
education programs, projects, and activities at greater and closer levels than
was previously possible. The proposed work will have substantial benefit to
society by providing current, high quality information on environmental health
and safety of nanomaterials which will enable the development and implementation
of sound risk management practices.