* 0903772
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Strong Interchange Instabilities in a Rotating Dipole Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Michael Mauel, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 90,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 08-589. The award provides funds to partially support the graduate student
participation in the overall research effort, which is being funded separately
by the DoE [Grant DE-FG02-00ER54585OFES]. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear
dynamics of strong interchange instabilities concern fundamental phenomenon
occurring in a variety of natural and artificial situations. In this work,
laboratory techniques will be used to produce intense interchange instabilities,
induce strong interchange convection, and sustain steady interchange turbulence.
The investigations focus on measurement, modification, and understanding of
strong interchange turbulence. Previous work has found that interchange
turbulence is dominated by large-scale rotating structures, and, probably, these
structures represent a "self-organized" state. With this award, remaining
questions concerning the precise nature of structure coupling and transport will
be addressed with improved diagnostics, additional probes, and advanced
simulations using our newly parallelized nonlinear interchange code. The
combination of detailed experimental measurements, computer simulation, and
computer data analysis will test developing theory and provide a basis for
understanding a variety of nonlinear processes which occur in plasmas produced
in the laboratory and found in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Collisionless
Terrella Experiment (CTX) research project creates connections between
laboratory plasma physics, natural plasma phenomena, nonlinear physics, and
computational physics. CTX serves a central and important role in the
educational opportunities for Columbia University graduate and undergraduate
students. Undergraduate student research interns assembled the CTX device, and
this project will continue to be a student-focused research program. This
project attracts outstanding graduate and undergraduate students and has
provided hands-on research experience to talented high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award provides support for the Graduate
Research Assistant involved with this research project.