* 0903985
* Collaborative Research: Educational Simulation for Computing and Information Ethics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2011
* Russell Robbins, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2011
* USD 68,968.00

Modern global society is increasingly reliant on computing and information
professionals to serve key roles in creating, managing, and maintaining the
global computing and information infrastructure that is critical to research,
education, commerce, and quality of life. As such, computing and information
professionals need to learn not only technical skills but also how to resolve
ethical issues such as in/outsourcing, intellectual property, and information
privacy. Working in the new global economy requires that computing and
information professionals are able to consider the range of cultural values and
ethical perspectives as represented by leading thinkers such as Aristotle,
Bentham, Buddha, Confucius, Gilligan, and Kant. To broaden and deepen the
ethical perspectives of computing and information professionals, it is essential
to develop and teach courses in computing and information ethics as part of
professional graduate programs in computer science and the interdisciplinary
information field. Further, to enable current and future computing and
information professionals to appreciate and understand the relevance of ethics
in their work, it is necessary to find educationally motivating ways to engage
graduate students in professional computing and information programs to consider
key ethical issues. In this project the PIs hope to accomplish this goal through
development and evaluation of an educational simulation for computing and
information ethics, which serves as the cornerstone for an innovative course
focusing on the role of values and ethics in computing and information within a
global society. Building on their prior research, the PIs will explore three
main research questions: How do graduate students in a computing and information
ethics course use educational simulation software to gain understandings of and
hands-on experiences with important computing and information ethics issues such
as intellectual property in a global society? Does geographical co-location have
an impact on use of the simulation in the context of an internationally-oriented
computing and information ethics graduate course with a diverse range of
students? Do students in a graduate-level computing and information ethics
course benefit most from interaction with peers, or with the software agents
developed through this project?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project
outcomes will include a free and open-source simulation for computing and
information ethics, which allows students both to participate in and learn from
cases, and to develop and implement their own cases that they can then share
with peers. The PIs will develop a novel and highly participatory course built
around the simulation, which will be implemented in professional computing and
information master's programs across the country and the world, and which will
better prepare computing and information professionals to deal with ethical
issues throughout their careers.