* 0903930
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Control of Qudits and Quantum Transport in Optical Lattics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Poul Jessen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2013
* USD 351,318.00

This NSF award will support the development of general methods to control and
measure physical systems whose behavior is governed by quantum mechanics. As a
concrete physical testbed the project will use cold atoms and optical lattices
(spatially periodic potential wells formed by interfering laser beams used to
trap cold atoms). This system provides access to a broad range of quantum
phenomena, and is considered one of the leading platforms for quantum
information science such as quantum computation. The immediate goal is to
develop robust and flexible control tools to manipulate quantum information
encoded in finite sets of atomic ground states (qudits). By correlating the
state of an atom with its position in an optical lattice, it becomes possible to
control the quantum mechanical motion of atoms on a grid. Simultaneous quantum
control of the internal and motional quantum states of atoms will be essential
if the atom-lattice system is to be used for quantum computation and quantum
simulation of condensed-matter physics, both of which are grand challenges
pursued by research groups across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When physical
devices are used to perform real world tasks, the process can be understood
abstractly in terms of a system moving through a sequence of configurations
(states) in response to external commands (controls). In practice, control of
the device must be accurate and reliable even in the presence of errors and
imperfections. This is a non-trivial challenge even for systems governed by
classical mechanics, and has historically given rise to an entire engineering
discipline known as Control Science. Modern advances in nanoscience is pushing
technology into the quantum realm, and an analogous new field of Quantum Control
must therefore be established. This NSF award will contribute substantially to
the knowledge base of Quantum Control and Quantum Information Science. Notably,
the tools and techniques developed for the cold atoms and optical lattice
platform will be broadly applicable because a single set of mathematical
principles underlie the design of controls for any quantum system, be it atomic,
molecular, optical or condensed matter. All aspects of the research will involve
graduate students, and will occur within the framework of the Center for Quantum
Information and Control (CQuIC), a newly established joint venture involving
principal investigators at the University of New Mexico and the University of
Arizona. The award will thus contribute to the training of future scientists and
researchers in Quantum Control and Quantum Information Science.