* 0903818
* Development of a General, Fully Relativistic B-Spline R-Matrix with Pseudo-States Program for Electron and Photon Interactions with Atoms, Ions, and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2013
* USD 196,764.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). A general and effective program for electron and photon
interactions with atoms, ions, and molecules is being developed by extending a
highly successful B-spline R-matrix (BSR) approach produced during previous
funding periods. Specifally, the work involves the following projects:  1)
Adapting the existing BSR program and a newly developed fully relativistic
Dirac-based DBSR code to massively parallel computing platforms provided by the
NSF's TeraGrid resources;  2) Performing benchmark calculations for electron
collisions with complex targets; 3) Developing a fully relativistic R-matrix
with pseudo-states (RMPS) version;  4) Developing a general method to treat
time-dependent intense short-pulse laser interactions with complex targets;  5)
Extending the code to treat charged-particle projectiles and molecular
targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research consists of
the further development of a suite of computer programs to calculate accurate
atomic data for a wide variety of electron- and photon-driven processes. The
production calculations will focus on atomic targets, for which these data are
of critical value to model the physics and chemistry of astrophysical and
laboratory plasmas, lasers, and planetary atmospheres. This effort supports many
experimental projects ranging from industrial lighting systems to fundamental
research performed at next-generation synchrotons and free-electron lasers. The
next version of the computer code will be documented so that it can made
available to the public. Finally, undergraduate students are being
trained through developing and testing individual modules of the package.