* 0903659
* IGERT: Usable Privacy and Security
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Norman Sadeh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Regassa
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,924,671.00

This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) project
supports the development of an interdisciplinary graduate program at Carnegie
Mellon University to train researchers in the field of usable privacy and
security. The program will provide courses in security, privacy, human-computer
interaction, artificial intelligence, economics, and psychology to complement
the students' primary fields of study. There is growing recognition that privacy
and security failures are often the results of cognitive and behavioral biases
and human errors. Many of these failures can be attributed to poorly designed
user interfaces or secure systems that have not been built around the needs and
skills of their human operators; in other words, systems that have not made
privacy and security usable. This IGERT will train cross-disciplinary
researchers and develop methodologies, principles, and approaches that can be
applied to diverse systems and applications. With social and economic activities
becoming increasingly reliant on cyber infrastructure and with 60% of security
breaches attributable to human failure, this IGERT addresses one of the most
fundamental challenges faced by society today: designing usable secure systems.
It does so by: (1) producing research advances that will provide for usable
privacy and security in both current and future pervasive computing
environments; (2) training a new generation of researchers to engage in
interdisciplinary research on usable privacy and security and apply such
research to real-world problems; (3) recruiting and training students
underrepresented in traditional computer security and information assurance
graduate programs. IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary
background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical,
professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
disciplinary boundaries.