* 0903301
* Seventh International conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2010
* USD 16,320.00

0903301&lt;br/&gt;Kandlikar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Seventh International
Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels organized under ASME
sponsorship, will be held June 22-24, 2009, at the POSTECH - Pohang University
of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea. Over the years, since its
inception in 2002, this conference series has attracted many leading researchers
from diverse disciplines working in different countries becoming a premiere
international forum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The conference is
intended to provide a platform for researchers to exchange information and
identify research needs in this emerging area that encompasses many engineering
and bio-medical disciplines. The main objective is to provide a multi-
disciplinary forum to promote and expedite progress on fundamental understanding
and applications in many different fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The international nature of the meeting is highly beneficial to
everyone for purposes of global interaction. This conference will support a
number of students as well as emerging and key leaders who are attending the
conference. Emphasis is given to solicit participation from underrepresented
groups. Just as last year, the conference will also host a Special Student Forum
that will be organized by students. The forum will present students'
perspectives on the research needs and opportunities in this emerging field.
This will be somewhat of a role reversal; researchers will ask the students
questions and the students will answer from their perspectives. This will help
develop research leadership skills of the students, as they prepare to lead
efforts through research innovation.