* 0903075
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Biofuels Production in the U.S. Midwest:  Negotiating Social and Ecological Outcomes Across Place and Scale
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Sean Gillon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2011
* USD 11,567.00

The United States has embarked on an initiative to greatly increase the
production of biofuels, with incentives and mandates inscribed in the Energy
Independence and Security Act (2007) and the 2008 Farm Bill. Advocates argue
that biofuels provide a means to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, improve
rural socioeconomic futures, and reduce dependence on foreign oil. Opponents
find biofuels' consequences for food availability, carbon emissions and land use
change to be worrisome. Despite an increased domestic production of biofuels,
especially corn ethanol, little is known about how increased biofuels production
in the US Midwest will change social and environmental outcomes at farm and
regional levels or will interact with broader processes of environmental
governance occurring at the nexus of agriculture, energy and the environment.
This research aims to fill this knowledge gap by asking: 1) How are agriculture
and conservation practices changing in Iowa in the context of biofuels
development? 2) What are the opportunities, risks and costs associated with
increased biofuels production, as seen by farmers, conservation agents and rural
residents? 3) How does biofuels production relate to broader processes of
environmental governance across scale (i.e. local, national and global)? These
questions build on insights from the fields of political economy of agriculture,
environmental governance, rural studies and political ecology and will be
answered with both quantitative and qualitative primary and secondary data
sources. Data-collection methods will include semi-structured interviews and
participant observation aimed at gaining an understanding of change in farmers'
agricultural and conservation practices and their experience of biofuels
industry development. Conservation agents' experience of changing agri-
environmental goals and practice and residents' experiences of biofuels industry
development will also be assessed through interviews. Qualitative data
collection will be focused in northeastern Iowa, where mixed livestock and grain
farming, several biorefineries and a topographically varied landscape make
change associated with biofuels production to be varied and visible. These data
will be complemented by the collection and analysis of available quantitative
data on land use change and industry development.

It is expected that this doctoral dissertation research will reveal key
components involved in farmer decision-making in agricultural and conservation
practice in relation to biofuels industry growth and volatility in commodity and
other agricultural markets. Future public and private investments in biofuels
are likely to be significant and the ability of rural areas to maintain social
and ecological benefits of biofuels production will depend upon mechanisms of
environmental governance, the social and political economic context within which
farmer decisions are made, and how residents weigh the benefits of environmental
stewardship with the promised benefits of biofuels. The project's results will
directly supplement empirical knowledge of biofuels' consequences and add depth
and scope to research in environmental governance, the political economy of
agriculture and rural studies, and political ecology. Moreover, these results
will enable the maintenance of socio-economic and environmental quality gains by
informing future rounds of policy-making and research addressing climate change
and working to achieve a more sustainable agriculture.