* 0903342
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Ab Initio Study of Aqueous Polyions
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Stuart Bogatko, Bogatko                 Stuart         A
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2011
* USD 141,520.00

0903342 Bogatko

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Stuart A.
Bogatko to work with Dr. Paul Geerlings at Free University of Brussels in
Belgium.

The environmental impact of new industrial and energy technologies is today a
main subject of public discussion. Of prime concern is the possible migration of
toxic material from industrial sites or containment facilities into the
biosphere. The Aluminum(III) ion is of particular importance because it is found
in the by-products of important industrial activities such as processing of
bauxite to form pure alumina and the reclamation of hydrocarbons from deep
deposits. Unfortunately it is also a known neurotoxin disrupting essential
biological processes in plants and animals and may possibly play a role in
Alzheimer?s disease. Contact with the aqueous phase would undoubtedly play a
major role in the migration of toxic aluminum species. In solution Al3+ exists
in a variety of oxohydroxo polyion species such as [Al(H2O)6]3+,
[Al2(OH)2(H2O)8]4+, [Al3(OH)4(H2O)9]5+, [Al4(OH)6(H2O)11]6+,
[Al4O(OH)5(H2O)10]5+ and [AlO4Al12(OH)24(H2O)12]7+. The chemical reactivity of
these species determines whether further polymerization, dissociation or
adsorption on mineral surfaces will occur. This study addresses these concerns.
The reactivity indices, such as nucleophilicity, electrophilicity and chemical
hardness, of these species are evaluated using high level quantum chemistry
methods in a variety of aqueous environments including effects of solution pH,
counter-ions, temperature and pressure. Experimental methods have seen limited
success due to the complexity of these systems. First principles theoretical
investigations have thus become an invaluable tool not only supplementing
experimental data but also in prediction of new properties. A realistic
simulation poses a significant computational challenge because a large number of
atoms are required to model the solvation effects and an efficient and high
level molecular dynamics algorithm needs to be used to include the effects of
temperature and pressure. This is achieved using the Conceptual Density
Functional Theory (CDFT) methods, whose concepts have been developed and
implemented by Professor Paul Geerlings of Vrije Universiteit Brussels (VUB),
and the high performance Pseudo-Potential Plane-Wave Density Functional Theory
(PSPW-DFT) algorithms developed by Professor John Weare of the University of
California San Diego (UCSD). The joining of these methods represents a major
step in the field of Quantum Computational Chemistry towards producing highly
accurate, quantitative chemical information of a system whose size and
complexity represents the ?state of the art?.