* 0903191
* A Design Framework for Improving Reliability, Debug and Security of Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project ID: 0903191&lt;br/&gt;PI names: Sandip
Kundu and Israel Koren&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Design Framework for Improving
Reliability, Debug and Security of Multi-Core Systems&lt;br/&gt;Inst: University
of Massachusetts, Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Today?s
computer chips feature multiple cores in the same substrate where all cores may
perform concurrent tasks, improving overall performance. However, multi-core
systems exacerbate some problems such as power dissipation, system and software
debugging, security and long term system reliability. Power consumption in
computer systems is a major concern. For example, Google server plants,
reportedly consume about 103 megawatts of electricity ? enough to power a city
of the size of Tacoma, Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debugging multi-core
hardware/software in a multitasking, multithreading, multi-core environment is
very complex as an individual core may crash and communication may deadlock.
Computer reliability and security are increasing concerns, as society becomes
ever more dependent on the availability of computer systems and on the security
of the data that they process and store. Continuous monitoring of the health of
the computer system to allow fast recovery from faults, and protecting critical
and private data from tampering attempts are thus
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project envisions designing a simple
dedicated supervisory core integrated into chip multi-processors that is always
alive. This core supports execution of commands for rebooting individual cores
and allows query of internal states of any core on the same substrate. Such a
core adds little to system cost but adds a number of run time capabilities that
allow us to solve the above problems and also allow improved remote system
management, which has emerged as a major challenge in computer data
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is two fold. At
a technical level, it provides solutions to mitigate societal problems such as
energy consumption, advancing computer security and improving computer up-time.
At a curriculum level, it trains researchers in a discipline that is extremely
important for US industrial competitiveness. This project is actively supported
by major US industries through technical collaboration.