* 0904325
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Optimization with Sparse Priors -- Algorithms, Indices, and Economic Incentives
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ashish Goel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 698,070.00

This is a collaborative research project combining the expertise of Ashish Goel,
Stanford University (IIS-0904325) and Sanjeev Khanna, University of Pennsylvania
(IIS-0904314).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, content has been generated by
a limited number of publishers (such as book houses, music companies, and
newspapers), and its quality then evaluated by professional editors and
reviewers. In recent years, however, individuals have become mass producers of
content, generating images, blogs, opinions, and recommendations, in a
decentralized manner. This content is then discovered and consumed by other
users, and centralized review is rendered infeasible by the sheer magnitude of
available content. Consequently, there is a need to utilize user feedback, both
explicit and implicit, in order to provide optimum rankings and recommendations
to Internet users. The same broad problem occurs in online advertising,
automatic moderation of discussion boards, and automated deductions of user
preference on social networks. In addition to being very large, user activity
data on the Internet is also typically very sparse, since each user only
performs a small share of possible actions (e.g., searches for a small fraction
of keywords, reviews or purchases a small fraction of
products).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design algorithms and
optimization techniques to effectively utilize such data. The sparse data is
treated as a "prior belief" on user preferences. The project also aims to design
economic incentives to obtain useful and corrective data, robust to
manipulation. The two parts of this research interact strongly with each other,
since the algorithmic component can identify valuable pieces of additional
information to acquire. Together, these two parts can help users derive optimum
value from Internet data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this project will
improve search engine performance and facilitate web applications that employ
user feedback. The project Web site
(http://www.stanford.edu/~ashishg/sparse_opt.html) will be used to disseminate
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;