* 0904292
* Collaborative Research:  Laboratory Studies of Formation, Aging and Physicochemical Properties of Atmospheric Organic Particulate Matter
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Kolb, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 123,508.00

The overall goal of this project is to reduce uncertainties related to the
formation, oxidative aging, and cloud condensation nucleus (CCN) activity of
organic aerosol particles, thereby providing a more reliable base for modeling
and predicting climate change. A unique laboratory setup to characterize the
composition, size, morphology, and density of aerosol particles and to measure
CCN activity of these particles will be used to characterize and understand
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation/evolution mechanisms and yields from
atmospherically relevant precursor gases oxidized by hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl
radicals and ozone. Multi-step heterogeneous oxidation of atmospherically
relevant organic compounds will also be studied. The results will provide
information necessary to characterize chemical composition of SOA from given
precursors and to accurately represent their CCN
proclivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators (PIs) will actively
participate in an initiative funded by the Gelfand Family Charitable Trust to
mentor science students in four Boston inner city high schools, a program guided
by the TSIP concept (Teaching Science through the Inquiry Process). Students
will be mentored in small groups and in one-on-one settings with the aim of
helping them prepare science fair projects. Two of the schools have science
fairs already (Monument High School and The Engineering School). In the other
two, working with the teachers and students, the PIs will help organize such
fairs. The vehicle for potential science discussions will be current
environmental issues with a specific focus on the atmosphere.