* 0904122
* Collaborative Research: SGER: Layout Generation Tools for Double-Gate-Transistor-Array-Based IC Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Wojciech Maly, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2011
* USD 32,674.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: SGER: Layout Generation Tools for
Double-Gate-Transistor-Array-Based IC Designs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCF - 0904122
&lt;br/&gt;Maly, Wojciech (Carnegie-Mellon University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCF
- 0904124 &lt;br/&gt;Marek-Sadowska, Malgorzata (University of California-Santa
Barbara)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
demonstrate the feasibility of an approach that can potentially remedy the huge
productivity crisis plaguing the IC industry. The PIs propose a design
methodology utilizing transistor-array-based canvases. The building block of a
canvas is a vertical slit (VeS), dual-gate, junction-less transistor that can be
fabricated with an SOI-like process. Canvases can be configured into useful
circuits by customizing interconnects fabricated in a metallization process. In
this way, one of the show stoppers of the modern design, lithographic
imperfections, can be almost completely eliminated. The research proposed here
is focused on developing basic layout tools for VeS-transistor arrays to show
that dense transistor layouts are feasible, and to quantify the performance and
power consumption of circuits built from VeS
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the methodology may
have a huge effect on IC manufacturing and design practices.&lt;br/&gt;The
design and manufacturing strategy proposed here has a very real chance of
helping designers&lt;br/&gt;to make rapid use of the huge number of transistors
available on a single chip without sacrificing performance and cost. The VeS
transistor arrays can also serve as foundations for 3-D
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;