* 0904153
* International Summer School on Biocomplexity from Gene to System, July 1-7, 2009, Istanbul, Turkey
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Metin Akay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 04/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

0836346&lt;br/&gt;M. Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the 8th
International Summer School on Biocomplexity from Gene to System during July
1-7, 2009 at Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey. The main objective of this
summer school is to expose undergraduate and graduate biological science and
bioengineering students to the relatively new approaches of the mathematical and
computational challenges in Systems Biology and the new directions in
computational biology, bioinformatics and molecular engineering research and to
facilitate rapid diffusion of these mathematical and computational tools in the
biological sciences. These methods will be helpful, also, to students in
computer science and mathematics who are interested in pursuing research in
biology, biomolecular engineering and bioengineering, since the summer school
provides exceptional insights into the fundamental challenges in biological
sciences. The NSF funds will be used to support ten US senior undergraduate and
graduate students, and seven summer school faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer school will use lectures, oriented
toward biological science students, by expert faculty and will focus on the
relatively new approaches of the mathematical and computational challenges in
neuroscience and neural engineering and the new directions in computational
neuroscience, neural informatics and neurotechnology. In addition to these
lectures, the summer school will include 2 two-hour panel discussion, with
active participation of undergraduate and graduate students, focused on (1)
systems biology: advances and challenges; and (2) the Future directions: from
genome to physiome. In addition, students will present their research activities
in their departments and institutes in a poster session, which will facilitate
discussion of both the biology and computational approaches. &lt;br/&gt;The
broaders impacts are very strong. The summer school will stimulate further
interdisciplinary research and collaborations among students, engineers,
mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers, and will help in
identifying new, challenging directions in complex biological science and
bioengineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by the Biomedical Engineering Program and Office of International Science and
Engineering.