* 0904943
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Side-Channel-Proof Embedded Processors with Integrated Multi-Layer Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Scott Smith, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract: Side-Channel-Proof Embedded Processors with Integrated Multi-Layer
Protection Embedded digital systems are ubiquitous and may contain sensitive
information that could be used for malicious purposes if fallen into the wrong
hands. Therefore, strong cryptographic algorithms have been incorporated inside
these devices. However, attackers have switched their targets from the
cryptographic algorithms themselves to the hardware/software implementations of
these algorithms, through ?side-channel? chip measurements. From a hardware
perspective, such side-channel attacks can be implemented at both the circuit-
level and architecture-level. Although much research has been performed in
mitigating side-channel attacks, these solutions are inflexible, unsystematic,
and have high overhead. The goal of this research is to develop a universal
solution that synergistically combines both architecture-level and circuit-level
countermeasures for mitigating all major categories of side-channel attacks, to
yield an extremely secure, highly flexible, low overhead digital system design
methodology. In this proof-of-concept project, preliminary research will be
carried out at both levels. At the architecture-level, novel architectural
support to mitigate architecture-level timing and access-driven attacks will be
developed. At the circuit-level, Delay-Insensitive Ternary Logic will be
utilized to design the new architectural support as well as other key components
of a MIPS32 4K-compatible embedded microprocessor. The effectiveness and
efficiency of side-channel attack resistance at both architecture-level and
circuit-level will be evaluated. Educational modules of circuit-level and
architecture-level attack mitigation will be developed. Graduate and
undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented groups, will be
involved in this project. The research outcome will be disseminated to the
academic and industrial communities through journal articles, conference
presentations, and appropriate websites.

