* 0904055
* Collaborative Research: Empirical and Hierarchical Bayesian Methods with Applications to Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Tapabrata Maiti, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2009
* USD 55,497.00

The project will introduce some new empirical and hierarchical Bayesian (EB and
HB) methodology which can be used in a wide range of problems in demography,
sociology, business, insurance, economics, and surveys. In particular, the
methods are expected to be readily applicable to certain small area estimation
problems involving both discrete and continuous data. The two major motivating
examples for this research are estimation of the proportion of uninsured for
minority subpopulations and neighborhood level estimation of the proportion of
African-American females suffering from clinical depression. The first topic is
of immense relevance to many Federal Agencies such as the Center for Disease
Control/National Center for Health Statistics and the United States Bureau of
the Census. The second is of direct relevance to researchers engaged in Family
and Community Health Study. The project is expected to develop a general class
of EB confidence intervals not only for continuous data, but also for discrete
data, such as binary and count data. The research will also address robust HB
and EB estimation. The general methodology will have direct application to the
specific examples mentioned earlier and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed research is enormous. The development of simple and easy
to use EB confidence intervals will be an advancement not only for the small
area literature, but also for a wide range of problems in demography, sociology,
business, economics and insurance where EB methods are routinely used. The
simplicity and data-adaptability of these intervals will make them readily
usable not only for binary and count data, but also for skewed continuous data
fitted by the exponential and gamma distributions. Also, the construction of
robust HB and EB estimators will provide a strong theoretically viable method
for simultaneous estimation problems, once again routinely faced in diverse
research areas. In addition, the proposed research will contribute towards
research-based training of graduate students, involve participation of under-
represented groups and foster interagency and interdisciplinary collaboration.
The new research results also will be incorporated in graduate courses on survey
sampling. This award was supported as part of the fiscal year 2006 Mathematical
Sciences priority area special competition on Mathematical Social and Behavioral
Sciences (MSBS). &lt;br/&gt;