* 0904165
* Conference on Nonparametric Statistics and Statistical Learning; Spring 2010; Columbus, OH
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Joseph Verducci, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

An international conference on Nonparametric Statistics and Statistical Learning
is scheduled for May 19-22, 2010 at the Ohio State University. The conference is
cosponsored by the American Statistical Association (ASA) Section on
Nonparametric Statistics and the newly formed ASA Section on Statistical
Learning & Data Mining. This is the first and very timely effort to explore the
synergy of these two areas in a single conference. The conference features six
plenary talks by internationally prominent researchers whose work relates
closely to both fields. Sixteen invited breakout sessions, each with three
talks, cover additional topics with potential interest to both fields. These
include Robustness of Statistical Learning Methods, Implications of Data
Reduction by Data Depth, Nonparametric Bayesian Methods and Model Selection,
Rank Based Methods for High Dimensional Problems, Designs for Variable
Screening, Ranked Set Sampling and the Collapse of Importance Sampling in Very
Large Scale Systems. There are also eight contributed paper sessions and two
contributed poster sessions where junior investigators and graduate students are
expected to participate. Nonparametrics and Statistical Learning share key
foundational structures. Both disciplines avoid unrealistic assumptions about
underlying distributions or models in scientific studies; both allow for complex
association among variables; and both address problems in data summarization,
discovery, classification and prediction. The advent of powerful computers with
accompanying massive data sets brings both disciplines to the forefront of
statistical theory and practice. The goal of the proposed conference is to
present some of the most important recent advances in these fields and to
discuss future research directions. A major part of the conference focuses on
bringing statistical research leaders together with students, postdoctoral
fellows, and young academics in a stimulating environment. The funding from the
NSF supports attendance of graduate students and junior researchers in American
universities to present either a talk or a poster. The conference is expected to
accelerate interactions and collaborations among researchers in the important
areas of nonparametric statistics and statistical learning, and thereby lead to
the development of new and more effective methods of modeling and inference.

Statistical learning, with its roots in nonparametric statistics, pervades
virtually all aspects of modern life. From automatic interpretation of hand-
written numbers to sort mail by zip code, to identification of which genes to
target and which chemical features might best be incorporated into new
medicines, to real time analysis of satellite images in predicting hurricane
paths, to anywhere else there is massive data with many sources of variation,
statistical learning has become the main strategy for putting the data to good
use. Additional applications include optimal allocations of credit, selection of
product features to emphasize in different markets, and evaluation of concordant
sources when determining the need to raise threat levels to Homeland Security.
The conference features a session on national statistics with key speakers from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, and the defense industry, and
Application sessions with speakers from the National Center for Atmospheric
Research, the software industry, and other private sectors. Interactions among
academic, governmental, and industrial statisticians in the field should
strengthen both research and practice.