* 0904670
* Collaborative Research: Towards Petascale Cosmological Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Zhiling Lan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 09/30/2013
* USD 345,835.00

OCI-0904482/OCI-0904484/OCI-
0904670&lt;br/&gt;Kravtsov/Rudd/Lan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research program to develop
petascale numerical simulations of structure formation in the universe. This
work will utilize the Adaptive Refinement Tree (ART) cosmological simulation
code. Specific goals are: (1) to achieve petascale level performance for the ART
cosmological code by improving load balancing, communication performance, and
the hybrid parallelization mode on multi-core/multi-processor nodes on petascale
platforms; (2) to develop a robust fault-tolerance mechanism for petascale ART
simulations; (3) to provide a user-level interface and documentation for public
release of ART under an open source license; and (4) to produce state-of-the-art
cosmological simulations that will result in a rich scientific output and a
valuable repository of simulation results for the astrophysical community. The
project combines the expertise of a computer scientist with extensive experience
in research on load balancing, scalability, and fault tolerance, with a group of
numerical cosmologists with significant experience in code development and
running state-of-the-art cosmological simulations. The petascale cosmological
simulations resulting from this work will lead to major breakthroughs in our
understanding of galaxy formation and will provide critical theoretical support
for forthcoming large observational surveys designed to probe the matter and
energy content of our universe and constrain properties of the mysterious dark
matter and dark energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge the cross-
disciplinary boundaries between Computer Science and Astrophysics by developing
a tightly-knit team collaborating on a single project. By involving graduate
students of different levels and a postdoctoral scholar, this project will serve
as an excellent vehicle for professional training of young computational
scientists and numerical astrophysicists in cutting edge simulation techniques.
The ultimate result of this project - a publicly available, open source
petascale cosmological simulation code - will be of great value for the general
astrophysics community, and will be widely used, as shown by the widespread
usage of other, currently existing, publicly available cosmological codes. The
code can also be used as a calibration tool for current and pending dark energy
experiments. On a broader scale, this project will have a direct impact on
undergraduate education and the general public. Visualizations of cosmological
simulations of the kind proposed here trigger a curiosity and a sense of
discovery in the general public afforded only by the exploration of the
universe. To this end, in collaboration with the Adler Planetarium in Chicago,
three-dimensional visualizations of the simulations will be developed for full-
dome planetaria shows and public lectures and be made available on the web.