* 0904155
* Maine's Sustainability Science Initiative
* O/D,EPS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Michael Eckardt, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Timothy VanReken
* 12/31/2014
* USD 20,000,000.00

Proposal Title: Maine?s Sustainability Science Initiative

Institution: University of Maine

Goals: Maine?s Sustainability Science Initiative (SSI) seeks to catalyze and
expand the state?s interdisciplinary research capacity for understanding the
coupled dynamics of social-ecological systems (SES) and determining how such
knowledge can best inform stakeholders and their decision-making processes. The
core SSI objective is to create a new statewide Center for Sustainability
Solutions (CSS) where place-based systems research, knowledge to action focus,
and strong stakeholder partnerships will serve as a testbed for developing
solutions to sustainable development challenges in and beyond Maine. The
research focuses on three interacting drivers of landscape change (urbanization,
forest ecosystem management, and climate change) that affect Maine and other
regions. Although Maine has faced some serious environmental challenges, its
ecosystems have not reached crisis points. As a result, Maine can be a valuable
model for exploring proactive, cost-effective approaches to sustainable
development, The proposed research will employ three innovative strategies: 1)
model development and testing based on an integrated analysis of interactions
among drivers of landscape change; 2) a quasi-experimental approach to evaluate
the ability of alternative modeling techniques to account for SES thresholds,
feedbacks, and resilience; and 3) close stakeholder partnerships to ensure that
the work is shaped by the demands of social and institutional systems to enhance
the value of the research for decision-making. These strategies depend upon a
high-level of interdisciplinary integration, and build on past EPSCoR
investments that created research teams characterized by diverse expertise. This
project aims to increase the capacity and productivity of those teams, and
create the foundation for a green innovation economy in Maine.

In concert with the novel approach to innovative research, the project
activities effectively integrate research and education to bolster the STEM
training and scientific expertise of Maine?s future workforce. In collaboration
with ?Maine STEM Coalition Initiative?, the project engages K-12 students,
integrates the Center for Sustainability Solutions? research (a center that
would be created with funding requested in this proposal) with K-12 education,
and coordinates teacher professional development. At the postsecondary education
levels, the project includes design of new courses that emphasize
interdisciplinary and systems modeling and that integrate stakeholders into
service-learning activities; development of interdisciplinary academic research
and private sector internships; design of a mentoring program; and engagement of
students in the development of use of innovative technology.

