* 0904052
* Integers Conference 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Bruce Landman, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 17,900.00

The University of West Georgia will be the site of the Integers Conference 2009,
a conference in the areas of combinatorics and number theory. The conference
will follow the style of the successful Integers Conferences of 2003, 2005, and
2007. The 2009 conference will be held over a four-day period, October 7-10,
2009. One of its main goals will be to serve as a catalyst for important
collaborative projects among mathematicians and computer scientists representing
the areas of additive number theory, multiplicative number theory, probabilistic
number theory, combinatorics, combinatorial optimization, game theory, and
Ramsey theory. There will be five or six plenary speakers, who will give one-
hour talks. There will also be approximately seventy 20-minute talks. The
conference will be held in honor of the sixty-fifth birthday of Carl Pomerance,
a distinguished mathematician who has made major contributions in number theory.

The conference will gather mathematicians, graduate students, undergraduate
students, and others interested in combinatorics or number theory. It will
include student research talks, and promote interaction among research
mathematicians at all stages from the talented undergraduate to the
internationally distinguished researcher. A variety of areas of expertise will
be represented from within the general area of discrete mathematics. Leading
experts will present their latest work, and there will be much collaboration
among participants. The research areas have many applications, including
cryptography, genetics, neural networks, mathematical biology, radio frequency
assignment for mobile telecommunications, coding theory, sequences for
communications applications, and interconnection networks.