* 0904499
* Field-Theoretic Polymer Simulations: Free Energy and Multi-Scale Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences contribute funding to this award. It supports theoretical
and computational research and education that will develop the "field-theoretic
simulation" method, enabling direct numerical investigations of field theory
models of polymers, complex fluids, and soft materials without resorting to the
mean-field approximation. The PI aims to make fundamental, transformative
breakthroughs in understanding and methodology that will enable field-theoretic
simulation studies of entirely new classes of polymers and soft materials.
Specific components of the project include: + Chebyshev spectral methods. This
research thrust will explore the use of Chebyshev spectral collocation methods
in solving polymer self-consistent field theory equations for thin polymer
films. The high accuracy provided by Chebyshev methods could facilitate
simulations of multi-layer block copolymer films that are currently
inaccessible, but highly relevant to the rapidly developing field of block
copolymer lithography. + Grafted polymer layers. This thrust aims to develop
novel approaches and numerical methods for conducting high resolution field-
theoretic and self-consistent field theory simulations of grafted polymer
layers. An expected outcome of this work is computational tools that will
revolutionize ligand design in polymer-grafted nanoparticles, prediction of the
structure and assembly of polymer functionalized nanoparticles and colloids, and
guide "grafted from" nano-patterning schemes for microelectronics fabrication. +
Free energy estimation. This research thrust will develop theoretical and
computational strategies for computing absolute and relative free energies in
field-based simulations. Such methods will enable the determination of phase
diagrams, energy landscapes, and kinetic pathways for broad classes of soft
material systems that defy conventional approaches. + Systematic coarse-graining
method. The PI aims to develop methods for systematic coarse-graining of polymer
field theories in conjunction with FTS simulations. This will facilitate the
isolation of lattice cutoff effects and enable simulations of diverse families
of equilibrium polymeric fluids on unprecedented length scales.

This award supports graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and
computational polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and
post-docs with classical physics training to broader soft materials/polymer
science disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained under this project will be further leveraged through the Complex Fluids
Design Consortium (CFDC) at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership
that is addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex
fluid formulations.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences contribute funding to this award. It supports theoretical
and computational research and education that will extend develop new
theoretical and advanced computer simulation methods to study systems composed
of polymers which are long chain-like molecules. Some examples include DNA and
the fundamental building blocks of plastics. The PI?s research includes the
application of these computer simulation methods to the design of new materials
based on polymers, for example plastics and materials composed of small organic
or inorganic particles in a matrix composed of polymers.

This award supports graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and
computational polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and
post-docs with classical physics training to broader soft materials/polymer
science disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained under this project will be further leveraged through the Complex Fluids
Design Consortium (CFDC) at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership
that is addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex
fluid formulations.