* 0904839
* Thermal Imaging of Exosolar Planets with Coronagraphic Optics for the Large Binocular Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Johanan Codona, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 08/31/2013
* USD 486,355.00

It is extremely difficult to be able to see a small faint object next to a much
larger and much brighter object. This is the task that is faced by astronomers
who would like to see a planet in orbit about its parent star. Because distances
to even the nearest stars are very large, planets appear from earth to be so
close to the stars that their light is lost in starlight. The traditional way of
looking for faint objects next to brighter objects is to put an occulting mask
(usually a circular disk) in front of the bright star. However, some of the
light still manages to leak out into the area around the star due to the well-
known optical phenomenon of diffraction. The light that leaks out is still much,
much brighter than a planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Matthew Kenworthy from the
University of Arizona and his colleagues have demonstrated an enhanced occulting
disk technique that increases the suppression of the star's light a factor of
100 by shaping the mask to cause optical interference at strategic distances
from the star. A star appears to us as essentially a pin-point of light somewhat
broadened by passage of the light through the earth's atmosphere. Most of the
light is concentrated in the center, but some of it is spread out by the
telescope optics into "Airy diffraction rings" - circles of relative brightness
and darkness - around the central image of the star. By cleverly shaping the
disk (termed an "apodizing phase plate") these diffraction rings can be greatly
suppressed allowing fainter objects to be detected. Dr. Kenworthy is now
developing an improved version of his apodizing phase plates that will suppress
the diffracted light by a factor of 10,000 and will allow astronomers to detect
Jupiter sized planets around nearby stars. This exciting research is supported
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through the Advanced Technology and
Instrumentation program.