* 0904217
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Economic Change and Continuity during the Initial Period at the Castillo de Huaricanga (Fortaleza Valley, Peru)
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Martin Authier, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. R. Alan Covey, Martin Authier will excavate at the
Castillo de Huaricanga, a monumental complex of pyramids, platforms, and plazas
constructed around 1000 BC in the Fortaleza Valley on the north-central coast of
Peru. The excavations will test whether or not elite residences, central storage
facilities, and craft production areas were located within the monumental
center. Authier will clear loose surface debris from three large areas of the
monumental complex in order to record the architectural configuration, and then
excavate two rooms in each area to determine the function of the spaces based on
architectural features and the associated artifact assemblage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will broaden the
understanding of the early complex societies on the coast of Peru, and it will
contribute to the science of anthropology by expanding on cultural evolutionary
theory, focusing on small-scale changes within emergent complex societies.
Excavations at the Castillo de Huaricanga will add to the understanding of
variability in monumental centers along the Peruvian coast during the Initial
Period. The research will focus on the complex interplay between local tradition
and interregional interaction in the elites' management and maintenance of an
economic power base. The investigations will also offer a rare look at change
and continuity between the Late Archaic (~3000 BC-1800 BC) and the Initial
Period (~800 BC - 900 BC) because the Castillo de Huaricanga is located near a
Late Archaic monumental complex that has been excavated in recent years.
Moreover, the research will contribute to the anthropological understanding of
emergent complex societies. Anthropological theory of cultural evolution has
been moving beyond the taxonomic issues toward the recognition of great
variability in early complex societies and the importance of individual agents
in small-scale changes. The archaeological study of the Castillo de Huaricanga
will test how elites maintain their economic power base though small changes
based on the larger regional changes that affect them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the research include academic collaboration with Peruvian
archaeologists, the advancement of education, and community involvement in
developing tourism and managing the cultural resources. Close collaboration with
a Peruvian co-director will help advance academic dialogue between scholars in
Peru and the U.S. The research will also involve Peruvian and American students
in both the excavation and laboratory analysis, which will give the hands-on
training and experience that are essential for education in archaeology.
Finally, the local community of Huaricanga will be involved in the investigation
of their rich cultural patrimony. In addition to employing experienced local
workers, the project will involve the whole community by giving site tours,
public talks, and working with local archaeologists who are working to establish
a small museum in the community. It is essential that archaeologists work with
the community to protect the invaluable cultural heritage. By demonstrating the
value of the cultural resources in the area, the researchers will protect the
site from future damage from looters, farmers, and pastoralists who have damaged
the site in the past.