* 0904818
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Computing, Visualization, and Science Discovery of Turbulent Sooting Flames
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ramanan Sankaran, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 266,743.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Petascale Computing, Visualization, and
Science Discovery of Turbulent Sooting Flames Principal Investigator: Im, Hong
G. [Lead] Institution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor Proposal No: OCI-0904660
Principal Investigator: Trouve, Arnaud C Institution: University of Maryland
College Park Proposal No: OCI-0904480 Principal Investigator: Haworth, Daniel C.
Institution: Pennsylvania State Univ University Park Proposal No: OCI-0904649
Principal Investigator: Lu, Tianfeng Institution: University of Connecticut
Proposal No: OCI-0904771 Principal Investigator: Sankaran, Ramanan Institution:
University of Tennessee Knoxville Proposal No: OCI-0904818 Principal
Investigator: Ma, Kwan-Liu Institution: University of California-Davis Proposal
No: OCI-0905008

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Energy efficiency, the environment, and human health can be affected by
combustion-generated soot, so controlling soot is a major technological and
societal concern. This research is directed toward achieving soot prediction
from turbulent combustion by using peta-flop computing. A team of six research
groups is working together to develop a peta-flop software package that will
capture the physics and chemistry of turbulent sooting flames at an
unprecedented level of detail and realism. These research efforts are expected
to lead to breakthroughs in our fundamental understanding of many important
scientific issues related to energy conversion and pollutant control. The
comprehensive software package developed here will allow detailed consideration
of gas-phase chemistry, soot formation, and radiative heat transfer phenomena.
It will extend a previous teraflop code for direct numerical simulation (DNS) of
turbulent combustion by enhancing parallelism at the grid, operator, and
equation levels. Other goals include reduced chemical-kinetic mechanisms for
soot formation associated with different hydrocarbon fuels; spectrally resolved
radiative heat-transfer models for gases and soot particles allowing arbitrary
optical thickness; a soot aerosol and transport model based on the combination
of sectional and moment methods; multivariate dataset and data-mining software;
novel fault tolerance and checkpoint capabilities; in-situ visualization; and
automated feature extraction and tracking of limit phenomena such as
ignition/extinction in sooting flames. The new simulation capability will be
tested in laboratory-scale turbulent flames at high Reynolds and Damk√∂hler
numbers.

This collaborative research will enhance the nation?s competitiveness by
engaging a new generation of students in multi-disciplinary computational
science and engineering. Faculty, students, and the resulting software
development will benefit from the interdisciplinary interchange of computer
science and domain science necessary to ensure that the code is designed and
optimized efficiently. Dissemination of the software will occur through an open-
source license. The multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional aspects of the
project will naturally lead to a number of opportunities for sponsoring high
school and undergraduate student research programs. The activities will also
complement and benefit from close collaboration with other research groups
worldwide in combustion research as well as in computer science.