* 0904749
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Unification Laboratory: Increasing the Power of Cryptographic Protocol Analysis Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jose Meseguer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project develops cryptographic protocol reasoning techniques that take into
account algebraic properties of cryptosystems. Traditionally, formal methods for
cryptographic protocol verification view cryptographic operations as a black
box, ignoring the properties of cryptographic algorithms that can be exploited
to design attacks. The proposed research uses a novel approach based on
equational unification to build new more expressive and efficient search
algorithms for algebraic theories relevant to cryptographic protocols.
Equational unification gives a compact representation of all circumstances under
which two different terms correspond to the same behavior. The algorithms are
implemented and integrated into Maude-NPA, a system that has been successful in
symbolic protocol analysis. It is demonstrated that Maude-NPA when enriched with
such powerful unification algorithms can analyze protocols and ensure their
reliability, which could not be done otherwise.

Improved techniques for analyzing security are helpful both in assuring that
systems are free of bugs, and in speeding up the acceptance of new systems based
on the confidence gained by a formal analysis. This research will lead to the
design and implementation of next generation tools for protocol analysis.
Algorithms developed will be made available to researchers as a library suitable
for use with protocol analysis tools. Tools from the project will help students
understand concepts relevant to protocol design and get hands-on experience.
Equational unification for algebraic theories is not only useful for protocol
analysis, but also for program analysis in general, thus making the results of
this project to be widely relevant.