* 0904773
* Collaborative Research: Simulation and Analysis of Turbulent Jet Noise Using Arbitrary-Order Hermite Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Thomas Hagstrom, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 438,993.00

Hagstrom and Colonius&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the
American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigators, with their students and postdocs,
pursue an interdisciplinary project with three primary aims. The first aim is
the development, optimization, and dissemination of novel computational methods
based on arbitrary-order Hermite approximations that efficiently utilize
petascale facilities to solve complex, multiple-scale, time-dependent systems of
partial differential equations. Secondly, Hermite methods are applied to the
direct simulation of turbulent jet noise at Reynolds numbers more than an order
of magnitude beyond those currently available, paving the way for future
simulations under flow conditions relevant to engineering design. The final goal
is the development and application of post-processing techniques to use the
simulation data to discover the basic physical mechanisms responsible for the
jet noise, improve the inputs to engineering models, and inform strategies for
noise reduction. The unique properties of Hermite methods make them ideal for
high-resolution simulations on high-performance computing platforms. This is the
first instance where they are fully exercised to attack a difficult problem. The
methods themselves can be profitably used in any application requiring high
accuracy, and a library of optimized building blocks along with templates for
their application is created and made freely available to the scientific
community. To understand jet noise is an immense scientific challenge. The
radiated sound, which carries only a minuscule fraction of the flow energy,
results from both small-scale turbulence and the complex dynamics of larger-
scale coherent structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The efficient utilization of
the next generation of high-performance computing systems is hindered by the
heterogeneous nature of the hardware. This project is focused on new methods
that are both flexible enough for complex architectures, and powerful enough to
deliver high-resolution approximations. Jet noise is an environmental problem
subject to increasingly severe regulation throughout the world. To meet the
ambitious noise reduction goals under discussion, a greatly enhanced
understanding of the basic physics is needed. The simulations and follow-up
analysis to be completed by the investigators bring us much closer to the goal
of discovering the subtle physical mechanisms responsible for the acoustic
radiation and to the rational design of methods to suppress it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;