* 0904136
* Support of Student Participation in the North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC-2009-- Cincinnati, Ohio; June 21-June 26, 2009)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* William Ausich, Paleontological Society
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2010
* USD 25,125.00

Support of Student Participation in the North American Paleontological
Convention (NAPC-2009--Cincinnati, Ohio; June 21-June 26, 2009)

William I. Ausich, Paleontological Society EAR-0904136

This grant was supported by funds from both the Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology Program (GEO) and the Systematic Biology & Biodiversity Inventories
Cluster (BIO)

ABSTRACT The North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC) is held every four
years to bring together disparate parts of the paleontological sciences that
otherwise seldom meet. It is supported by paleontological groups headquartered
in North America and is open to all who are interested in paleontology. The
meeting planned for June 21 through June 26, 2009 at the University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio will be the ninth NAPC. Furthermore, the 2009 NAPC
coincides with the bicentennial of the birth of Charles Darwin and the
sesquicentennial of the publication of The Origin of Species. NSF has supported
the participation of American students in previous NAPCs and this proposal
requests funds to support students at next year's meeting. Based on past
experience, the Organizing Committee anticipates that about 100-150 students
will attend. The support will be used for two purposes. First of all funds will
be provided to the meeting organizers to reduce the cost of student
registration. Secondly, funds will be available to support the travel costs for
some students to the meeting. Grantees would be selected on the basis of merit,
and appropriate attention will be paid to the need to support minority groups
and women.