* 0904065
* Collaborative Research:   Integrated Analysis of In-Flight Collision Avoidance Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Fabrizio Gabbiani, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 267,762.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

All animals rely on the integration of sensory, postural and environmental
information to generate complex motor behaviors such as swimming, playing tennis
or flying. This collaborative project will study how the nervous system
transforms information gathered by the senses into motor commands, based on the
biomechanical properties of the muscles as well as the mechanical and
environmental constraints imposed on the body by the outside world through the
laws of physics. A favorable model system to study these complex aspects of
behavior is the generation of collision avoidance maneuvers in flying insects,
as much is known about their nervous system and the aerodynamic mechanisms
underlying insect flight. The three groups that will collaborate on this project
are based at Baylor College of Medicine, Rice University and the University of
Arizona and will bring complementary expertise in neurophysiology, advanced
computer modeling techniques, and aerodynamic engineering, respectively. This
work will provide a comprehensive description of in-flight collision avoidance
in response to visual threats and will thus contribute to an integrated
understanding of the basis of complex sensory-motor transformations underlying
behavior. The new insights that will be gathered over the course of the work
could be applied to the design of real-time artificial vision systems and
collision avoidance systems for various vehicles. Finally, this project will
contribute to research education by allowing interested students to acquire
interdisciplinary laboratory experience at the graduate as well as the
undergraduate level, through various summer research programs. Students involved
in the project at Baylor College of Medicine will learn how to record nervous
activity from the brain of behaving animals and model its impact on behavior.