* 0904675
* Realistic Simulation of Jet Engine Noise using Petaflop Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Zhiyuan Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,291,668.00

Blaisdell 0904675

The goal of this study is to advance the science of subsonic and supersonic jet
noise prediction for modern-day turbofan aircraft engines using petascale
computing. Jet noise is an important issue due to increased air traffic,
penalties for noisier aircraft, future stringent noise regulations and military
operational requirements. Previous experiments have shown that a 50% decrease in
jet noise power output can be achieved by certain chevron and lobe mixer designs
without essentially changing the net thrust of the engine. However, the physical
mechanisms for the reduced noise are not well understood. The effect on noise of
mixing devices, in particular chevrons and lobed mixers, is the focus of the
present work.

The PIs will investigate turbulent mixing by accurately simulating it with
advanced computational techniques based on large eddy simulation (LES). Integral
acoustic methods will extend the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) results to
the far-field. Processing speeds and memory sizes of existing supercomputers
limit current simulations to low Reynolds numbers and idealized geometries for
the mixing devices. Thus, these simulations do not allow design and optimization
of mixing for noise reduction, especially since these mixing devices influence
the high frequencies of the noise spectrum, increasing the grid resolution
requirements. Modeling at realistic Reynolds numbers and nozzle geometries
requires tens of billions of points. The PIs algorithms will be designed to take
advantage of multi-level parallelism and, within a node of such an architecture,
address the 'memory wall' aspect of multicore architectures where the cost of
arithmetic operations is much smaller than memory references. These algorithms
will be based on a mixture of the transposition scheme and the multi-block
approaches we used in the past. The methodology will be validated by making
comparisons with both turbulence and acoustics measurements from high-quality
experiments using realistic nozzle geometries.

This project represents a computational-engineering activity integrating modern
modeling, parallel algorithm design, and fine-tuned implementations on petascale
architectures. The project will help promote interdisciplinary research,
teaching, training, and learning by training three Ph.D. graduate students. One
undergraduate research assistant will be involved during each summer for the
five years of the project. Outreach to inner-city high school students from
Indianapolis will be done through Purdue's Science Bound Program. The findings
of this research will be shared with the aerospace and computer industries. As
appropriate, results will also be shared with the general public through the
Purdue News Service.