* 0904157
* Nonlocal Electrodynamics Effect and Microscopic Intrinsic Parameters in Pippard Superconductors. Experimental Study
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Vladimir Kozhevnikov, Tulsa Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 190,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is one of the most
striking phenomena of consequence for scientific understanding and applications.
Discovered nearly one hundred years ago, it took scientists more than four
decades to achieve a general understanding of this phenomenon. Soon after,
practical applications of superconductivity began emerging. Probably, the most
well-known of those is Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Since 1986 physicists have
faced a new challenge, the discovery of unconventional superconductors, which
defied conventional understanding. The basic concept of superconductivity theory
is the formation of Cooper pairs, ?quasiparticles? consisting of two-electrons
that transport current without resistance (a supercurrent). The dimension of a
Cooper pair is of the order of a thousand atomic sizes and a pair?s mass is
about 2.5 times that of an electron. Knowledge of these parameters is important
both for the theory and for practical applications. Surprisingly enough,
experimental values of these key characteristics have not yet been
experimentally established for any superconductor. This individual investigator
award supports a project which goal is to measure the size and the mass of the
Cooper pairs in conventional superconductors. The experiments will be performed
using the most advanced nuclear techniques of condensed matter physics. Direct
involvement of community college students constitutes a major educational merit
of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The
principal microscopic intrinsic parameters of superconductors, important for
both superconductivity theory and for practical applications, are the London
penetration depth at zero temperature and the Pippard coherence length. To date
the experimental values of these parameters have not been established for any
superconductor. This individual investigator award supports a project to
directly measure the London penetration depth and the Pippard coherence length
in classical Pippard (extreme Type-I) superconductors, specifically in Al, In
and Sn. Taking into account that the Pippard coherence length represents the
size of the Cooper pairs and the London penetration depth is associated with the
mass of the quasiparticles, the project is targeted at obtaining experimental
values of these key characteristics of the Cooper pairs for the indicated
materials. Values of the microscopic intrinsic parameters will be obtained from
the profile of the magnetic field penetrating into the superconductors in the
Meissner state. The magnetic field profiles will be measured using polarized
neutron reflectometry, low-energy muon spin rotation spectroscopy and beta-
detected NMR techniques. Direct involvement of community college students
constitutes a major educational merit of this project.