* 0904929
* Impact of Growth and Process Parameters in Growth of Strain Reduced III-Nitride Layers on Ion Implanted AlN/Si Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Joan Redwing, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,652.00

Technical: This project focuses on the development of a fundamental
understanding of strain reduction mechanisms in overgrown gallium nitride (GaN)
layers on silicon. The central idea is to use ion implantation through an AlN
buffer layer to create a highly defective layer in silicon substrate, in the
vicinity of the interface between the AlN buffer and silicon substrate.
Reduction in strain due to the formation of the defected layer is expected to
greatly reduce GaN film fracturing as well as the formation of threading
dislocation defects. Preliminary results suggest that a large reduction in
strain in GaN is possible using this approach. However, the fundamental
mechanism responsible for such improvements is not yet understood. In this
project, various ex-situ and in-situ materials characterization techniques will
be used for the formulation of an understanding of the relationship between ion
implantation conditions and the morphology and thickness of the epitaxially
grown AlN buffer layer as well as the type and density of dislocations and film
fracturing observed in the overgrown GaN layer.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. The success of the project would help to the
development of high performance optoelectronic devices on large area dislocation
reduced III-nitrides on Si(111) and Si(100) substrates. The project cultivate a
sense of leadership in graduate students while offering undergraduate students
an opportunity to learn scientific research and problem-solving skills via
mentoring from graduate students and faculty in a collaborative environment. The
project involves faculty and students at the College of Nanoscale Science and
Engineering of the University at Albany - State University of New York and at
the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Pennsylvania State
University. In addition, a public outreach program, Science and Technology
exhibit in the Mall, is expected to expose over 1000 families and their children
to science and technology each year in a fun and informal environment.