* 0904312
* Collaborative Research: NSCC/SA Status, Manipulating Group Threats, &amp; Conflict within &amp; between Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Benard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2013
* USD 95,695.00

Previous research suggests that groups tend to become more cohesive or tightly
bonded when facing threats from the outside, whether those threats come from
other groups or from the natural world. In the face of such threats, people tend
to become more self-sacrificing and more willing to place the good of the group
over their own personal well-being. Furthermore, when a group is threatened, its
members also become less likely to compete for positions of authority or
dominance within the group, in favor of investing their effort and resources in
helping the group as a whole succeed. While this tendency underlies many acts of
great selflessness and heroism, it also may become a group's Achilles heel.
Earlier experimental work by the researchers showed that some group members --
especially those with dominant positions within the group -- exploit people's
tendency to behave altruistically in the face of threats to the group, by
manufacturing false threats and profiting from the subsequent self-sacrifice of
others. Dominant individuals can bolster their positions within the group by
using the appearance of a threat to discourage competition for their position.
This project extends these findings by exploring the mechanisms underlying this
tendency of dominant group members to misrepresent threats to the group in order
to maintain their position. The researchers also will explore the relationship
between "threat fatigue," which occurs when group members become skeptical and
unresponsive to apparent threats, and the extent to which individuals can obtain
accurate information about the threats on their own. Finally, the researchers
will investigate the dynamics of threat manipulation, testing whether patterns
of threat manipulation and responses to such manipulation differ as a function
of the nature of the group (i.e., democratic and non-democratic groups) and the
nature of the threat (i.e., stemming from another group or from non-human causes
such as natural disasters). The intellectual contributions thus include an
enhanced understanding of why threat manipulation occurs, and how information,
political institutions, and the nature of threats shape behavior. The broader
impacts of this work include bringing together research from the biological and
social sciences and applying it to interactions within and between nations. The
dominance-threat manipulation link is crucial for understanding interactions
between leaders and citizens, avoiding the costs and perils of inappropriately
high or low vigilance, and for reducing corruption, abuses of power,
manipulation of citizens by leaders, and apathy regarding alleged threats to
national security.