* 0904879
* Collaborative Research: A Petaflop Cyberinfrastructure for Computing Free Energy Landscapes of Macro- and Biomolecular Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Peter Cummings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 584,488.00

The objective of this research is to develop a petascale cyberinfrastructure for
the efficient calculation of free energy landscapes for complex macro- and
biomolecular systems. The approach is to develop a cyberinfrastructure for
performing Wang-Landau calculations of free energy distributions on petaflop
architectures and, to demonstrate its effectiveness, apply it to two outstanding
science problems (conformations of a linker protein in solution and self-
assembly of lipids). Free energy is a measure of the energy of the system that
takes into account entropic and thermal effects. Understanding the relative free
energies of, and barriers between, various conformations of macromolecular and
biological molecules, including proteins, and of phase transitions between
disordered and self-assembled structures, is an extremely important area of
chemistry, biochemistry and biophysics and is an area where increased
computational capabilities hold the promise of significant
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research
is that it has the potential to result in new algorithms for performing free
energy calculations on petascale architectures, in addition to yielding insights
into conformational equilibria and self-assembly in macro- and biomolecular
systems. The broader impacts of the proposed research include the development of
a robust open source petascale cyberinfrastructure for performing free energy
calculations made possible only through a strong synergy between physics,
chemistry, biology, engineering, and computer science. Through the research
performed and educational and outreach programs at the participating
institutions, the project exposes high school, undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers to the frontiers of computational physics,
chemistry and materials research.&lt;br/&gt;