* 0904353
* Optical reconstruction of cortical connectivity
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Rafael Yuste, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 730,000.00

One of the greatest challenges in computational neuroscience is to reconstruct
the connectivity of large, complex neuronal networks. The ability to decipher
circuit connectivity would have a fundamental impact on our understanding of the
dynamical properties and the functional organization of the nervous system.
Knowledge of prevalent connectivity patterns will also shed light on the
developmental constraints and learning rules under which the network might be
operating.

Recent developments open new possibilities for collaborative efforts to tackle
this basic problem. First, advances in two-photon imaging and photostimulation
methods make it possible to observe the simultaneous activity of large ensembles
of neurons, while stimulating neurons in arbitrary spatiotemporal patterns.
Second, new statistical methods for extracting action potential timing
information from calcium imaging data, and for modeling the response properties
of small collections of neurons, are now efficient enough that they may be
implemented on-line and scaled up to understand the function of large networks.

The investigators will combine these new experimental and analytical methods to
estimate, for the first time, the connectivity diagram of large neocortical
circuits, using two-photon calcium imaging of spontaneous and evoked activity in
thalamocortical slices. A key novel step here is to directly verify the
estimated circuit model with two-photon glutamate uncaging, which allows any
neuron in the circuit to be activated (with single-cell resolution) while the
evoked postsynaptic responses are monitored.

This interdisciplinary project has three complementary specific aims: (1)
Develop statistically-optimal methods for real-time inference of spike timing
from calcium imaging data. (2) Use these spike timing inference methods to
estimate the network connectivity from large-scale multineuronal calcium-imaging
of cortical slices. (3) Confirm the derived connectivity maps with glutamate
uncaging and patch clamping, by photoactivating putative presynaptic neurons
while recording intracellularly from postsynaptic cells. The proposed methods
should also prove applicable to study other central and peripheral regions of
the nervous system; data analysis software will be made publicly available
online, to enhance the infrastructure for research and education in
computational neuroscience.