* 0904288
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Multiscale Models for the Cerebrovasculature: Algorithms, Software and Petaflop Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* George Karniadakis, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 08/31/2013
* USD 678,165.00

Future petaflop simulations of realistic biological and physical systems will
necessarily involve concurrent multiscale modeling. This project will address
fundamental mathematical, algorithmic and software issues for simulating a human
brain vascular model, the first of its kind, consisting of 100 large 3D arteries
(Macrovascular Network, MaN), 10 million arterioles (Mesovascular Network,MeN)
and one billion capillaries (Microvascular Network, MiN). The three-level MaN-
MeN-MiN integration offers a general platform for developing hybrid
deterministic-stochastic systems, scalable algorithms, and scalable multiscale
software to handle coupling between heterogeneous PDEs and also between
continuum and atomistic formulations. Building upon their initial work on the
human arterial tree and the new brain imaging data, PIs propose image-based 3D
Navier-Stokes simulations for fully resolving MaN, coupled to subpixel
stochastic simulations of MeN and MiN to complete the closure. Project will
implement an MPI/UPC hybrid model to exploit the strengths of both programming
paradigms: the high scalability and rich functionality for process control in
MPI, and the low communication overhead for small messages and fine-grain
parallelism in UPC. We will further seek to integrate multi-threading into the
MPI/UPC model, especially for dynamic refinement. The main software advancement
will be the development of MPIg tailored for multiscale applications, like the
MaN-MeN-MiN problem, on a single or multiple petaflop platforms. Several open
issues associated with co-processing and visualization of petabyte-size data
will be also addressed.

Broader Impact: This work will contribute to Computational Mathematics
(interfacing heterogeneous PDEs, and also PDEs-atomistic systems); to Computer
Science (development of UPC/MPI, multiscale MPIg, and increased leverage of
vendor-supplied MPI in MPIg); and Bioengineering (biomechanics gateway to
simulate brain pathologies). This proposal is transformative in that it shifts
the computational paradigm to a new level (orders of magnitude above the state-
of-the-art) that will allow, for first time, realistic simulations of
cerebrovasculature in health and disease. The validated algorithms for peta°op
computing we propose are of general interest for use in many multiscale
biological and physical applications, including vascular trees of all living
organisms and also in simulations of nuclear reactors and other power/chemical
plants. The new simulation environment, with the human brain as a backdrop, will
be critical in training a new generation of inter-disciplinary scientists to be
comfortable in using multiscale mathematics and scalable software tools for
extreme computing. Project will engage postdocs, graduate, undergraduate and
high school students. We will use 3D immersive/interactive visualizations as an
opportunity to educate students about simulation, predictability, and other
issues of computer science, engineering, and applied mathematics. Outreach
activities will involve female students from middle and high schools and
students from the special MET high schools.