* 0904034
* Nanoclusters of Boron and Borides
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 09/30/2013
* USD 766,024.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Atomic clusters containing a few to few hundred atoms exhibit
dramatic size-dependent chemical and physical properties and form the foundation
for nano-science. In this proposal, supported by both the Divisions of Materials
Research (DMR) and Chemisty (CHE) at NSF, Dr. Wang and his students plan to
investigate nanoclusters of elemental boron and metal borides. Their experiment
involves primarily photoelectron spectroscopy studies of size-selected cluster
anions, produced by a laser vaporization cluster source. Photoelectron spectra
contain electronic structure fingerprints for the clusters, which are combined
with theoretical calculations to provide information about the structure,
stability, and chemical bonding of the clusters. The objective of the research
is to elucidate the structural transitions of boron nanoclusters as a function
of size and lay the foundation for new forms of boron nanostructures. In
addition, high resolution photoelectron imaging is proposed for boron clusters
to obtain vibrational information. The proposed research will systematically
elucidate the structures and structural transitions of boron clusters to build
the knowledge base for understanding the viability and stability of boron
nanotubes and fullerenelike nanostructures. Guided by the cluster studies,
exploratory synthesis is also planned. Transition metal diborides have been
recently investigated as candidates for superhard materials. However, very
little is known about the metal-boron chemical bond at the molecular level. Dr.
Wang and his students also plan to study the structures and bonding of small
bimetallic boride clusters, MxBy (M = Re, Os, Ir, Ru, and Fe), by combining
photoelectron spectroscopy and theoretical calculations. Information about the
M-B bond strengths, and the stability and bonding in the MxBy boride clusters,
will be valuable to design and understand superhard diboride materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Fundamental studies of atomic clusters have led to major
advances in nanoscience and materials science, such as the fullerenes and carbon
nanotubes. The focus of this research program is on clusters of boron and metal
borides. The new molecular structures and concepts of chemical bonding
discovered in the gas-phase clusters are expected to have broad impact in
chemistry, as well as in nanoscience and materials science. The proposed work on
boron clusters may lead to discoveries of boron nanotubes and boron fullerenes,
which may open up new directions of research. The metal boride cluster work will
help the design and discovery of new superhard boride materials, which have wide
industrial applications. The research program will involve significant national
and international collaborations, providing a dynamic learning environment for
students engaged in the research. The research program is also integrated to the
teaching of both graduate and undergraduate students and contribute to the
development of research infrastructure through new research methodologies.

