* 0904731
* NSCC/SA: Deciphering Civil Conflict in the Middle East
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhenchao Qian, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,979.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.

The Middle East is a global hotspot with over thirty percent of global
international terrorist attacks, a major share of deaths from internal armed
conflict, and all of the inter-state wars of the past three decades such as the
1980-1988 Iran-Iraq conflict and the 1990-1991 Gulf war. Because it is a
strategic region with a significant share of the world's energy reserves and the
crossroads of the world, it is important to understand the nature of Middle East
conflicts and the possibilities for their resolution. Conflict in the Middle
East represents a central challenge to twenty-first century international
security.

This research project will develop and implement a new conceptual framework for
understanding civil conflict. The focus of the project will be on the effects of
transnational processes such as economic rentierism (the derivation of national
revenues by renting internal resources to external clients), international
migration, and far-reaching social networks. The project will investigate how
these processes shaped the development of civil protest and terrorism in the
Middle East since the Gulf War.

Understanding cross-national processes requires interdisciplinary conceptual and
methodological expertise. Thus, this project will bring together a team
including scholars from sociology, geography, and economics, all with
international expertise. Several either reside in or originate from Middle East
nations. The results of this research will inform scholarly and policy-related
understanding of the transnational, transformational processes in the Middle
East that were relevant to civil conflict during the 1990s and remain important
today.

This research will directly influence the interdisciplinary community of
researchers, educators and future scholars concerned with the early warning of
civil conflict. It will promote an agenda for future research that advances
interdisciplinary and multi-method assessment of transnational processes so that
the complex consequences of regional change can be anticipated. In addition to
policy insights, it will also create visual products (such as geo-spatial
presentations of Palestinian migrations and the growth of transnational
networks) that will be useful to educators, students and policy makers
interested in the changing international order and factors that influence
international security.