* 0904177
* Development of Composite Likelihood Method in High-Dimensional Correlated Data Analysis: Estimation, Inference and Model Selection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Peter Song, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,845.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111&amp;#8208;5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in computing
and measurement technologies have given subject-matter scientists opportunities
to develop large scale experiments and ambitious information collection schemes
that have led to various types of high-dimensional correlated data. This
proposal focuses on the development of statistical theory and methods of
composite likelihood for analyzing such high-dimensional correlated data. In
particular, the principle investigator plans to achieve three research goals: To
develop a new algorithm analogous to the EM algorithm in the context of
composite likelihood theory for the analysis of incomplete high-dimensional
data; to develop a new model selection criterion analogous to the Bayesian
Information Criterion for the scenario where the number of model parameters may
increase in the sample size; and to develop a new procedure to evaluate and
boost the efficiency loss due to dimension reduction in the composite likelihood
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the developed methods will be applied to
the analysis of data from practical studies to facilitate the understanding of
subject-matter sciences and ultimately to improve human knowledge and quality of
life. The principle investigator has close connections with researchers in other
fields such as Biology, Computer Science, Epidemiology, Health and Medical
Sciences at University of Michigan. He has been working closely with these
scientists who will serve as local users of the methodologies and provide
valuable feedback. The project is also devoted to substantial educational
initiatives that will involve undergraduate and graduate students and expose
them to state-of-the-art research in various interdisciplinary topics related to
the proposed research. These include new courses, short courses at major
conferences, summer workshops, mentoring, and software development. These and
other dissemination activities will increase awareness of modern powerful
methods for data analysis among scientists from other fields.