* 0904999
* Relaxation and Aging Processes out of Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michel Pleimling, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education in systems far from equilibrium that
evolve with slow dynamics. The PI aims to generalize a theoretical framework
that he has proposed to systems that evolve according to a detailed balance
violating dynamics and that therefore relax toward nonequilibrium steady states.
The PI's framework is based on the notion of local scale invariance. Progress
along these lines would enhance understanding of relaxation and aging at a
fundamental level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining advanced analytical and
numerical techniques, the PI will explore several novel aspects of relaxation
and aging processes, including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Aging and fluctuations
in reaction-diffusion systems. Even though reversible chemical reactions are
known to be characterized by slow dynamics, their aging regime has not yet been
studied in detail. Building a predictive theory of aging would be highly
desirable. Moreover, such processes are quite generic, occurring for any value
of the system parameters. Thus, it should be relatively easy to set up
experiments with real systems in order to verify the predictions from this
theory. In addition, the proposed study of fluctuations in irreversible
reaction-diffusion systems will yield new insights into the generic properties
of truly out-of-equilibrium systems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Aging in growth processes. The
study of aging phenomena in growth processes began quite recently, and has
addressed only linear Langevin equations. To describe processes beyond the
validity of linear approximations, the PI proposes to investigate aging
phenomena associated with nonlinear Langevin equations, as, e.g., the Kardar-
Parisi-Zhang equation.&lt;br/&gt;3. A novel approach for the description of
aging systems. A recently uncovered mapping between nonequilibrium physics
problems and string theoretical problems opens a novel and uncharted approach
that the PI proposes to explore. This approach, together with anticipated
generalizations of the PI's successful theory of local scale invariance, offers
the exciting possibility of a unifying theoretical framework for the description
of wide classes of aging systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training through research
is the central educational aspect of the present proposal. The project allows
both undergraduate and graduate students can contribute in a substantial and
meaningful way. The students will have ample opportunities to become proficient
in various analytical and numerical techniques, including parallel computing on
state-of-the-art high performance computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education broadly on many-particle systems that in states far from equilibrium.
Nonequilibrium systems and processes are ubiquitous and encompass a wide range
of phenomena from materials growth to chemical systems that exhibit interesting
spatial patterns to the processes that sustain life. The PI aims to advance our
understanding of systems that are out of equilibrium by developing a theoretical
approach to describe how a system in a nonequilbrium state transforms to a
nonequilbrium state, as opposed to an equilibrium state, with time. This will
contribute to our understanding of relaxation and aging processes that occur in
materials, such as glasses, as well as chemical and other systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training through research is the central educational
aspect of the present proposal. The project allows both undergraduate and
graduate students can contribute in a substantial and meaningful way. The
students will have ample opportunities to become proficient in various
analytical and numerical techniques, including parallel computing on state-of-
the-art high performance computers.