* 0904257
* 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Thin Film and Crystal Growth Mechanisms; New London, NH; Summer 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2008,11/30/2009
* Jonah Erlebacher, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 11/30/2009
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0904257 PI: Erlebacher, Jonah ORG: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Thin
Film and Crystal Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The 2009 Gordon
Research Conference on Thin Films and Crystallization addresses the fundamental
issues underlying processes associated with crystal growth, which is central to
a broad array of technologies. The conference will attract scientists from a
wide range of disciplines, from semiconductor thin film growth to
biocrystallization and crystallization for pharmaceutical drug delivery.
Sessions devoted to the following timely topics are included: crystal surface
morphology and kinetics, low dimensional crystals, fundamentals of crystal
nucleation and growth, large biomolecule crystallization, biocrystallization and
biomineralization, organic electronics, advanced electron microscopy, and
structure function relationships on catalytic crystal surfaces. These topics
intersect the portfolios of the NSF Biomaterials and Solid State and Materials
Chemistry programs, which will provide partial support for the
Conference..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The Gordon Research
Conferences have a long standing reputation for providing an informal atmosphere
for intimate scientific exchange among scientists from around the world. The
plans for this conference fit this mold very well. The Vice-Chair and at least 6
of the 19 invited speakers are females. Participation in the Conference is by
invitation, and the organizers describe a plan to ensure participation from a
diverse selection of scientists, including especially women, racial and ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, and others from groups that have been
traditionally underrepresented in science. NSF support will help to facilitate
participation by young scientists who might otherwise be unable to attend. The
organizers have given due attention in the expenditure of support funds provided
to further the NSF goals of broadening participation and integration of research
and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;