* 0904096
* Diffusion in Rare Earth Binary and Ternary Intermetallics Studied using PAC
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gary Collins, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2013
* USD 419,125.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Professor Collins and coworkers pioneered use of perturbed angular correlation
spectroscopy (PAC) to measure diffusional jump frequencies of probe atoms in
highly ordered intermetallic compounds. Jumps are detected via relaxation of the
nuclear quadrupole interaction caused by stochastic fluctuations in either the
orientation or magnitude of electric field gradients (EFG). The method has been
applied especially to ?line compounds? formed from rare earth and trielide
elements (Al, Ga, In). Exceptionally high frequencies have been observed that
are attributed to rapid motion of vacancies. Diffusion mechanisms have also been
elucidated experimentally by making measurements on pairs of samples of binary
alloys having the opposing boundary compositions. Comparison of measured jump
frequencies has been used to identify the type of vacancy (rare-earth or
trielide) that is predominantly responsible for diffusion. PAC experiments are
proposed for a range of binary, pseudo-binary and ternary line compounds.
Examples include Al4Ba, in which the EFGs at all sites are collinear, the
pseudo-binary compounds In3(La1-xPrx), which all have the L12 structure, and
LaCoIn5, a ternary phase that is structurally related to In3La. Short term
collaborations have been arranged to check the extent to which jump frequencies
of Cd impurity atoms and In host atoms differ.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Diffusion, or atom movement, in solids is important for understanding the
mechanical strength and stability of materials and affects many other
properties, such as the degree of crystalline order and magnetism. Increasingly
complex materials are becoming important to technology and there is great
interest in improving our understanding of diffusion phenomena in those
materials. Professor Collins and coworkers have pioneered use of a spectroscopy
derived from nuclear physics to directly measure frequencies of jumping of probe
atoms in highly-ordered compounds. In most solids, atoms move by hopping into
vacancies (missing atoms). Unusually high jump frequencies have been found in
certain classes of intermetallic compounds. By comparing measurements made on
two samples having slightly different compositions, Collins and coworkers have
been able to determine whether the vacancy on sites of element A or element B is
most responsible for diffusion. This has given an entirely new kind of insight
into diffusion phenomena. Studies are proposed on a range of binary and ternary
compounds. The project will involve participation and training of graduate and
undergraduate students. More than 12 graduate, undergraduate and high-school
students participated in research under a previous grant, including six women.
Results will be disseminated widely in publications and in conference
presentations and seminars. Also, short courses are planned on defects and
diffusion and on use of nuclear methods to study solids. A collaboration has
been established to carry out some experiments at CERN, the European nuclear
physics center in Geneva, that are not possible in the US.