* 0904832
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Approximate Computational Geometry via Controlled Linear Perturbation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Elisha Sacks, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 308,000.00

The investigators will develop an approximate computational geometry that is
algorithm independent, accurate, and fast. Geometric predicate evaluation and
element construction will be performed approximately using floating point
arithmetic. Degeneracy will be handled transparently. The evaluation and
construction techniques will be encapsulated in a software library that will be
free for nonprofit use.

The research challenge is robustness: the output of an approximate algorithm
must be correct for a small perturbation of the given input. This definition
extends the numerical analysis definition of a stable algorithm to cover
combinatorial error. Robustness is a fundamental computer science problem that
is a major challenge in computational geometry. The predominant strategy in
computational geometry, exact computation using algebraic geometry, has high
computational complexity and contradicts the standard scientific and engineering
strategy of approximate computation with error bounds. The investigators will
adapt approximate computation to the special needs of computational geometry,
which is primarily combinatorial. This task involves core research at the
interface between computational geometry and numerical computing.

Robust approximate computation will transform how computational geometry is
taught, how algorithms are developed and implemented, and how the field
interacts with the wider scientific and engineering community. Introductory
courses will present a rigorous, practical robustness theory, instead of
treating robustness in an ad hoc, incomplete way. Programmers will implement
real RAM algorithms as stated, using our library to ensure robustness and to
handle degeneracy, instead of addressing these problems anew for every
algorithm, which is often a major research challenge. Computational geometry
will be available to other disciplines in the form of high-quality software
libraries, akin to modern applied mathematics libraries.