* 0904809
* Collaborative Research: Taming the scale explosion in nuclear structure calculations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Umit Catalyurek, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,402.00

Solving for the structure and reactions of the atomic nucleus

The discovery of nuclear fission revealed the tremendous amount of energy that
can be released when the strong bonds between the neutrons and protons forming
atomic nuclei are broken. Ever since that history-making discovery, theoretical
nuclear physicists have sought a detailed explanation of the properties of the
atomic nucleus based on knowledge of the strong force between these
constituents. When this goal is achieved, we will be able to predict reactions
that take place in extreme environments ? from the interiors of stars to the
core of nuclear reactors. Improving our knowledge of nuclear structure and
reactions will help us economically and safely harness nuclear phenomena in
support of a broad spectrum of humanitarian needs. Future nuclear science and
technology advances promise a growing line of medical, industrial and energy
applications. Nuclear medicine and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging provide
just two prominent medical applications that rely on elementary properties of
atomic nuclei.

This project aims to expand dramatically the reach as well as the impact of
nuclear theory by harnessing the vast computational power of NSF's leadership
class computer facilities under construction. The goal is to develop and
implement a symmetry-based extension of the ab initio no-core shell model. By
effectively ferreting out important interactions at the fundamental quantum
level, we can achieve accurate predictions of nuclear properties based upon a
deep understanding of the underlying forces. All participating particles are
treated on the same footing within a matrix (?shell model?) picture of the
quantum many-particle system, the nucleus. We aim to predict the structure and
reactions of light-nuclei important for stellar processes and, possibly, for
fusion reactors within five years. As part of this PetaApps grant, future
leaders ? primarily graduate students and postdocs, will be supported to conduct
this research under the guidance of senior investigators.