* 0904063
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Analysis of In-Flight Collision Avoidance Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sergey Shkarayev, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 243,906.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All animals rely on the integration of
sensory, postural and environmental information to generate complex motor
behaviors such as swimming, playing tennis or flying. This collaborative project
will study how the nervous system transforms information gathered by the senses
into motor commands, based on the biomechanical properties of the muscles as
well as the mechanical and environmental constraints imposed on the body by the
outside world through the laws of physics. A favorable model system to study
these complex aspects of behavior is the generation of collision avoidance
maneuvers in flying insects, as much is known about their nervous system and the
aerodynamic mechanisms underlying insect flight. The three groups that will
collaborate on this project are based at Baylor College of Medicine, Rice
University and the University of Arizona and will bring complementary expertise
in neurophysiology, advanced computer modeling techniques, and aerodynamic
engineering, respectively. This work will provide a comprehensive description of
in-flight collision avoidance in response to visual threats and will thus
contribute to an integrated understanding of the basis of complex sensory-motor
transformations underlying behavior. The new insights that will be gathered over
the course of the work could be applied to the design of real-time artificial
vision systems and collision avoidance systems for various vehicles. Finally,
this project will contribute to research education by allowing interested
students to acquire interdisciplinary laboratory experience at the graduate as
well as the undergraduate level, through various summer research programs.
Students involved in the project at the University of Arizona will learn how to
record aerodynamic parameters of flapping flight of animals and manmade flapping
wings.