* 0904287
* Multi-Timescale Molecular Simulation Study of Hydration Force, Hydrophobic Interaction and Shear Dynamics in Nanometer Confined Aqueous Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Yongsheng Leng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 01/31/2012
* USD 172,191.00

The forces induced between two molecularly smooth solid surfaces at nanometer
scale distances in an aqueous environment are ubiquitous in many diverse
systems, and the underlying mechanism is at the heart of numerous proposed
technologies. In this proposed project, the PIs will carry out a fundamental and
innovative molecular simulation study to explore the underlying mechanisms of
these forces, which can be classified into two main categories: The short-range
repulsive hydration force between two hydrophilic surfaces in dense electrolyte
solutions and the long-range hydrophobic attraction force between two
hydrophobic surfaces in water. A multi-timescale hybrid molecular simulation
method will be developed to investigate the nanoscale approach and shearing
between two surfaces. Understanding these physical phenomena is critical to many
technological applications, ranging from friction and lubrication in micro/nano
electro-mechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS) and biolubrication at biological
interfaces, to nanofluidics in ion channels (or through crowded intracellular
environments) and protein folding. The research objectives include: (1)
Development of a molecular simulation methodology that incorporates realistic
molecular models for the surface-water-ion complex in nanoconfined aqueous
system and mechanomolecular ensembles to represent the real situation in surface
force apparatus (SFA) experiments; (2) Fundamental studies of the underlying
mechanisms of hydration force between hydrophilic surfaces, the dewetting,
hydrophobic attraction and collapse between hydrophobic surfaces; and (3) Multi-
timescale hybrid molecular simulation study of nanoscale surface approach and
shearing, combined with the transient time correlation function (TTCF) formalism
applicable at low shear rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the proposed work lies in its goals to elucidate, at molecular level, the
underlying mechanisms of hydration forces, hydrophobic interaction and shear
dynamics of nanometer confined aqueous systems, to integrate the complementary
expertise of Leng and Cummings, and to coordinate the theoretical studies with
experimental studies in Jacob Klein's group. The broader impacts of the proposed
research lie in its enhancement of our knowledge in understanding the long-
standing fundamental questions related to the hydration force and hydrophobic
effects observed in SFA experiments. The new findings from the research program
will be communicated to SFA science community via publication, conference
presentation and website, and will be used to guide the engineering design for
biolubrication and bioMEMS/NEMS devices. These findings will also have potential
impact on the understanding of protein folding, self-assembly, and nanomechanics
in biology. One PhD student will be trained through this project. Undergraduate
students will participate in this interdisciplinary research program, funded by
the Vanderbilt Summer Undergraduate Research Program. Further, K-12 teachers
will have the opportunity to participate in the project through Vanderbilt
Summer Research Experience for Teachers programs. The PI and co-PI will offer
lectures based on the insights derived from this research work in a chemical
engineering graduate molecular simulation course, in the junior-level mechanical
engineering dynamics course (ME190, being taught by the PI), and in ES101,
Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering, an introductory course for freshmen
mechanical engineering students designed to excite their interest in frontier
research areas in mechanical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;