* 0904125
* Development of Innovative Statistical Tools in Design of Scientific Experiments and Surveillance Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Sam Hedayat, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 304,997.00

Providing flexibility to an experimenter in ensuring efficient and cost-
effective data collection methods in pharmaceutical, biotechnological,
agricultural and engineering studies have thrown up unprecedented challenges to
the design theorists. The investigator develops innovative design-based
techniques, in the classical sense as well as in the context of factorial
experiments and crossover designs with immediate applications in such areas as
biopharmaceutical trials, drug abuse liability trials, and evaluation of new
drugs for unwanted effects on electrical properties of the heart, which includes
QT/QTc trials in safety assessment. The issues of timely detection and
prevention of various types of adverse health events such as drug toxicity, are
gaining importance in surveillance related to public health and phase IV
clinical trials. The investigator also explores and develops relevant innovative
surveillance strategies and examine their relative performance with respect to
several well-known optimality criteria and with reference to the role of
statistical indicators [such as false alarm rate, delay time for true alarm, in-
control average run length]. The investigator examines strategies for
determining how frequently and how efficiently the adverse event rate should be
monitored in the sense of timely detection and intervention, incurring minimal
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops innovative statistical theory
and related computational methodologies in resolving some critical design and
surveillance issues, not adequately addressed hitherto, covering such areas as
pharmaceutical, biotechnological, agricultural and engineering studies.
Researchers learn about cutting edge techniques to deal with some real life
problems such as(i) the effects of environmental factors on quality of drug
substance or shelf life for drug product or storage conditions, (ii)
surveillance issues in medical sciences and public health [complicated cases of
pregnancies, pandemic influenza, West Nile virus, severe acute respiratory
syndrome [SARS], emission of radiation from hazardous pollutants in air /
surface / water] and in drug toxicity study in Phase IV clinical trials.
Practitioners utilize the findings for more insightful experimentation and data
collection techniques in these fields. Advanced Undergraduate and Graduate
students are trained in the statistical methods.