* 0904281
* Geometric analysis problems related to surfaces in mathematical physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mu-Tao Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 129,998.00

Professor Mu-Tao Wang proposes to study the geometry of surfaces in mathematical
physics and their related PDE's. He plans to continue his research on the mean
curvature flow of Lagrangian submanifolds of Kahler-Einstein manifolds.
Immediate goals are to understand the behavior of the flow under natural
convexity conditions and to apply the results to isotopy problems. Professor
Wang shall further investigate the notion of quasilocal mass he recently
discovered with Professor Shing-Tung Yau. Immediate goals include studying how
the quasi-local mass changes in the spatial, null, and timelike directions and
evaluating the quasi-local energy-momentum vector on solutions of the Einstein
field equation.

Professor Mu-Tao Wang purposes to study the geometry and analysis associated
with special curved geometric shapes, including special Lagrangians which are
higher dimensional analogues of soap films, and surfaces in space-time that are
boundaries of spatial regions. The study of special Lagrangians will provide new
perspectives and insights of the geometry of Calabi-Yau manifolds, the space of
string theory. Professor Wang's newly discovered quasi-local energy measures the
total energy contained in a bounded region of the universe even when the
gravitational effect on the boundary is very strong. This notion is essential in
many unsolved problems involving singularities in general relativity. The
proposed research will further our understanding of energy in the universe and
related problems such as black hole formations and collisions.

