* 0904371
* SHF: Medium: MACANTOK -- a MAchine-Code-ANalysis TOol Kit -- and its Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Thomas Reps, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Recent work has revealed how important it is to examine the properties of
programs after they have been translated to machine code. For instance, many
security exploits depend on platform-specific features that are not visible at
the source-code level, such as memory-layout details (e.g., the offsets of
variables in activation records and padding between fields of a structure). The
expected contributions of the project include (i) a language-independent tool
generator that, from a formal specification of a given instruction set's syntax
and semantics, generates implementations of dynamic-analysis, static-analysis,
and symbolic-evaluation components tailored to that instruction set, and (ii) a
variety of prototype language-specific applications (i.e., specific machine-
code-analysis tools), including

o A tool to automate the detection of bugs and security vulnerabilities in
machine code. The aim is to identify definite bugs and vulnerabilities, and
information about what is required to trigger them. o A tool to check sequencing
properties on machine code. o A tool that can aid in detecting interoperability
problems among components by inferring input/output and network-communication
formats, and by summarizing the behavior of a component's client.

The results will help programmers create correct, reliable, and secure software
systems by providing them with new kinds of tools to (a) verify properties of a
program?s behavior, and (b) find potential bugs and security vulnerabilities.