* 0904912
* Collaborative Research: Causal Connectivity and Computations in Hundreds of Neurons in Cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Alan Litke, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 352,120.00

A central task in understanding how neurons collectively process information is
to map how neurons influence each other in local cortical networks. As defined
here, local cortical networks will consist of tens to hundreds of neurons.
Influence will be defined as how well knowledge of activity in one neuron will
allow the activity in another neuron to be predicted. Three methods for
measuring influence between neurons will be explored. To assess these methods,
they will be used on data from simple, and then realistic, models of cortical
networks where the underlying connectivity structure is known. After refinement,
the methods will be applied to recordings from hundreds of cortical neurons in
small slice cultures of brain tissue. Over 100 cortical neurons at a time will
be recorded through the use of an advanced, 512 electrode array. In addition,
measures of influence will be applied to data taken from 16 wire electrodes
placed in behaving rats. These in vivo recordings will serve as a first step
toward linking influence maps in cortical networks to behavior. This research is
expected to provide new knowledge that could aid the design of brain-like
computing devices. In addition, it could ultimately be used as a tool to
identify differences in influence patterns between healthy and pathological
brains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three methods for measuring influence will
include directed information, transfer entropy, and Granger causality. Special
care will be taken to identify situations where these measurements may produce
false positive connections. These include cases where two neurons are driven by
a common source at different delays, and cases where one neuron influences
another neuron indirectly through an intercalated neuron. Such false positive
connections will be identified and corrected, to the extent possible, by
comparing raw pairwise measures of influence with conditional measures of
influence. Simulations will also provide an estimate of how often neurons
outside the recorded population can contribute to false positive connections.
These estimates will be used to place confidence limits on the influence maps
extracted from actual data. In neurons where influences converge, synergistic
interactions between influences will be measured. The map of influence will
serve to identify locations within the network where synergistic transformations
of information, or computations, occur.