* 0904445
* SGER: Study soft nanolithography with femtosecond laser irradiations for chemical and gas sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Mengyan Shen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0904445&lt;br/&gt;Mengyan Shen&lt;br/&gt;University of
Massahusetts,Lowell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is SGER project on
nanosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technique for fabricating nanospikes on
different solid surfaces with intense femtosecond laser pulse irradiation was
found in 2004. This femtosecond laser irradiation technique is combined with a
soft lithography to preliminarily develop a soft nanolithographic manufacturing
technique at University of Massachusetts Lowell. The combined technique provides
a unique effective tool to design and improve the sensitivity of chemical and
gas sensors and greatly reduce the cost. This combined technique can be further
used to fabricate surface enhance Raman spectroscopy (SERS) sensors at very low
cost; and the sensitivity of a tin oxide gas sensor on silicon nanostructures
can be significantly increased. In this research project, nanostructures will be
designed using the femtoscond laser pulse irradiation technique to study the
nanolithographic manufacturing technique to replicate nanostructures three-
dimensionally with polymers at precision better than 5 nm, and fabricate gas
(for example, carbon monoxide) and SERS sensor prototypes with the polymer
replica at very low cost. Finally, based on the results of this 12-month
project, a platform to develop integrated chemical and gas nanosensors, for
example, microelectronic nose can be built. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;