* 0904106
* Shape Memory Elastomers Derived from Ionomer/Fatty Acid Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Robert Weiss, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2009
* USD 125,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory polymers (SMP) are materials
that have the capability of changing shape when exposed to some external
stimulus. The most common type of shape memory material is one for which the
shape change is achieved by changes in temperature, i.e., a thermally-induced
shape memory effect. Such materials possess at least two independent crosslinked
networks, at least one of which is thermally reversible. The materials have a
permanent shape due usually to a covalently crosslinked network, but they can be
reshaped above a thermal transition (Tc) of a second, reversible network and
fixed into a temporary shape when cooled under stress to below Tc. When reheated
above the critical temperature, the material remembers and reverts to the
permanent shape due to entropy elasticity. The objective of the proposed work is
to develop and understand the structure and properties of a new class of SMP
based on blends of an elastomeric ionomer and low molar mass fatty acids or
their salts. A major goal is to understand the molecular origin of shape memory
in such materials. Nanophase separation of the ionomer or covalent crosslinking
of the ionomer will be used to develop the permanent network. Very strong ionic
or dipolar interactions between the polymer and the fatty acid (salt) will allow
crystals of the fatty acid (salt) to function as thermally reversible, physical
crosslinks that can provide a temporary shape. Since, the melting point of the
fatty acid (salt) serves as Tc, the temperature of the shape memory effect can
be easily controlled by choosing an appropriate fatty acid (salt) for the
compound. This will provide significant versatility in the tailoring of Tc, as
well as the mechanical properties of the SMP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory polymers (SMP) have applications as
medical devices (orthodontic wires, polymer stents with drug delivery
capabilities, biodegradable implants, smart surgical sutures), actuators,
sensors, artificial muscles, switches, smart textiles and self-deployable
structures. This project will develop a new, versatile type of SMP and train
scientists to work in the field of smart materials, which is an enabling
technology in many high-tech applications. The grant specifically supports the
work of two graduate students and undergraduate chemical engineering students
will participate in the project through independent study or as REU students.
The PI and students will also participate in education and outreach programs
designed to enhance exposure of K-12 students and teachers to science and
technology, specifically in the field of smart materials. These include the
University?s residential Engineering 2000 program that targets minority
students, the DaVinci Project that helps math and science teachers (grades 7-12)
to integrate engineering into the classroom, and the NSF-funded Galileo Project
that introduces high school students and K-12 educators to core engineering
concepts and problem-solving practices. In addition, the NSF-funded Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation' (LSAMP) will be used to introduce minority
students to research. The results of the research will be published in
prestigious, peer-reviewed journals and presented at international scientific
congresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;