* 0904520
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Designing a Content-Aware Internet Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 276,298.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant majority of current
Internet traffic is due to distributing content, yet the Internet was designed
to be largely agnostic to characteristics of the content flowing over it. This
research investigates the design and operation of a content-aware Internet
ecosystem, which thrives on the interaction between users (seeking seek fast and
correct downloads), content providers (seeking to minimize network congestion
and transit traffic), and network providers (who generate content, and seek the
cost- and resource-efficient dissemination). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
takes a two-pronged approach. On one hand, it explores novel analysis of
fundamental performance limits for a content-aware Internet ecosystem that
rigorously characterizes the benefits of an intelligently designed cross-layer
architecture. On the other hand, it includes developing mechanisms and practical
implementation of a content distribution system, by which involved parties can
interact constructively to achieve these gains yet respect each others'
interests. This approach combines a range of techniques, including modeling and
theoretical analysis, measurement and data analysis, system design, simulation,
and system implementation. Affordable and ready access to digital content helps
inform, educate, and entertain society as a whole. Additionally, by developing
cost- and resource-effective delivery techniques, the friction continuing to
build between involved parties can be reduced and the technical side of the
network neutrality debate can be better informed. To enhance this impact, the
project includes an educational component involving local universities from
under-represented groups, curriculum development and interactions with industry.