* 0904039
* Continuation of Full-Scale Three-Dimensional Numerical Experiments of High-Intensity Particle and Laser Beam Matter Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Warren Mori, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2012
* USD 483,000.00

This award will support basic research with three-dimensions simulations
including full-scale modeling of ongoing or planned experiments with the primary
tool being three-dimensional particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations. The simulations
provide a test bed for theoretical ideas and, once validated, a method to guide
experiments. High-fidelity full-scale modeling will provide a means to
extrapolate parameters into regimes that will not be accessible to experiments
for years to come. The research group will exploit an unmatched array of PIC
codes and data analysis tools, a detailed understanding of the key PWFA
experiments, and close connections to experimental programs within the US and
abroad. In particular, the research will investigate the following 1. Explore
the physics necessary to make a compact LWFA or PWFA stage. 2. Explore the
physics necessary to make a linear collider based on wakefield stages a reality.
3. Carry out full-scale 3D PIC simulations of beam and laser-plasma experiments,
e.g., at UCLA, SLAC, the L'OASIS lab at LBL, the Hercules laser at Michigan, the
Texas Petatwatt laser, and RAL (England). 4. Continue to develop the PIC
infrastructure including reduced PIC algorithms. 5. Continue to develop
predictive theory and scaling laws.

The High Energy Density Science (HEDS) area of intense laser and beam-matter
interactions has an impact on plasma-based acceleration and radiation sources,
and even on the fast ignitor fusion concept. Compact particle accelerators might
eventually have an impact on particle physics, material science, structural
biology, medicine, fusion research, and transmutation of nuclear waste. The
students and post-doctoral researchers trained under this grant will be part of
the twenty-first century work force in computational science and engineering as
well as experts in HEDS. UCLA codes and algorithms are being used by other
groups throughout the world. This grant supported a female graduate student. An
effort is underway to share this group's parallel simulation codes with Florida
A&M, a historically black university.