* 0904011
* Travel Support for 2009 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy to be held in Oakland, CA on May 17-20, 2009.
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* David Du, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 03/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Through this award, travel support is being provided for young researchers to
attend the 2009 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy to be held in Oakland,
California, USA. The 2009 symposium marks the 30th annual meeting of this
flagship security and privacy conference. Since 1980, the IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy has been the premier forum for presenting developments in
computer security and electronic privacy, and for bringing together researchers
and practitioners in the field. The Symposium is sponsored by the IEEE Computer
Society Technical Committee on Security and Privacy. The Symposium, as many
other academic activities, relies on the experience of senior members of the
community but requires fresh ideas and new researchers to join the community. As
such, and to encourage graduate students and young faculty members to
participate in the always exciting technical program and events at the
Symposium, the travel support is used to sponsor the travel expenses for
graduate students and junior faculty members to attend the Symposium. The total
amount of the award is $25,000 on the basis of an average travel grant of $1,200
for each selected junior faculty participant and $900 for each selected graduate
student. Attendance at SP 2009 will be very beneficial to young scientists who
otherwise would be unable to participate. Travel support for student and junior
faculty attendance is advertised nationwide, and women, minorities and disabled
students are especially encouraged to apply for the grants.