* 0904359
* Collaborative Research: Microparasite-Macroparasite Interactions: Dynamics of Co-infection and Implications for Disease Control
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2008,09/30/2013
* Charles Nunn, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 115,483.00

Abstract Infection of hosts by multiple parasite species is the norm rather than
the exception in most natural populations, yet studies of parasite dynamics
largely focus on single parasites interacting with single hosts. Fundamental
principles of immunology suggest that co-infection of hosts by microparasites
(bacteria, viruses, protozoa) and macroparasites (helminths) should have
important effects on disease dynamics. For example, exposure to macroparasites
may increase host susceptibility to and progression of important microparasitic
diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria in humans. The central goal of
this study is to investigate the consequences of microparasite-macroparasite
interactions for patterns of disease at three distinct levels of biological
organization: individuals, populations and species. To achieve this goal,
African buffalo (Syncerus caffer) co-infected with bovine tuberculosis (BTB,
Mycobacterium bovis) and gastrointestinal nematodes will be used as a model
system to investigate individual-level patterns of infection and parasite
population dynamics. Specifically, a combination of field and captive studies
and mathematical modeling will be used to assess patterns of infection and
immunity in these free-ranging animals, understand the effects of nematode
treatment on BTB transmission, and examine the reciprocal effects of BTB on
nematodes. Scaling up from this system, a comprehensive database of parasites
and pathogens infecting wild mammals and humans will then be used to investigate
the effect of helminths on the distribution of microparasitic diseases across
populations and species. In combination, these analyses will reveal how within-
host immunological interactions between micoparasites and macroparasites shape
patterns of disease in natural host populations and among species. Broader
impacts of this study include training of multiple graduate students,
undergraduate students and paraprofessionals; application of study results to
the management of an ecologically and economically important wildlife disease;
and active collaboration with the public health community to understand the
utility of using helminth control as a tool for combating microparasitic
diseases in humans.