* 0904497
* III: Medium: Better Information Integration through Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jennifer Widom, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,184,825.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of providing
seamless, integrated querying over multiple&lt;br/&gt;interrelated sources of
information has been plaguing the database,&lt;br/&gt;information management,
information retrieval, and artificial&lt;br/&gt;intelligence research
communities for decades. There have been&lt;br/&gt;successful lines of research
addressing specific components of the&lt;br/&gt;data integration problem, and
large "one-off" systems have been built&lt;br/&gt;that successfully integrate
specific information sources in specific&lt;br/&gt;domains. However, a
completely general solution to the data&lt;br/&gt;integration problem is thought
not to be realizable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is developing a new
type of information integration&lt;br/&gt;system that is both novel and
realizable. It is based on the following&lt;br/&gt;premises and
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The system provides a general data
integration solution targeted&lt;br/&gt;for a certain type of environment: when
multiple sources have joining,&lt;br/&gt;overlapping, and potentially
conflicting information about the same or&lt;br/&gt;closely related real-world
entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The system permits and exploits uncertainty as
an integral part of&lt;br/&gt;data integration: Uncertainty may be present in
source data, source&lt;br/&gt;schemata, the integration process, integrated
schemata, and integrated&lt;br/&gt;data. In fact, uncertainty can play a key
role successful information&lt;br/&gt;integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The
system relies on general-purpose entity-resolution as a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
building block of the integration process and the&lt;br/&gt;integrated
information. Furthermore, the system retains both the&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty and
the lineage associated with the entity-
resolution&lt;br/&gt;process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) The system incorporates
powerful lineage capabilities, tracking&lt;br/&gt;where, when, and how data was
produced, how it has evolved over time,&lt;br/&gt;and how it has been combined
and manipulated as part of the&lt;br/&gt;integration process. Lineage is used to
enhance the integration&lt;br/&gt;process, and it is offered to the end-user in
a variety of forms for&lt;br/&gt;data understanding and conflict-resolution
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information on the project can be found
at the project web&lt;br/&gt;page: http://infolab.stanford.edu/udi/&lt;br/&gt;