* 0904907
* High-Fidelity Simulation of Bioelectromagnetic Effects on the Human Body with Petascale Computers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Robert van de Geijn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,400,000.00

The objective of this research program is the development of reliable, high-
accuracy and high-resolution biolectromagnetics (BIOEM) simulators that can
effectively utilize petascale computational resources to quantify the
interaction of the human body with nearby wireless devices. The investigators
are developing two classes of advanced BIOEM solvers based on finite- and
boundary-element algorithms to solve coupled electromagnetic and bio-heat
transfer equations. The investigators are, also, deploying the resulting solvers
on petascale computers for high-fidelity simulations and cross-validating and
verifying the two classes of solvers during development to build confidence in
the legitimacy of the new simulation results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to significantly advance the state-of-the-art in BIOEM simulation, to
accurately model wave interactions with the human body at resolutions never
before attempted, to quantify the heating effect of wireless devices on the
human body and the electromagnetic effect of the human body on device
performance, and to demonstrate that results from these simulations can be used
to design safer and more efficient devices. It is being executed by an
interdisciplinary team of researchers at the University of Texas at Austin?s
Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences and the Texas Advanced
Computing Center. The resulting petascale finite- and boundary-element solvers
are expected to be useful for many other wave propagation/absorption problems.
The project is training students and postdoctoral researchers and establishing
an interdisciplinary community of developers and users fluent in petascale
computing. The investigators are introducing petascale algorithmic concepts,
programming techniques, simulators, and applications into graduate and
undergraduate courses. They are disseminating their findings and broadening
participation of underrepresented groups through international conferences and
peer-reviewed journals, through seminars at nearby universities in Texas,
including those with significant underrepresented minority populations, and by
releasing the resulting software via open source mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;