* 0904015
* Collaborative Research: Community Infrastructure for General Relativistic MHD (CIGR)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Community Infrastructure for General Relativistic
Magnetohydrodynamics (CIGR) collaboration will create a modern, scalable, and
open, community toolkit and cyberinfrastructure for general relativistic
magnetohydrodynamics (GRMHD). These tools will advance computational
capabilities across the fields of numerical relativity and computational
astrophysics and provide the collaborative infrastructure needed to accelerate
the development of simulation codes able to accurately model grand challenge
problems such as the coalescence of binary neutron stars, core-collapse
supernovae, and gamma-ray bursts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIGR includes four core
thrusts that capitalize on accumulated experience with the Cactus framework, the
scalable Carpet adaptive mesh refinement driver and the Whisky code for general
relativistic hydrodynamics developed by the European Union Astrophysics Network:
(i) providing a featureful toolkit for GRMHD that research groups can use and
extend to build their own cutting edge production codes; (ii) providing an open
code for GRMHD that integrates together components for general relativistic
hydrodynamics,  microphysical equations of state, magnetohydrodynamics, and
radiation transport; (iii) developing new enabling cyberinfrastructure for
numerical relativity, including highly reliable and optimized input/output,
distributed storage and archives, data and simulation classification and
provenance; and (iv) supporting these  toolkits and tools on increasing large
and complex computing environments such as the NSF's TeraGrid, DOE's LCF, and
prepare for soon to arrive petascale and data-intensive environments such as NSF
XD, Blue Waters and DataNet programs.