* 0904490
* Collaborative Research:  Inflation and Redistribution
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2008,03/31/2011
* Klaus Martin Schneider, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2011
* USD 76,551.00

This proposal outlines research on the redistribution effects of inflation.
Redistribution of real wealth is an immediate consequence of any unanticipated
change in the price level. Inflation lowers the real value of nominal assets and
liabilities, and thereby shifts wealth from lenders to borrowers. Existing
studies have focused on the revaluation of government debt. The research
described in this proposal considers the revaluation of all nominal assets and
liabilities in the economy. The goal is to provide a comprehensive quantitative
assessment of the redistribution effects of inflation, as well as their
implications for macroeconomic aggregates and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that it enhances our
understanding of the real effects of inflation. The proposal achieves this
objective by employing two analytical tools. The first is an empirical framework
used to document exposure to inflation risk in the United States, for different
sectors as well as age and wealth groups of households. The framework combines
sectoral data from the Flow of Funds Accounts, household-level data from the
Survey of Consumer Finances, as well as data on the payoff structure and market
prices of nominal assets to construct a consistent array of nominal positions.
To gauge the duration of these positions, future payment streams are estimated
by date, agent, and type of nominal instrument. The second tool is a dynamic
general equilibrium model that can be used to assess the economic effects of
redistribution shocks. The model allows for heterogeneity along the same
dimensions as the data; it is calibrated to match key macroeconomic aggregates
as well as properties of the wealth and income distribution. It can also
accommodate various fiscal policy scenarios that may arise in response to an
inflation episode. The proposal describes an application that uses the tools to
quantify the wealth redistribution that would occur if the United States were to
enter another moderate inflation episode similar to that of the 1970s. This
application leads to three main results. First, even moderate inflation can
cause a sizable redistribution of wealth. The main winners from inflation would
be the government and young households with mortgage debt, while the main losers
would be old households and, in light of the recent surge in foreign debt,
foreigners. Second, the model shows that the responses of losers (old lenders)
and winners (young borrowers) do not cancel out, so that redistribution due to
inflation has aggregate effects. The magnitude of these effects is comparable to
those in representative-agent models with monetary frictions, but the effects
arising from redistribution persist long after the end of the inflation episode.
Third, the welfare effect on domestic households is the opposite of what
standard monetary models generate: inflation-induced redistribution has a
positive effect on the weighted aggregate welfare. Overall, the application
demonstrates that redistribution is an important channel for the impact of
inflation on household behavior, economic aggregates, and welfare.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research derives from
its implications for monetary policy, as well as the design of institutions that
help control inflation. The existing application shows that households have
important reasons to disagree about monetary policy. The proposal describes a
number of additional policy applications. First, the setup will be used to
assess the redistribution effects of stabilization policy. Here the objective is
to quantify the wealth effects of U.S. monetary policy in the 1980s. A second
extension will explore the political economy implications of the findings. The
existing results show that there are circumstances such that a majority of
households stands to gain from inflation-induced redistribution. Moreover, the
fiscal policy package that accompanies an inflationary episode is a key factor
in shaping public support for inflation policies. The proposal outlines an
empirical investigation of the degree to which redistribution concerns can
explain the emergence of historical episodes of high inflation, as well as an
extended theoretical analysis of the political economy of inflation. &lt;br/&gt;