* 0904188
* Fundamental Structural Processes of Relaxation and Shear Transformations in Metallic Glasses
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* En (Evan) Ma, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 09/30/2013
* USD 499,548.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The metals we are familiar with are all crystalline, and their plasticity is
well known to be carried by structural defects called dislocations. In contrast,
the corresponding plastic flow mechanism in amorphous metals (i.e. ?bulk
metallic glasses?, or BMGs) remains largely unresolved. This project is designed
to uncover the fundamental structural processes responsible for the basic
relaxation events in BMGs, including the thermal relaxation events and the
initial inelastic relaxation events under stresses. For example, under imposed
stresses, there must be structural origins responsible for the localized basic
flow events, the so called ?shear transformations? (STs). There should be
preferential ?flow defects? generated (the proposed ?shear transformation
zones?, STZs), which play the role of dislocations in mediating the stress-
driven atomic shuffling that carries the plastic strain. The structural origin
of thermal relaxations and STs will be uncovered at the atomic level using
molecular dynamics simulations. The locations of fertile sites for (cooperative)
STs under stresses will be identified, based on specific local structural and
dynamical properties, including the degree of local order, atomic-site stresses
and free volume content. The atomistic ST mechanisms (the triggering events and
cooperative atomic shear/shuffling), the STZ size (number of atoms involved) and
the origin of this length scale, the fertility or propensity of local atoms for
STs, the evolution of the short-to-medium range order during the ST and in the
flow state, and the coalescing behavior of STZs in localization leading to later
shear banding, will all be investigated. The kinetic pathway of the structural
processes, in particular the associated transition barrier and its dependence on
local structure, will be determined in terms of the potential energy landscape.
The intellectual merit of this research lies in the resolution of a key
structure ? (deformation) property relationship issue for amorphous metals.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Compared with conventional metals and alloys which are all crystalline, non-
crystalline (amorphous) bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) show higher strength and
yet can still sustain plastic flow (permanent strains and shape changes). The
internal structures for amorphous (glassy) alloys are now on the atomic scale,
without the ?dislocation? defects that carry the plastic deformation in the
long-range regular lattice in crystalline metals. This project is designed to
uncover how such glassy structures in BMGs evolve under stresses to control the
yielding and ductility of the material. For broader impact, an educational
effort will be made by compiling a simulation movie to enrich and advance the
teaching of several materials science courses in which the concept of
dislocation is used. The movie will demonstrate how a ?dislocation-less? flow
process would be like, and contrast it with a ?dislocation motion in crystals?
movie to help the students broaden their view about deformation processes in
general. These movies will be produced by undergraduate students (assisted by
faculty/graduate students) recruited into the laboratory to complete their
Senior Design course, making use of their computer skills. In general, an
understanding of the structure-deformation relationship has broad implications
for the intensive work on metallic glasses currently ongoing around the world,
especially for identifying what kind of glass structure/compositions would have
a good combination of strength and ductility. Our research trains graduate
students at the cutting edge of metals research. It builds on the knowledge
acquired during the PI's previous projects and should hence be an efficient use
of Federal funds. The results will be disseminated at conferences and in top
journals.