* 0904501
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Minimalist Mapping and Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Subhash Suri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 848,000.00

Proposal Title: RI: Medium Collaborative Research: Minimalist Mapping
and&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 05/05/09&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental
and challenging questions that are common to&lt;br/&gt;robotic systems that
build their own maps and solve monitoring tasks. In particular,
the&lt;br/&gt;work contributes to our general understanding of the interplay
between sensing, control,&lt;br/&gt;and computation as people attempt to design
systems that minimize costs and&lt;br/&gt;maximize
robustness.&lt;br/&gt;Powerful new abstractions, planning algorithms, and
control laws that accomplish basic&lt;br/&gt;mapping and monitoring operations
are being developed in this effort. This is expected&lt;br/&gt;to lead to
improved technologies in numerous settings where mapping and
monotoring&lt;br/&gt;are basic components.&lt;br/&gt;Ample motivation is
provided by technological challenges that involve searching,&lt;br/&gt;tracking,
and monitoring the behavior of people, wildlife, and robots. Examples
include&lt;br/&gt;search-and-rescue, security sweeps, mapping abandoned mines,
scientific study of&lt;br/&gt;endangered species, assisted living, ground-based
military operations, and even&lt;br/&gt;analysis of shopping
habits.&lt;br/&gt;The work is particularly transformative because it lives
outside of the traditional&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of algorithms, computational
geometry, sensor networks, control theory, and&lt;br/&gt;robotics. Furthermore,
national interest continues to grow in the direction of
developing&lt;br/&gt;distributed robotic systems that combine sensing,
actuation, and computation. By&lt;br/&gt;helping to break down traditional
academic and scientific barriers, it is expected that the&lt;br/&gt;work will
transform the way we think about robotics algorithms, the engineering
design&lt;br/&gt;process, and the education of students across the robotics,
computational geometry,&lt;br/&gt;and control disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:0905523 PI
Name:LaValle, Steven&lt;br/&gt;Printed from eJacket: 05/06/09 Page 1 of 1