* 0904577
* SHF: MEDIUM: Semiconductor Life Extenstion through Reconfiguration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andre DeHon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 749,999.00

Industry will soon manufacture transistors whose sizes are on the order of
atoms. These tiny transistors are fragile, meaning each transistor will be
different and will change during use. Many transistors will be unusable when
first built; still others will degrade or fail with use. Like people or
snowflakes, each of our components (e.g. microprocessors, graphic chips,
memories) and systems (e.g. cell phones, mp3 players, anti-lock brakes) built
with these tiny transistors will be unique. Traditional, one-size-fits-all
approaches assign tasks to transistors oblivious of their unique strengths and
weaknesses; these approaches waste much of the potential benefits of these tiny
transistors, leading to systems that cost too much, use too much energy, and
fail too soon. This research explores a novel assignment approach that assigns
tasks adaptively based on measured transistor characteristics. The fastest
transistors are assigned where they most accelerate performance, while the
slower transistors can still be used for less time-critical tasks. Assignments
are further re-evaluated during system operation, allowing fresh transistors to
replace transistors that wear out.

Practically, this means IC manufacturers can produce smaller transistors and
continue to deliver more capable electronics (e.g. digital video recorders, cell
phones, laptops, supercomputers) for fixed dollar budgets. These capabilities
continue to improve our quality of life, providing richer media, better
communication, greater automation, and greater safety. This work will reduce the
energy per computational task thereby extending battery life, reducing energy
bills, and facilitating cooler operation. Replacement and reassignment mean
electronic components will last longer and degrade gracefully.