* 0904093
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Real-Time Continuum Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2017
* Jing Xiao, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2017
* USD 437,587.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the potential of fundamentally new
modes of robotic manipulation using novel continuum robots in less-structured
environments with large uncertainties and even unknowns. A continuum robot, such
as a trunk/tentacle robot arm, is in many senses ?dual? to a traditional robot
manipulator (consisting of an articulated arm and a gripper or hand), featuring
relatively low precision but high compliance: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Its
inherent flexibility and compliance offer greater promise to enable deft
manipulation under imprecise and uncertain conditions of objects over a wider
range (orders of magnitude) of size and weight, of many different shapes, and
with widely different physical characteristics (rigid, soft, flexible, etc.)..
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* On the other hand, its inherent lack of precision
renders the traditional approaches to planning and control of robot manipulators
unsuitable for manipulation with continuum robots. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project pioneers the study of the basic problem of autonomous manipulation of an
object with much uncertainty by a single continuum robot. It introduces a novel
and holistic approach that integrates real-time adaptive planning and robust
control schemes under real-time sensing and large environmental uncertainty. It
next extends the basic approach to address multiple continuum robots working in
a common environment, where each robot needs not know the motion of another
robot. The research combines theoretical/algorithmic development with real-world
validation on an experimental test bed with real trunk/tentacle robots equipped
with sensors. The results will be actively disseminated through publications,
free software, and real-world demos to impact research, education, and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;