* 0904614
* Null Test of Newton's Law of Gravitation on a 100-Micrometer Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Ho Jung Paik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The objective of this research is to test Newton's inverse-
square law of gravitation to 1% at a 100-micrometer range and to search for
extra dimensions or other new physics down to a few tens of micrometers. The
experiment will be cooled to liquid helium temperatures. To minimize Newtonian
errors, the experiment employs a near-null source, a circular disk of large
diameter-to-thickness ratio. Two test masses, also disk-shaped, are positioned
on the two sides of the source mass at close proximity. As the source is driven,
the differential acceleration signal across the test masses should appear at
twice the drive frequency due to symmetry. The signal is detected by a
superconducting differential accelerometer, which is a highly sensitive gravity
sensor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore the very nature of
spacetime and test foundations of General Relativity and theories beyond the
Standard Model of particle physics. The observation of a deviation from Newton's
law at short distance would revolutionize our understanding of gravity, could be
an approach the potential experimental confirmation of string theory, and could
possibly shed light on the mystifying cosmological constant problem. This sort
of research is basically understandable and exciting to the public, thus
stimulating their interest in fundamental science. Further refinement of the
cryogenic techniques that this laboratory has developed for measuring extremely
weak forces is of potential value in a variety of other fields of precision
measurement.