* 0904713
* Structural and combinatorial theory of Poisson algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Leonid Makar-Limanov, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 248,297.00

The structural and combinatorial theory of commutative algebras, associative
algebras, and Lie algebras is one of the most important branches of modern
mathematics. Though Poisson algebras are very closely interconnected with these
algebras, at present there is no systematic algebraic theory of Poisson
algebras. This is rather surprising if one takes in account how important (and
popular) Poisson algebras are in many branches of mathematics and physics. It is
important to study Poisson algebras from an algebraic point of view. An
algebraic theory of Poisson algebras will be useful for understanding the
geometry of Poisson structures. Purely algebraic study of Poisson algebras
should also give new approaches to many problems of commutative algebras, Lie
algebras, and associative algebras. It is clear as well that the study of
Poisson structures will bring a better understanding of their deformation
quantization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Siméon-Denis Poisson (1781 ?1840) was one of
the most prolific mathematicians of all times. Among his numerous contributions,
he introduced Poisson brackets as a tool for classical dynamics. Carl Gustav
Jacob Jacobi (1804 ? 1851) realized the importance of these brackets and
discovered their algebraic properties. Marius Sophus Lie (17 December 1842 - 18
February 1899) began the study of their geometry. During the past 40 years
Poisson geometry has become an active field of research stimulated by
connections with a number of areas, including non-commutative, geometry,
harmonic analysis on Lie groups, infinite dimensional Lie algebras, mechanics of
particles and continua, singularity theory, and completely integrable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Systematic algebraic approach to the Poisson structures and
development of appropriate algebraic theory and tools has potentially the same
value for the scientist working with these structures (primarily physicists and
geometers) as commutative algebra has for algebraic geometers. This approach
should bring better clarity to the subject and allow obtaining more detailed and
understandable results.&lt;br/&gt;