* 0904646
* Collaborative Research: NSCC/SA: Terror, Conflict Processes, Organizations, & Ideologies: Completing the Picture
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Remco Chang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.

Understanding the utility and effectiveness of government, and in particular US
government, tactics and strategies in influencing the frequency and severity of
dissident' tactics and strategies is critical to successfully limiting violent
terrorist activity. This research will address this question by specifying a
complex adaptive systems model of government-dissident-mass public interactions
developed from disparate social science literatures and military doctrine.
Specifically, the model considers (1) how mass support for political violence
affects the ebb and flow of government-dissident interactions and the emergence
and evolution of social networks, (2) how US government diplomatic, information,
military, and economic strategies yield intended, unintended, direct, and
indirect effects on levels of political violence and the strength of social
networks, and (3) how the evolution and strength of networks and the intensity
of mass support affects levels of government repression. Implications of this
model will be tested using bilinear mixed effects statistical models. The
project makes contributions in both the academic and policy arenas ranging from
improved academic understanding of government and dissident tactical choices to
informing the efforts of practitioners involved in confronting violent
challengers. The project has implications for how to constrain and limit violent
and terrorist activities around the world and particularly in South, East, and
Southeast Asia. Moreover, the project produces a set of extensive linked
datasets on actors, groups, governments, foreign actors and their activities as
well as their characteristics and network structures for 31 countries from
1997-2008. Finally, the project facilitates the professional development of
graduate and undergraduate researchers by employing them as research
apprentices, exposing them to new methodologies, and acquainting them with
interdisciplinary studies of violent political conflict.