* 0904581
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research:  The Role of Order in Search
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Amihood Amir, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 09/30/2014
* USD 304,000.00

Searching for a string in a digital library is a fundamental operation. One may
seek a phrase in a file that is being manipulated by a text editor, a sentence
on the web via a search engine, or a genome in the human DNA sequence. This
basic tool has been well researched and, indeed, is ubiquitous in data
processing.

However, string matching and motif discovery algorithms ("Stringology") that
have dealt with searches in general databases, have always assumed that the
sought string is ordered. The research thrusts were in directions such as exact
matching, approximate matching, or grappling with the challenge of coping with
errors in the data. But always the order of the data was assumed to be iron-
clad.

Nevertheless, some non-conforming problems have been gnawing at the walls of
this assumption. Some of the areas where applications assume erroneous order of
the data are: Text Editing, where errors such as swaps or transpositions, assume
that the data has not been changed -- it has rather been rearranged;
Computational Biology, where reversals or transpositions of genome subsequences
are part of the evolutionary process; and Linguistics, where the task of lexical
categorization is aided by considering sets of parts-of-speech in various
orders.

The above application areas suggest that the wonderfully ordered world of
pattern matching may be too rigid to handle new challenges. This project
introduces a fundamentally new model of string matching, where the order of
symbols in the input pattern may be perturbed, but the content remains
unchanged. This model studies unordered pattern matching universes in order to
supply the above mentioned application areas with appropriate computational
tools. A theory of unordered matching will give a general framework for all the
above problems.

This project considers permuted Stringology as a line leading from fully ordered
data all the way to data with no order at all. The ordered side has been
historically amply researched. The specific technical goals of the project are:

1. To develop a theory and framework for permuted Stringology. 2. To identify
the types of unordered problems that are more difficult than ordered
Stringology, the conditions that make them harder, and the reason why. 3. To
define the term ``Similarity'' in unordered clusters. 4. To define the world of
``almost ordered sequences'', and to compare it with unordered and ordered
sequences. 5. To design tools that will be key elements in the solution for the
proposed problems, and will be shared by more than one algorithm. The list of
problems includes Indexing, Dictionary and Approximations.

This project's aim is to study the fundamental problems arising from a model of
pattern matching with rearrangement. The immediate benefit to the field is a
totally new, yet very basic, research direction that seems to defy the state-of-
the-art toolkit. The historical tools of pattern matching, such as dynamic
programming, FFT, sub-word trees, renaming, encodings, and embeddings do not
seem suitable to handle these problems. New algorithmic tools and data
structures are required. In fact, this direction already bore unexpected
interesting fruits -- the solution of an open problem in graph theory posed by
the mathematician Cayley in 1849! Techniques such as non-standard convolutions,
group testing, and graph theoretic algorithms, have been necessary to solve some
of the problems thus far.

Since this project defines a new model, there are many directions to explore. It
is expected that this project will mark the beginning of intensive research in a
new paradigm.