* 0904154
* 4th International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering, April 29-May 2, 2009, Antalya, Turkey
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Metin Akay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

0904154&lt;br/&gt;M. Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support the 4th International IEEE EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering during
April 29-May 2, 2009 in Antalya, Turkey. The objective of this conference is to
highlight progress in Neural and Cognitive Engineering, an emerging field
bridging molecular, cellular, systems, cognitive and behavioral neuroscience
with engineering, physics, chemistry, mathematics and computer science. This
neural engineering conference will further stimulate neural engineering research
and education among neuroscientists, chemists, engineers, computer scientists
and mathematicians. Neural engineering deals with many aspects of basic and
clinical problems associated with neural dysfunction including the
representation of sensory and motor information, the electrical stimulation of
the neuromuscular system to control the muscle activation and movement, the
analysis and visualization of complex neural systems at multi-scale from the
single-cell and to the system levels to understand the underlying mechanisms,
the development of novel electronic and photonic devices and techniques for
experimental probing, the neural simulation studies, the design and development
of human-machine interface systems and artificial vision sensors and neural
prosthesis to restore and enhance the impaired sensory and motor systems and
functions. The Technical Program Tracks include: (1) Imaging and Mapping the
Brain (Functional, Molecular and Cellular), (2) Brain-Computer Interface, (3)
Neural Signal Processing and Modeling, (4) Neuro-Nanotechnology, (5) Neural
Prostheses, (6) Neuro-Robotics, (7) Cognitive Engineering and Science, (8)
Neural Informatics, and (9) Others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
keynote, plenary, platform and poster sessions, the conference will also have a
panel to focus on the challenges of making a career in the rapidly growing,
interdisciplinary fields of neural engineering, from being hired as part of a
team and finding exciting new research opportunities, all the way up to becoming
a team leader and what to look for when organizing that team and choosing its
members. Options will be discussed for graduate studies and research
internationally as well as within the United States, and for collaboration among
researchers and students internationally. Particular emphasis will be placed on
the current trend in scientific research communities toward integration of
multiple, previously distinct, fields, and the need for students of all
backgrounds and areas of academic interest to move toward careers in neural
engineering and neurotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering Program and Office of International
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;