* 0904264
* Quantum Spin Hall Effect and Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Shou-Cheng Zhang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 510,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education focused on investigating a new topological state of quantum matter.
The project will lead to new concepts, the prediction of candidate materials
that exhibit topological states, and work with experimentalists to verify their
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Search for topological states of matter has
become an important goal in condensed matter physics. The quantum Hall state
gives the first example of a topological state which is characterized by well
defined a topological number and described by the topological field theory at
low energy. Recently, the theoretical prediction and the experimental
observation of the quantum spin Hall state in mercury telluride-cadmium
telluride quantum wells provides another example of a new type of topological
state. The quantum spin Hall state is a time-reversal invariant bulk insulator,
with gapless edge states where opposite spin states counter-propagate. The PI
aims to search and design new materials for the topological insulators in two
and three dimensions. He plans to systematically investigate the experimentally
measurable topological properties of these systems, including the fractional
charge, spin-charge separation and the topological magneto-electric effect. He
will also investigate topological Mott insulators where the gap arises from
strong electronic correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is dedicated to the
supervision of the PhD. Through the Stanford-IBM center for quantum spintronics,
graduate students and postdocs also get broad exposure to the challenges facing
the semiconductor industry today. The PI has also been invited to present at the
annual press conferences of the Semiconductor Industry Association, sharing both
the excitement and the urgency of our research with the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research integrated with education to elucidate the novel properties
of electrons organized in a new state of matter and to predict new materials or
specific existing materials where the state can be found. Insulators have been
known for a long time; they are a large class of materials that do not conduct
electricity. Recently a new kind of insulator, called a topological insulator,
was predicted which does not conduct electrons through the bulk but electrons
can flow along the edges without dissipation. Materials that are currently being
studied in this context include some consisting of alternating layers of mercury
telluride and cadmium telluride, the compound bismuth telluride, and alloys
composed of bismuth and antimony. Experiments are consistent with theoretical
predictions. The PI will carry out theoretical research to further explore these
new states of matter and to predict new materials in which they may arise. The
study of topological insulators may lead to a new generation of electronic
devices that may help to sustain the rapid growth in performance of information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is dedicated to the supervision of the
PhD. Through the Stanford-IBM center for quantum spintronics, graduate students
and postdocs also get broad exposure to the challenges facing the semiconductor
industry today. The PI has also been invited to present at the annual press
conferences of the Semiconductor Industry Association, sharing both the
excitement and the urgency of our research with the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;