* 0904909
* NSCC/LA: Collaborative Research: Modeling Discourse and Social Dynamics in Authoritarian Regimes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Arthur Graesser, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2013
* USD 581,999.00

The ways people use words can provide insights into their thoughts, motives, and
relationships with others. Discourse patterns can be modeled to predict
deception, status, group processes, emotional states, and personality. An
important question is whether the relationship between discourse and social
dynamics can be extended to create predictive models of social processes across
multiple languages and cultures, and among military, political and civilian
organizations in authoritarian regimes. The specific goals of the project are a)
to define and compare the ways natural language reflects social dynamics through
the analysis of a wide range of documents across languages and cultures, b) to
develop annotated and socially indexed multi-language databases of communication
(e.g., English, Arabic, Chinese, Spanish, and Korean), along with preliminary
research tools that can enhance our ability to conduct research across languages
and cultures, and c) to address key national security questions emerging from
the collection of vast amounts of digitized documents and communication, such as
the capability to understand past actions and cognitions of previous regimes and
assess emerging threats.

The project will focus on three types of social dynamics: a) Leadership,
identity and group dynamics, and the degree to which the psychological and
social identities of people and groups can be determined through writing and
speech; b) Cohesion of text and social processes, and whether it is possible to
identify the connections among people in a social group, such as the stability
of the group and likelihood of defection, by comparing the ways the group
members separately use words; and c) Deception and misinformation, and whether
it is possible to identify deception and deceptive intent from language-based
cues. A cross-cutting research theme is the complexities of conducting
computational analysis of discourse and social dynamics across multiple
languages and translated corpora. For example, to what degree does translation
distort the link between language and social dynamics?

The project will advance social science theory, developing new models linking
language use with social dynamics and providing a new way of looking at large
cross-sections of a society. New computational methods will be developed that
can be applied to large, representative samples of text from across an entire
country's political and cultural landscape. These methods, unlike traditional
analytical methods, do not require individual analysis by highly trained social
scientists and historians and can provide the capacity to process documents that
may number in the millions. These developments and findings will advance
analyses of social dynamics that were not previously possible and can assist
scientists and practitioners, such as security analysts, in understanding
information flow and social structure at a macroscopic level. Such knowledge
could potentially help security analysts to pinpoint individuals and groups that
merit direct study by trained experts.