* 0904674
* NSCC/SA: Collaborative Research: Predicting the Nature of Conflict - An Evolutionary Analysis of the Tactical Choice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2015
* Atin Basuchoudhary, Virginia Military Institute Research Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/2015
* USD 142,962.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the
relationship and dependence between the type of conflict or insurgency that
exists in a country, and the type of government present in the country from
which the conflict originates. An innovative dual approach is proposed to study
conflict in which an evolutionary game theoretical model is paired with an
experimental analysis in the laboratory. Evolutionary game theory predicts that
individuals making the "fittest" choices will survive, multiply, and
characterize the population. In the spirit of this approach, rebels in a country
will be modeled as agents interacting among themselves and with the rest of the
population in the country, repeatedly over time. The rebels' choice of tactic
will be the action that performs the best (with the highest fitness) given on
the type of political and social environment faced in the country. Therefore,
over time, an equilibrium characterized by a particular type of conflict will
emerge. Experimental methods will be used to investigate how groups learn to
cooperate and coordinate over the best tactic over time, as they interact with
each other. The objective will be to determine how the choice of an action or
tactic evolves over time under different environments, mimicking different types
of regimes and governments. The proposed evolutionary model looks at the
evolution of tactical responses in conflict situations as a function of the
power of a state. This connects the nature of future -- and, therefore,
unobservable -- conflict to the current and observable nature of government, and
provides a means for predicting the nature of conflict. This predictability can
then be used to develop responses specific to the nature of the expected
conflict.