* 0904615
* RUI: Undergraduate Research in Glass Science at Coe College; A National Model of Excellence
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 451,953.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a vigorous and
innovative undergraduate research program that serves as a national model of
excellence. This project involves 40 students studying a mix of applied and
basic science projects in glass science over the next five years. Students will
undertake research focused on discovering new glass forming systems and ranges
of compositions; characterizing physical properties; building patented rapid
cooling devices; learning to make micron-scale gratings and optical devices;
forming microspheres; working on nuclear waste incorporation into glasses; and
doing atomic structure studies of these new materials. The broader impacts of
this proposed work are manifold. They include: &lt;br/&gt;1) teaching large
numbers of undergraduates how to do sustained research. Seventy percent of their
students continue onwards to graduate school in science or engineering. The
group is fully inclusive and participation is welcomed by all. &lt;br/&gt;2)
serving the glass science and physics community. In this area the faculty have
assumed leadership roles (examples: Prof. Affatigato is the immediate past chair
of the Glass and Optical Materials Division of the American Ceramic Society, and
Prof. Feller was co- president of American Institute of Physics?s Society of
Physics Students) and numerous conferences in glass science and physics were
organized. Also, two segments of on-line courses (co-organized by Clemson
University and the NSF-International Materials Institute at Lehigh University
and Penn State University) were taught in glass science (spectroscopy and
properties). &lt;br/&gt;3) bringing science to the public by visiting schools;
hosting student groups at Coe College; giving public lectures and demonstrations
on topics such as glass-making. The signature outreach program is the Coe
Playground of Science that brings 1500-2000 community members, mainly young
students, for an evening of science demonstrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a
vigorous undergraduate research program that will educate 40 undergraduate
students over the next five years. Much of the work will be done in-house at Coe
College using very well equipped laboratories. The equipment base includes:
scanning electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, Raman and Fourier
Transform infrared spectroscopies, laser-desorption time-of-flight mass
spectroscopy, x-ray diffraction, much thermal equipment, chemical determination
by x-ray analysis (EDXRF), and an excellent glass-making facility. The research
conducted has both both basic and applied aspects, and it seeks to make
substantial contributions to the field of glass science. The basic science work
is focused on discovering new glass forming systems; extending glass-forming
ranges; conducting atomic structure studies of these new glasses using a wealth
of spectroscopic techniques available both at Coe College and around the world;
and characterizing physical properties. The more applied work includes designing
and building patentable state-of-the art rapid cooling devices; learning to make
micron-scale gratings and microspheres using laser crystallization and flame
spheroidization; and working on nuclear waste incorporation into borosilicate
host glasses. A significant amount of this research is done with collaborators
around the world, in particular, in North and South America, and in Europe. This
expands the repertoire of techniques available to these students and facilitates
the discovery of new information. These collaborations also bring new ideas and
students to Coe College, enriching the educational experience for all. The
impacts of the work are considerable. The science and technology created at Coe
College is used by groups throughout the world and the methods of instruction
serve as a model for the nation. The educational approach is innovative and
undergraduate students learn to do research over extended periods (multiple
years) and they participate fully in all aspects of the work. To date they have
co-authored over 100 papers and have given hundreds of presentations.