* 0904635
* Dynamics and Impacts of Mesoscale Gravity Waves in Baroclinic Jet-Front Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2008,09/30/2011
* Fuqing Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2011
* USD 250,537.00

Intellectual Merit: Gravity waves are ubiquitous in the atmosphere and play a
fundamental role in a wide variety of atmospheric processes that have important
implications to tropospheric weather, stratospheric dynamics, ozone chemistry
and general circulation. They can transfer significant amounts of energy and
momentum, initiate and organize convection, and produce atmospheric turbulence.
The momentum transport and deposition by gravity waves have significant impacts
on the general circulation of the atmosphere. A better knowledge of these
processes demands a complete understanding of the mechanisms by which the
gravity waves are generated, together with their characteristics, distribution
and variability. While past observational studies have repeatedly demonstrated
that many of the mesoscale gravity waves with horizontal wavelength of 50-500 km
are strongly associated with the midlatitude baroclinic jet-front systems, the
exact generation mechanisms of these waves remain uncertain. Building on the
progress made using dry dynamics, the ultimate goal of this research is to
understand the dynamics and impacts of the mesoscale gravity waves generated by
the tropospheric baroclinic jet-front systems and their interaction with moist
convection. This study will progressively approach the problem by using high-
resolution dry and moist idealized simulations of baroclinic waves, real-case
hemispheric modeling and satellite observations. Major objectives include: i)
expanding the investigation of gravity waves in the idealized simulations of dry
dynamics to further track the wave source origins and spatial/temporal
variations through the use of the ray tracing technique and to further
differentiate the roles of balance vs. imbalance in the wave generation through
direct calculations of wave forcing and response; ii) performing high-resolution
simulations of idealized moist baroclinic waves, investigating the
characteristics and dynamics of the gravity waves simulated therein and
exploring the interactions between gravity waves and convection; and iii)
extending the use of mesoscale models to a quasi-hemispheric domain to simulate
gravity waves associated with midlatitude baroclinic jet-front systems for an
entire winter season, comparing the model results with satellite observations
and idealized simulations, and qualitatively assessing the momentum and energy
fluxes and their impacts.

Broader Impacts: Better understanding of mesoscale gravity waves and their
interaction with moist processes may lead to better understanding of the
dynamics and improved forecasts of convective triggers and modulation as well as
the associated severe weather. Better understanding of flow imbalance and
mesoscale gravity waves may provide guidance on mesoscale data assimilation and
mesoscale predictability. Better understanding of gravity wave processes may
also lead to better parameterization of the energy and momentum transport
between the troposphere and stratosphere by non-topographic and non-convective
mesoscale gravity waves.