* 0904337
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Role of Transtension in Continental Rupture: An Integrative Study of the Sonoran Margin and Tibur√≥n Basin, Northern Gulf of California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Michael Oskin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2012
* USD 302,256.00

Development of strain partitioning in transtensional rifts may play a
significant role in localizing continental rupture. Partitioning of extension
and dextral shear in the proto-Gulf of California during Late Miocene time (12
to 6 million years ago) remains a fundamental unresolved problem that hinders
understanding of the initial conditions for ocean basin formation. Preliminary
evidence from coastal Sonora is supportive of a regional model that promotes
dextral transtension in a zone of uncertain width prior to localization of
plate-boundary motion in the Gulf of California approximately 6 million years
ago. It is not known whether Late Miocene dextral shear was sufficiently fast or
focused to alter rheological conditions and change the mode of rifting from
distributed Basin-and-Range-style extension to localized lithospheric necking,
subsidence, and continental rupture. In this project U.S. and Mexican scientists
aim to constrain the structural distribution of dextral shear over time during
localization of the plate boundary. Specifically, they will determine whether
late Miocene transtension in the proto-Gulf of California was accommodated by
diffuse 3-dimensional strain in a wide zone of coeval strike-slip and normal
faults or occurred in a narrow zone of discrete dextral faults and/or rotating
blocks embedded within a broader zone of East-West extension. To discriminate
between these models, the team is investigating the geologic structure and basin
development of the Sonoran continental margin, including adjacent Isla Tiburon
and the offshore Sonora shelf by: (1) documenting the distribution of dextral
shear through detailed structural mapping and paleomagnetic analysis; (2)
quantifying transtensional strain rates using structural reconstructions,
40Ar/39Ar dating of intercalated volcanic rocks, and subsidence analysis of
syntectonic sedimentary and volcanic basins; and (3) integrating the onshore
geologic record with offshore structures and basins by interpretation of
existing multi-channel seismic data from the offshore Tiburon basin.

The Gulf of California provides an excellent natural laboratory for studying
processes of continental break-up. Previous studies have shown that warm
continental crust tends to resist localized deformation, which is required for
rupture of continental lithosphere. Data from this study will improve
understanding of how and why the warm crust of western North America ruptured to
form the Gulf of California, which has been opening since about 6 million years
ago. This project is supported by the EAR Tectonics Program, the NSF Office of
international Science and Engineering, and the NSF/OCE MARGINS program. The
research involves significant participation of graduate and undergraduate
students, collaboration with Native Americans, and strong international
partnerships with research institutions in Mexico.