* 0904572
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Simulations of Quantum Systems by Stochastic Methods: Tools and Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeongnim Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 479,947.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports developing, testing, and optimizing a new generation of
simulation codes for calculating electronic states on petascale computers. The
codes will be based on quantum Monte Carlo methods. The effort will combine
recent advances in computer science, such as Global Arrays, fault-tolerant
parallelism, Graphics Processing Units and task-dynamical parallelism, with
recent disciplinary advances that can treat correlated electronic systems and
study physical effects currently out of reach. The goal is to establish
production-quality quantum Monte Carlo codes that can exploit Track I and
follow-on hardware to achieve scientific breakthrough calculations. Successful
use of petascale computers will likely be very challenging. Scaling up the
quantum Monte Carlo codes by more than two orders of magnitude will require
pursuing new avenues for algorithm organization and parallelization; for
example, utilizing the multicore/shared memory nature of the nodes. Attention to
fault tolerance and load balance will lead to reliable and efficient petascale
codes. A key thrust will be to couple quantum Monte Carlo methods for electrons
with classical simulation methods for the ions enabling realistic simulations on
virtually any system. New predictive capabilities and insights will result,
particularly into dynamics and finite temperature phenomena using a full quantum
mechanical description of the electrons. Another thrust involves applying
quantum Monte Carlo to strongly correlated electronic systems - among the most
important challenges in condensed matter physics. The PIs plan to implement and
test new correlated wavefunctions such as pfaffians with backflow, and new
quantum Monte Carlo algorithms, such as the dynamical coupling of classical and
quantum degrees of freedom. These developments will be applied to study water
with a full quantum mechanical description of all the relevant degrees of
freedom such as electrons and protons at nonzero temperatures without any
empirical or mean-field inputs. Quantum Monte Carlo calculations will also be
used to understand transition metal compounds, in particular, the magnetic
states and metal-insulator transitions at high pressures in transition metal
oxide materials. Despite decades of studies these systems remain inadequately
understood and require exceedingly high accuracy to reveal the origins of a
variety of many-body phenomena and experimentally observed phenomena. The
developed computational tools will be available to the scientific community
through the open source projects QMCPACK, and QWalk. The Global Arrays toolkit
will provide a high-level and scalable programming environment based on the
global address space programming model. This research and development effort
will also support training of graduate students and postdocs in the area of high
performance computing. The PIs will organize a Summer School, "Petaflop Quantum
Monte Carlo Methods," to train students, postdocs and researchers in the
developed methodologies and enable them to open new frontiers with high
performance computing at the petascale and beyond.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports developing, testing, and tuning the performance of a new
generation of computer codes targeted for the most powerful computers. These new
codes will be based on quantum mechanics and create a "virtual microscope" that
probe materials at the atomic scale. These codes will provide an accurate
determination of the forces between atoms enabled by an accurate quantum
mechanical description of the electrons and their motions which are the ultimate
sources of these forces. The resulting code will be applied to study water,
perhaps the most important component of life but also one of the most
challenging liquids and solids to understand. The accurate description of
electrons afforded by the PIs codes will enable the most accurate computational
study of materials which involve electrons that interact strongly with each
other leading to new states of matter. Understanding these materials may lead to
the discovery of new states of matter that may lead to new materials and device
technologies.

The codes that are developed will be made available to the broader computational
community of scientists and empower them to utilize the most powerful computers
to open new frontiers. This research and development effort will also support
training of graduate students and postdocs in the area of high performance
computing. The PIs will organize a Summer School, "Petaflop Quantum Monte Carlo
Methods," to train students, postdocs and researchers in the developed
methodologies and enable them to open new frontiers with high performance
computing at the petascale.