* 0904587
* Collaborative research: Development of efficient petascale algorithms  for inhomogeneous quantum-mechanical systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of new supercomputers
that employ hundreds of thousands of processors and can compute at speeds
approaching one quadrillion operations per second, many grand challenge science
problems can be solved which were unsolvable even a few years ago. This team of
physicists and computer scientists will develop new computational algorithms
based on the so-called Lanczos method, which involves using powers of a sparse
matrix multiplying an initial vector, that will find the diagonal of the inverse
of large sparse matrices and will find all of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
The codes that are developed will take into account the specific memory
addressing and accessing issues associated with trying to run these codes
efficiently on such large machines. &lt;br/&gt;These numerical algorithms, which
are likely to have wide use within the scientific community, will be applied to
two hard scientific problems in this work. The first is to describe how
ultracold atoms placed on a so-called optical lattice, where the atoms move
along a corrugated "egg-carton-like" surface, interact with each other quantum-
mechanically. Working with a group of the world's leading experimental groups in
this area, this team will solve a number of theoretical and computational
problems related to the behavior of these systems. &lt;br/&gt;The problems are
inherently difficult because the atoms are placed in a trap, like particles
sitting in a bowl, which makes established techniques very difficult to employ
on these systems. The second problem is the behavior of a quantum spin glass.
Glassy behavior is an inherently difficult problem, because the disorder breaks
the periodicity of the system, and makes it challenging to solve.
&lt;br/&gt;Conventional methods like quantum Monte Carlo simulations fail due to
the frustrated nature of the spins. Our work, based on an extension of high
temperature series expansions to be able to describe low-temperature properties,
will allow one to accurately probe the ground state properties of these
fascinating systems which are believed to display either topological order or
emergent cooperative behavior. &lt;br/&gt;The team will also investigate the
productivity trade offs associated with the use of modern parallel programming
models, such as the partitioned global address space (PGAS), particularly UPC,
for this class of problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general purpose numerical
codes developed under this grant will be distributed via the GNU public license.
This project will also train younger researchers in large scale scientific
computing.