* 0904430
* Characterizing Cortical Computation in the Context of Natural Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2010,07/31/2014
* Daniel Butts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 454,376.00

An understanding of how the brain processes visual stimuli is confounded by the
complexity of the natural visual world, combined with the intricate neuronal
processing that occurs within and across multiple cortical areas. Over the last
few decades, substantial progress has been made by using simple laboratory
stimuli, such as moving bars or dots, to develop simple descriptions of neuronal
tuning to these elements. This approach has provided a reasonable functional
description of lower cortical areas, but it is unlikely to be sufficient to
characterize the regions of the extrastriate cortex whose responses are thought
to represent elements particular to the natural visual world. Though a joint
Canadian-US collaboration, this project couples new experimental approaches
based on a set of complex stimuli approaching natural vision with appropriately
complex models, in order to understand how neurons in successive stages of
cortical processing are tuned to more natural visual
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most previous work with natural stimuli has
focused on the ventral pathway in the cortex, which is concerned with computing
object shape and identity. This is an extremely challenging problem, as the
dimensionality of shape space is unknown. This project focuses instead on the
dorsal stream of the primate visual cortex, which is primarily identified with
motion processing. The advantage of this approach is that motion, particularly
that seen in natural vision, can be locally decomposed into a low-dimensional
optic flow space that can be sampled using naturalistic stimuli designed for
this proposal. The development of such stimuli will extend both the spatial and
temporal complexity of probes to areas in the dorsal stream, while providing the
necessary constraints for a novel nonlinear modeling framework that will be
developed. These models will then be applied to motion stimuli derived through
simulation of natural three-dimensional virtual environments, allowing the
complex processing uncovered to be linked to natural visual features.
Furthermore, by performing this study across successive areas comprising the
dorsal hierarchy (V1, MT, and MST), this project aims to expose general
principles of cortical processing, namely how higher level abstractions are
derived from lower-level visual features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience and the
OISE Americas program. A companion project is being funded by the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research.