* 0904239
* NeTS-ProWin:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  A new taxonomy for cooperative  wireless networking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2008,08/31/2012
* Anna Scaglione, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 491,016.00

It is well documented how cooperative links can offer considerable performance
gains at the physical layer, but it is unclear what kind of network support
would be required to attain the sought gains. Cooperative links violate the
simple collision model for broadcast transmission, a model that has been
instrumental so far in allowing the parallel evolution of communication theory
and network theory. Recognizing the absence of a correct taxonomy to use
cooperative links at the network and multiple access layer, the objective of
this collaborative project is to investigate theoretically and experimentally
the interplay between a cooperative decentralized physical layer and the
wireless network architecture as a whole. More specifically, the project will
develop viable link abstractions, multiple access protocols, end-to-end network
transport models, appropriate algorithms to support the introduction in wireless
mobile networks of two technologies that are rapidly advancing: 1) cooperative
transmission, that consists of multiple network nodes operating as a
decentralized multi-antenna modem and, 2) distributed source coding, that allows
the decentralized compression of correlated observations and, thus, is relevant
to the design of a decentralized receiver. The project will also use the GNU
software radio platform to test cooperative links and assess their feasibility
and degradation when facing real limitations of transceiver synchronization,
carrier offset, clock jitter and computation delays. Algorithms and theoretical
results will be disseminated through the standard tools of research
publications. Experimental results will be also documented online where the
software will be shared to serve as an educational tool as well as to foster new
technological advances in mesh networks. This project will bring future wireless
networks closer to achieving the physical limits of communications.