* 0904844
* Collaborative Research: Coupled Models of Diffusion and Individual Behavior Over Extremely Large Social Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dimitrios Nikolopoulos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,182,798.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of contagions such as
opinions, attitudes, beliefs, and diseases across a national population is a
well-known complex problem; the recent fear of avian flu epidemics and financial
contagion serve as excellent examples. Other examples include: opinions, fads,
trends, norms, packet diffusion, worm propagation in computer networks and
database replication in sensor networks. In this project the investigators
propose to develop MTML-Sim: a Multi-Theory Multi-Level (MTML) modeling
framework, operating over extremely large dynamic socio-technical networks, in
which multiple contagions and behaviors are simultaneously co-evolving by
repeated interactions. MTML-Sim will use computational agent-based methods
resolved at an individual level to represent and compute the co-evolving
dynamics. The goal is to scale MTML-Sim to billions of individual agents
connected by multi-level social and information networks, and efficiently
execute on 100,000-processor petascale architectures that will come online in
the next few years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MTML-Sim will provide practical
methods to support academic researchers as well as policy makers before and
during large-scale cascades caused by the spread of contagion. The broader
impacts of the project will be achieved by tools used to identify critical
elements in the socio-technical networks before the start of cascades, and by
potential interventions for controlling the cascades based on the understanding
of the effects of individual and group behavior within the dynamically evolving
socio-technical networks.