* 0904534
* Collaborative Research: PetaApps: Enabling Multiscale Modeling of Turbulent Clouds on Petascale Computers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Louis Rossi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,064,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable weather and climate
prediction at local-to-global scales ultimately depends on a full and
quantitatively accurate understanding of microphysical processes governing
interactions of individual cloud droplets and their interplay with cloud-scale
dynamics. Of those mechanisms known to affect the growth of individual droplets
and evolution of cloud droplet populations within clouds, turbulence induced
collision-coalescence appears to be among the most complex. Previous direct
numerical simulation methods capable of resolving individual droplets have
traditionally been confined to consideration of exceedingly small volumes (of
order a cubic meter), as well as being restricted to relatively laminar (non-
turbulent) flows. These methods have thus been incapable of addressing the
impact of turbulent eddies, which typically have dimensions of 10-100 m, on
cloud droplet-scale processes such as condensation, coalescence and mixing. Even
very high resolution "Large Eddy Simulation (LES)" models, which have only
recently achieved grid spacings routinely approaching 10 m, must approximate
cloud microphysics via simplifying (and inherently limited) parameterization
techniques. As such, the millions to billions of individual droplets comprised
by even a small cloud cannot be individually represented and tracked via these
traditional approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of advanced petascale
computing methods by this investigative team will allow turbulence-to-cloud-
scale (i.e. multiscale) cloud dynamics and microphysics to be treated in a
seamless fashion absent unjustified simplifying assumptions. This approach will
lead to a more robust understanding of shallow ice-free convective clouds, such
as subtropical stratocumulus and trade-wind cumulus, which are known to play a
critical role in the global climate system. Computer codes developed under this
effort will be designed for ease of portability, ensuring their availability for
broad use throughout the relevant research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This collaborative effort will
allow advanced engineering fluid-mechanics research tools and state-of-the-art
petascale computational methods to be effectively merged and applied to critical
atmospheric processes within a unified numerical simulation framework. This
approach will address several open questions that have faced the cloud-physics
research community for many years, and will ultimately contribute to improved
weather and climate forecasts. Multidisciplinary education will be enhanced
through collaborative involvement of multiple graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as a Postdoctoral scholar.