* 0904094
* Compositional and Temperature Controls on Structural Order, Dynamics, and Properties of Multicomponent Borosilicate Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 520,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Borosilicate glasses are widely used in
technology, with applications ranging from heat- and chemical-resistant
glassware and reaction vessels, to reinforcement fibers in ?fiber-glass?, to
computer and television display screens. Many of these are central to multi-
billion dollar U.S. industries, such as flat-panel TV?s and computer monitors.
The atomic-scale structure of these materials controls their properties, which
must be tailored to improve performance in their diverse uses. This project
seeks to understand general principles of how variations in the glass
composition, and the way that it is heat-treated during manufacturing, change
the glass structure in useful ways, to allow properties to be more easily
predicted and engineered. The results of these studies should have more general
interest as well, in other fields of science where glasses (and the liquids that
form glass on cooling) are important, including geosciences and condensed-matter
physics. Education is central to this project, since most of the research will
be part of the training of Ph.D. and undergraduate students on their ways to
careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;The most important experimental approach that will be used is
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which provides
quantitative details about the structure around many of the components common in
technological glasses, including boron, aluminum, silicon, and oxygen. The P.I.
and students in this program will synthesize several series of glasses with
systematic variations in composition, and measure how glass structure changes.
They will vary the thermal history of the glasses to look for clearly important,
but poorly-known, effects of temperature. They will analyze results with
thermodynamic modeling to allow prediction of critical properties. Much of the
current development of improved and new types of glass materials comes from
trial-and-error experimentation; it is thus an important goal to develop more
fundamental understanding of structure-property relationships. Success with this
goal could lead to new ways of thinking about designing glass compositions for
new applications. Given major efforts in fundamental glass science in other
countries, and the importance of the manufacturing of high-tech glasses in U.S.
industry, it seems particularly urgent to progress in more basic understanding
of these materials.&lt;br/&gt;