* 0904050
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Landscape-level Controls on Terrestrial, Aquatic, and Wetland Responses to Climate Change in the Southern Canadian Arctic
* BIO,DEB
* 09/30/2008,06/30/2012
* Philip Camill, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 269,890.00

An extensive series of sediment cores from many connected lakes, wetlands, and
upland tundra and forests in northern Manitoba, Canada will be collected and
examined for several indicators of ecosystem composition and function over the
past 8000 years. Although ecological responses to Arctic warming have been shown
in previous research, such as increases in lake productivity, permafrost thaw,
shrub expansion, and northward shifts in the subarctic tree line, most of this
work involves the study of a single ecosystem type, such as terrestrial forests,
wetlands, or lakes. An objective of the new research is to examine how
interactions among these ecosystems in the past have affected their responses to
past climate change. Changes in one ecosystem may affect the response of others
to climate change, such as when soil runoff from forests and wetlands alters the
chemistry and productivity of the lakes into which they drain. This project will
be significant for determining how Arctic ecosystems may change in the future as
a result of rapid warming. A better understanding of the linkages among these
ecosystems will be essential for understanding ecological impacts on
productivity, nutrient cycles, or biodiversity in the Arctic and will help
inform the scientific community and the public about climate change, the direct
impacts of this climate change on the people of the Arctic and extended global
impacts on the carbon cycle and climate warming.

