* 0904373
* CSHL Conference:  Engineering Principles for Biological Sciences, December 10-13, 2008 in Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory, New York.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

We propose to provide support for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
to attend a conference on Engineering Principles for Biological Systems, to be
held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on 10--13 December 2008. The conference is
intended to foster cross-disciplinary exchange of ideas and expertise between
engineers, mathematicians and biologists interested in the analysis of diverse
biological systems through the application of engineering principles. Support
from this grant would be used to help offset the cost of the conference for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who wish to attend.

Intellectual Merit: Through the process of evolution, living systems retain
solutions arisen by chance to problems they must solve in order to survive. In
the past, theoretical biology has largely focused on explanations of the
physico-chemical mechanisms behind such solutions, while explanation in the form
of function-solution pairs has been studied in a relatively ad hoc manner and
has not been approached from a disciplinary perspective. This conference will
promote the development of an emerging approach to theoretical biology with more
formal emphasis on design or engineering principles. Here, the premise is that
although solutions or designs in biological systems are not engineered but
instead arise incrementally through natural selection, they may nevertheless be
studied in their existing forms in the framework of engineering theories
developed alongside human-engineered systems. This conference is part of a
series of workshops and conferences organized by Partha Mitra (CSHL), Richard
Murray (Caltech) and others to help foster a community of researchers working on
theoretical frameworks for understanding biological systems across a variety of
scales. A starting point for these theories can be drawn from courses taught in
engineering departments. The idea is therefore to start with major existing
engineering theories (controls, communication, computation) and to examine
whether these apply to biological systems, and if not, what modifications are in
order. The conference series and this CSHL conference in particular, will
provide an educational opportunity for biological researchers to learn about
engineering theories which may be relevant to their work, and for engineering
theorists and computer scientists to learn about biological problems they might
help to be understood. Each session at the conference will have a two invited
talks, one each by a biologist and a theoretician/engineer, integrated with a
set of contributed talks, chosen from submitted abstracts.

Dissemination and Broader Impact: The proposed conference will foster this new
approach to understanding biological systems and the collaborative culture
across disciplines that its success will require. The conference venue and
format are ideal for encouraging open discussion and initiating collaborative
efforts, and it is hoped that a continuing series of such meetings will also
encourage the development of an enduring and progressive theoretical framework.
To complement the direct training opportunity for conference participants, talks
presented at the conference will be put on a website for the benefit of the
wider scientific community. Options will be provided to individual presenters to
make their talks publicly available through the Leading Strand web site.