* 0904100
* International Research Fellowship Program: Investigations of the Semiochemicals in the Mating Sequence of the U.S.Invasive species Anoplophora Glabripennis and related Sub-Families
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Jacob Wickham, Wickham, Jacob D
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

0904100 Wickham

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jacob D.
Wickham to work with Dr. Yi Chen at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing,
China.

This project involves an investigation of the semiochemicals involved in the
mating sequence of the Asian Longhorned Beetle (ALB), Anoplophora glabripennis
(Coleoptera, Cerambycidae, Lamiinae), an invasive species in the U.S. that is
native to China and kills several species of angiospermous trees. The specific
focus is the identification of the long-range female pheromones, as well as
investigations to broaden understanding of the roles of host volatiles, male
produced pheromones, and contact cues (which encode information for sex
recognition and trail pheromones). To gain a better understanding of the
evolutionary patterns of pheromone use in Cerambycidae, the PI proposes research
into the mating sequence of ALB and investigations of another lamiine species, a
cerambycine, and one species from the more ancestral Prioninae. All species in
the proposal are of ecological and economic concern in China, and ALB is a
serious threat to forests in the USA with infestations in Chicago, IL, NYC, NJ,
and Worchester, MA. Long range mate attraction has been documented in four
genera of Cerambycinae (male produced), while female long range pheromones have
been documented for one species of the more ancestral Prioninae, and two other
genera in the Vesperidae (Cerambycoidea). For most insects that use pheromones,
females attract the males. Consistent with this evolutionary pattern and my
results to date, the PI expects that ALB females also use a long-range sex
pheromone (although male pheromones also play a role). He conducted extensive
laboratory investigations into the detection and identification of long-range,
female pheromones and host tree attractants for ALB. This involves recording
antennal signals of males using gas chromatography coupled with an
electroantennographic detector (GC-EAD), followed by GC-MS identification, lab
bioassay and field bioassay. His research will involve identification of the
unknown unsaturated hydrocarbons, GC-EAD recordings of activated female
extracts, laboratory bioassays using both activated and crude extracts, and
field trapping with synthetic pheromone components. The expected results are
that these new compounds have dual roles as precursors to volatile long-range
female pheromone, and the compounds themselves encode more information regarding
mating status (rather than sex recognition) for male ALB. The expected results
from investigations of chemical ecology of other related species will show
similar patterns of mate attraction and recognition.

The study of the signaling mechanisms and mating sequence of ALB and a
representative species from other subfamilies can broaden our knowledge of the
basic biology of this large and important group of insects, of which only
fragments of 0.2% of the world?s 35,000 species? chemical ecology is known.
Furthermore, ALB poses a serious threat to the health and sustainability of
North American forests, and long-range attractants would likely play a pivotal
role in the successful eradication of this invasive forest insect. In New York
City, over 100,000 trees have been treated with the systemic insecticide
imidacloprid, which has been detected in groundwater on Long Island. IPM using
attractants could limit insecticide use. The newly discovered infestation in
Worchester, MA (August 2008) direly needs chemical attractants as a monitoring
tool in the US government?s eradication program. In China, ALB is a serious pest
of poplar and willow plantations, which are grown for energy biomass
(potentially reducing coal consumption by 20-30%, and help combat global
warming), and as windbreaks in China?s massive anti-desertification program.