* 0904203
* Measured Organic Particle Types with Molecular Modeling of their Volatility and Uptake Properties
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Lynn Russell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2012
* USD 539,526.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research presents a combined
measurement, analysis, and modeling approach that addresses these uncertainties
in three related tasks. The Principal Investigator (PI) will: (1) collect and
analyze organic aerosols generated in smog chambers for functional group
composition and morphology (including chemical distribution within individual
particles) using Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy (STXM) and Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), as a function of "age" (oxidant
exposure); (2) analyze the morphology of our archive of approximately 1000
ambient particle spectra collected during eleven field campaigns in comparison
to the smog chamber particles and other published particle types; and (3)
identify the links between the observed organic compound types and morphologies
via model simulations. For each type, the PI will also calculate the volatility
and water uptake properties that these particles exhibit in atmospheric
conditions. Given the wide range of atmospheric particle sizes of interest and
the computational limitations of simulating individual molecules, the work will
include "full particle" techniques for particles smaller than 20 nanometers and
"slab" techniques for estimating parameters suitable for describing larger
particles in atmospheric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a set
of training opportunities for two postdoctoral scholars and one graduate student
who will participate in the scientific enterprise through engagement in
experimental and computational methods. The work establishes a new collaboration
among three U.S. academic institutions. In addition, the PI will involve
students in summarizing our recent findings on aerosol behavior for a broader
audience for posting on the "Outreach" web page maintained by the investigators.