* 0904220
* Collaborative Proposal: Continuation of th XENON Dark Matter Project: Construction and Underground Operation of an Upgraded XENON100 Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Elena Aprile, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,423,847.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project addresses the question of the nature of dark
matter in the Universe with an experimental search for Weakly Interactive
Massive Particles (WIMPs) using two-phase xenon detectors. This group is
currently operating at the 100 kg mass scale with the XENON100 experiment which
has replaced the XENON10 prototype in the same shield and location at the Gran
Sasso Underground Laboratory. The worldwide race towards direct dark matter
detection has been dramatically accelerated by the fast evolution of detectors
based on noble liquids. They have shifted the scale of target mass from a few to
tens of kilograms, while reducing the overall gamma/beta background to less than
0.001 events/kg/keV/day, much lower than scintillator and cryogenic bolometer
detectors. Despite being only a prototype, XENON10 has shown the potential of
two-phase Xe detectors for dark matter searches, bringing the XENON program to
the forefront of the field.

This award will provide funds to continue the XENON program for 2 more years to
complete the dark matter search with the current XENON100 detector within 2009,
and to realize an upgraded detector by early 2010 in the same shield and
location. Additionally, XENON100 has a robust possibility to address questions
related to the DAMA/LIBRA annual modulation signature, shedding new light on
this controversial result.

The broader impact of the XENON science program addresses questions about the
fundamental properties of the Universe and has all the ingredients to captivate
the interest and imagination of students and the general public alike.
Technical-related work can impact society in a number of ways: liquid xenon
imaging detectors and related technologies find applications in several fields
outside particle astrophysics, including national security and medical imaging
research.