* 0904946
* NSCC/SA: Collaborative Research: Experimental Analysis of Alternative Models of Conflict Bargaining
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Clark, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2012
* USD 151,861.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.

The application of bargaining models to the study of interstate conflict has
produced a large number of insights regarding why states fight, but it leaves
unsolved the puzzle as to why rational leaders would choose conflict if fighting
incurs costs they could avoid in a negotiated settlement. Most bargaining models
of conflict assume leaders are perfectly sensitive to expected costs and
benefits, and as a result, they do not make decision errors. This project
explores a bargaining model in which players are not assumed to be perfect
decision makers, nor to believe their opponents are perfect decision makers.
Instead, leaders are assumed to be somewhat insensitive to expected costs and
benefits and have beliefs about regarding the insensitivity of their opponents.
As a result, players may make mistakes in the way they play and may exhibit
suboptimal behavior relative to the predictions of standard game theory. A set
of laboratory experiments will be undertaken to evaluate the extent to which
such a model can explain the types of decision errors and suboptimal outcomes
that occur experimentally. Experiments will also examine the consequences of
having players trained in leadership and how large expected payoffs (high
stakes) influence decision making.