* 0904017
* Quantum Information with Alkaline Earth Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 02/28/2013
* USD 480,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work
stems from the desire to develop a new approach for scalable, neutral atom
based, quantum computation and quantum simulation that exploits the electronic
and nuclear degrees of freedom in alkaline-earth atoms. The unique atomic
structure of these atoms not only has made them ideal for optical frequency
standards and clock technology but also offers novel opportunities for quantum
information processing which remain to be exploited in full. In this project
registers of fermionic alkaline-earth atoms, with one (electronic) qubit encoded
in the ground singlet-triplet optical transition and additional qubits encoded
in the nuclear spin degrees of freedom are considered. Since the electronic
degrees of freedom can easily be manipulated with lasers and other external
fields, the electronic qubit are treated as the communication qubit, i.e. the
data bus for detecting and coupling the registers. The nuclear qubits, on the
other hand, are used as switches to turn on and off the electronic interactions
and to store quantum information. Specific goals of the project include; (i)
developing schemes for the accurate manipulation and detection of the electronic
and nuclear qubits, (ii) exploiting the electron and nuclear degrees of freedom
for entanglement generation and the implementation of quantum computation
protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work arises, in
part, from the educational and outreach aspects, including the training of
graduate students and postdocs. These students will benefit from interacting
also with experimental groups at JILA. The investigators will continue to
contribute to community outreach programs such as public lectures and accessible
physics articles, and will also maintain a significant level of service to the
physics community, through organizing workshops, serving on review panels, and
memberships on professional committees. This project will impact diverse areas
of research since it contains interdisciplinary science involving application of
the unique atomic structure of cold alkaline-earth ensembles as implemented for
precision spectroscopy (atomic, molecular and optical physics and quantum
optics) towards the design of highly-controllable set-ups capable on one hand of
processing quantum information (quantum information science) and on the other of
generating fundamental insights into strongly correlated manybody Hamiltonians
(condensed matter and material science). The interdisciplinary character of this
project is directly reflected in the PI's themselves, since it solicits support
for three principal investigators (Ana Maria Rey, Murray Holland and Victor
Gurarie)with expertise which spans the different but complementary areas of
quantum optics, condensed matter, and atomic physics. The resulting synergy of
interests and abilities will allow the group to delve into a broad range of
problems, which would be difficult or unfeasible for a single investigator
program.