* 0904349
* 2009 Cardiac Arrhythmia Mechanisms Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Natalia Trayanova, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 12/31/2009
* USD 10,000.00

0904349&lt;br/&gt;N. Trayanova&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
Gordon Research Conference on Cardiac Arrhythmia Mechanisms, to be held February
15-20, 2008 at Il Ciocco, Braga, Italy. This is the fourth Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Cardiac Arrhythmia Mechanisms. The conference is held every
other year. The proposed 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Cardiac Arrhythmia
Mechanisms will focus on both basic science and clinically relevant key
scientific topics. The meeting will allow opportunities to bring together groups
of outstanding investigators, experts in various relevant fields, including
molecular biology, molecular genetics, cellular electrophysiology, biophysics,
imaging, biomedical engineering, mathematics, and clinical cardiology to
interact and share ideas about the underlying mechanisms of complex life-
threatening cardiac arrhythmias. Leading experts and young promising
investigators in this field will present and discuss the most exciting new
contributions to the understanding of the mechanisms of cardiac rhythm
disturbances. The overall conference format is very interactive and
collaborative and allows time for quality discussions. The Gordon Conference
format, with carefully selected presentations and ample time for discussion,
will promote the informal exchange of information and foster the development of
strong long-lasting relationships among scientist with different backgrounds but
common interest in cardiac arrhythmia research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will draw participation from every aspect of our community, from
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows through to senior faculty, with
participation both national and international, and from academia and industry,
to uncover the major mechanisms of arrhythmogenesis. At the meeting, engineers,
physical scientists and life scientists will interact and share ideas about the
underlying mechanisms of complex life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias; and in
the long-term better treatments for the life-threatening arrhythmias can be
developed. The conference will target to increase the participation of women and
minorities. For the first time, there is a female Chair of the conference; the
organizing committee has two female members; and the program has already 6 women
speakers and discussion leaders, twice the number at the previous conference.
The conference will also provide an environment for students and junior
scientists to be mentored by the leaders in the field during the sessions, and
meals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used to support students
and postdoctoral fellows toward conference registration and/or travel
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;