* 0904423
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Hand-Mounted Tactile Displays for Haptically Identifying Shape and Dexterous Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Hong Tan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 346,602.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Force-feedback, or haptic, applications in medicine,
engineering, and design are increasing in popularity and importance based on the
advantages of haptic devices in providing intuitive and realistic interactions
with virtual environments. However, current haptic devices lack integrated
tactile feedback, which communicates contact and sliding between fingertips and
an object. Although a variety of tactile displays have been developed, most are
large bench-top devices and are impractical to place at a user?s fingertips
while exploring a virtual object. Simpler, more compact devices will solve this
problem and provide a means to create a more compelling virtual touch
experience. The overarching objective of this research is to significantly
improve the quality of touch feedback obtained with haptic interfaces by
improving both the mechanical interface to virtual worlds and the supporting
computational methods that generate touch sensations. These advances will be
informed by and validated through a progression of human subject experiments
that will culminate in two application-based evaluations in the areas of medical
bone palpation and virtual assembly. These case studies will quantify the
improved dexterous manipulation and exploration capabilities resulting from this
research.