* 0904361
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: From Text to Pictures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Owen Rambow, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2013
* USD 835,243.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are developing new
theoretical models and technology to automatically convert descriptive text into
3D scenes representing the text?s meaning. They do this via the Scenario-Based
Lexical Knowledge Resource (SBLR), a resource they are creating from existing
sources (PropBank, WordNet, FrameNet) and from automated mining of Wikipedia and
other un-annotated text. In addition to predicate-argument structure and
semantic roles, the SBLR includes necessary roles, typical role fillers,
contextual elements, and activity poses which enables analysis of input
sentences at a deep level and assembly of appropriate elements from libraries of
3D objects to depict the fuller scene implied by a sentence. For example, ?Terry
ate breakfast? does not tell us where (kitchen, dining room, restaurant) or what
he ate (cereal, doughnut, or rice, umeboshi, and natto). These elements must be
supplied from knowledge about typical role fillers appropriate for the
information that is specified in the input. Note that the SBLR has a component
that varies by cultural context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Textually-generated 3D
scenes will have a profound, paradigm-shifting effect in human computer
interaction, giving people unskilled in graphical design the ability to directly
express intentions and constraints in natural language -- bypassing standard
low-level direct-manipulation techniques. This research will open up the world
of 3D scene creation to a much larger group of people and a much wider set of
applications. In particular, the research will target middle-school age students
who need to improve their communicative skills, including those whose first
language is not English or who have learning difficulties: a field study in a
New York after-school program will test whether use of the system can improve
literacy skills. The technology also has the potential for interesting a more
diverse population in computer science at an early age, as interactions with
K-12 teachers have indicated. &lt;br/&gt;