* 0904282
* High-Pressure Synthesis and Physical Properties of New Oxides with Perovskite or Perovskite-Related Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John Goodenough, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2012
* USD 370,115.00

DMR 0904282&lt;br/&gt;High-pressure synthesis and physical properties of new
oxides with perovskite or perovskite-related
structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Unquenched orbital
angular momentum in the 4d and 5d transition-metal oxides with the perovskite or
the perovskite-related structure leads to a new type of Mott insulator and
anomalous metallic phases. Their exotic physical properties due to strong spin-
orbit coupling have attracted broad attention in recent years. The A-site cation
in these perovskites does not contribute directly to the electronic states near
the Fermi energy. However, as shown in high-Tc cuprates and the magnetoresistive
manganites, superconductive transition temperature, the magnetic transition
temperature, and the magnetization are highly sensitive to the A-cation disorder
as well as the mean A-cation size. The A-cation effect on the physical
properties of the 4d and 5d transition-metal oxides has not been studied
systematically. Introduction of A-cation size variance and the change of mean
A-cation size in a wide range is normally limited by the geometric tolerance
factor at ambient pressure. A complete study of this subject requires synthesis
at pressures as high as P ~ 20 GPa in some cases. The high-pressure synthesis
with a large volume at P &gt; 20 GPa has been developed in the field of
geoscience to study the earth?s lower mantle. However, it remains essentially a
virgin field to apply pressure over 10 GPa in a broad range of solid-state
synthesis. This funding will allow the PIs not only to address key factors
determining physical properties in the 4d and 5d metal oxides with unquenched
orbital angular momentum, but also to explore systematically solid-state
synthesis under pressure to 20 GPa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHINICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite oxides are technically important materials that
are widely used in the microelectronic industry, in chemical plants as
catalysts, and in solid-state fuel cells as both electrolyte and electrodes. The
basic research outlined in this project will lead to a better understanding of
perovskite oxides, which in turn benefits greatly their application.
&lt;br/&gt;What is unique about the PIs? laboratory is that they have
established several sophisticated instruments for material synthesis,
characterization, and measurements and they have a long history of emphasis on
the relationship between crystal structures, chemistry, their physical
properties, and their engineering application. Experimental results are compared
directly with theoretical calculations. The PIs emphasize high-pressure
synthesis and crystal growth in the project. These characteristics have
attracted scholars around the world to the laboratory. Students, post-docs, and
visiting scholars with diversified backgrounds of materials science, chemistry
and physics have a chance to interact with each other and to develop their own
strategy of material research while working on the project. Visiting researchers
have also brought with their specialties developed in their home laboratories.
All these factors create a very rich environment for learning and research. In
this project, the PIs also collaborate with scientists in Spain, Japan, China
and Canada. &lt;br/&gt;