* 0904631
* Scalable Algorithms for Multiscale Modeling and Analysis of Turbulent Combustion
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Valerio Pascucci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,500,000.00

Pascucci&lt;br/&gt;0904631&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate simulation of turbulent
combustion is a major open problem requiring petascale computing to resolve
highly nonlinear coupling of physical processes over a wide range of length and
time scales. The PIs approach to develop new modeling and algorithmic approaches
for this problem to tackle effectively High Performance Computing (HPC) for
combustion simulation at the Petascale. The PI's approach combines three
techniques: automatic algorithm parallelization, multidimensional data analysis
for model reduction, and multi-scale modeling with topological analysis to
connect models at different scales. The algorithm parallelization is based on an
algorithmic analysis that detects dependencies among computing stages, using
graph theory to detect and exploit parallelism more effectively than current
algorithms. This approach is independent from and complimentary to MPI
distributed parallelism and allows achieving the finer grain parallelism
necessary to exploit the multi core resources available on each computing node.
The PIs also plan a powerful new approach to model multiphysics flows, such as
turbulent combustion that leverages direct numerical simulation (DNS) and one-
dimensional turbulence (ODT) to provide surrogate 'truth sets'. High-dimensional
DNS data sets, containing terabytes of data, can be analyzed to extract lower-
dimensional manifolds known to exist. Techniques such as principal component
analysis can identify the optimal basis for representing manifolds in this high-
dimensional data. Once a basis has been identified and extracted from the data
sets generated by ODT, transport equations for the variables forming the basis
may be derived and solved in a large-eddy simulation (LES). The LES can then be
used to generate new ODT simulations which can feed back to the LES, thereby
creating a dynamic modeling approach that uses down-scale, highly resolved
statistical information to construct models to be used on larger scales (LES).
This modeling approach is a prime candidate for early testing on petascale
systems. The researchers in this study have already demonstrated the ability to
scale DNS and LES to terascale computing systems, and availability of petascale
computing will directly enable these modeling approaches. Application of the
algorithmic and modeling advances will be made to oxyfuel combustion of natural
gas. Oxyfuel combustion is one technique to facilitate carbon capture and
sequestration to mitigate carbon dioxide emissions from power plants burning
fossil fuels. While application will be made to natural gas systems, the
techniques and algorithms developed here will apply directly to other systems
including coal and transportation fuels such as diesel and gasoline. This
project will provide unique educational experiences for students, including
summer internships at national laboratories. Incorporating in regular classes
the lessons learned in this project will help educate the future work force.
Additionally, the research will strengthen collaborations between university
researchers and national laboratory staff involved in simulation and model
development, who will also participate in mentoring students.