* 0904080
* Second Young Investigators Summer Research Institute of the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2008,10/31/2010
* Steven Sawyer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2010
* USD 84,876.00

The Second Young Investigators Summer Research Institute will be a continuing
activity of the Consortium for the Science of Socio-Technical Systems (CSST).
CSST was born out of a series of workshops sponsored by NSF involving over forty
faculty members in diverse fields, such as social informatics, social computing,
CSCW, computational social science, HCI, and information science. Workshop
participants, recognizing the growing importance of research on the interplay of
humans and technology, or socio-technical systems, proposed the CSST as a
mechanism for promoting and supporting important research on social aspects of
technological change. An identified high priority, even in advance of the formal
creation of CSST, was initiation of an annual series of summer research
institutes targeted at people entering the field of sociotechnical systems
research. This proposal will support the second of these institutes to be held
on the campus of the University of Michigan in July, 2009. The inaugural
institute was very successful attracting 137 applications with a selected class
of 31 participants and thirteen institute faculty. Student participants will
include up to 30 advanced doctoral students and pre-tenure faculty doing
research on socio-technical systems. Up to fifteen instructors will be drawn
from senior faculty, including participants in the original NSF-supported
workshops on sociotechnical systems. This project will support the travel,
meals, and accommodations for all Institute
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
Institute will be on participants' research programs (e.g., dissertation for
doctoral students). The Institute provides both an opportunity for these
programs to be shaped through intellectual exchange with experienced researchers
as well as enhanced through collaboration with other young researchers. In
addition, the Institute will help spread ideas about research on socio-technical
systems within the US and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will continue to bring together the best of the
next generation of socio-technical system researchers. This allows them to
create a social network both among themselves and with several senior
researchers, which will play a major role in their professional development and
in the evolution of the field of socio-technical systems research. The diversity
of Institute participants (e.g., institutional, disciplinary, geographic,
gender, minority group status), will broaden participant's perspectives at a
critical stage in their careers.