* 0904380
* TC: Medium: Reimagining Cryptography by Identifying its Culturally-Rooted Assumptions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2014
* Phillip Rogaway, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2014
* USD 850,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years,
universally composable (UC) security, defined and extensively investigated by
Ran Canetti, has become a popular and important topic in modern cryptography.
Canetti's notion has enormous appeal, promising a unified framework under which
one can define virtually any cryptographic protocol goal, and further promising
that the resulting definitions will be composable in the sense that a protocol
solution for some goal will comprise a suitable primitive to use within any
other protocol that desires its abstracted functionality. But UC goals are
definitionally complex--in fact, the definitions can take tens of pages of
English prose to simply write down, and, even then, significant ambiguities may
remain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Phillip Rogaway explores an
alternative descriptive language for specifying UC goals. Instead of describing
the execution model in English, it will be described within the framework of
code-based game-playing. Under this descriptive language, a UC definition will
be described using a program, the program setting variables that induce a clear
and precise notion of adversarial advantage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Rogaway
will demonstrate the feasibility and practical value of his approach by applying
it to universally composable signature schemes. This will be an important first
step towards making unambiguous and verifiable UC definitions accessible to the
general cryptographic community and those they serve.