* 0904117
* Two-Dimensional Electron Systems in AlAs Quantum Wells: Fabrication and Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2014
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2014
* USD 610,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;One of the most fascinating areas in
solid-state physics concerns new states of matter that come about primarily
because of the interaction between electrons. To explore such states, one needs
specimens in which the imperfections, including impurities and crystal defects,
are reduced to a minimum. This individual investigator award supports a project
involving the fabrication of such samples, and measurements of their novel
electronic properties. The emphasis is on two-dimensional electron systems in
aluminum-arsenide quantum wells. These have parameters that are very different
from the commonly studied gallium-arsenide samples. An understanding of the
states and phenomena observed in the new samples not only will advance our
knowledge of fundamental physics, but can also lead to novel device concepts. A
major component of this research is the training and education of graduate and
undergraduate students in critical areas of crystal growth, semiconductor sample
processing, and electrical measurements. Well-trained students in this field
will be invaluable resources for the US as well as the rest of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This individual
investigator award supports a project to explore and elucidate electron
interaction physics in high-quality, quantum-confined semiconductor structures.
The program includes studies of fabrication, via the molecular beam epitaxy
technique, and of electronic transport properties at low temperatures and high
magnetic fields where electron correlation phenomena dominate. The emphasis of
the work is on novel, high-quality two-dimensional electron systems (2DESs)
confined to selectively-doped AlAs quantum wells; these 2DESs have parameters
that are very different from those of the standard 2DESs in GaAs. Several
problems, including the influence of the spin and valley degrees of freedom on
the integer and fractional quantum Hall states will be investigated. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved with these experimental research
projects. The students will be trained in crucial areas of crystal growth,
fabrication, and electrical measurements.