* 0904089
* Symposium: Sensory Biomechanics, Winter, '09, Westin Waterfront Hotel in Boston, MA.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2009
* Matthew McHenry, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 11,714.00

Animals sense mechanical signals in their environment for a wide variety of
behaviors. This ability is facilitated by sensory organs that transform a
stimulus into a nervous signal. Understanding how this is achieved requires a
consideration of both the physics of the signals and the neurobiology of the
sensory organs. This proposal will support a symposium that presents research on
the physics and biology of how animals sense mechanical information. Invited
speakers will discuss the mechanical signals in the environments of animals, the
behavioral responses of animals to these signals, and how signals are detected
by sensory organs. In addition, contributed presentations will showcase a
breadth of research that integrates biomechanics and sensory biology. All
presentations will be made during two days of the 2009 Annual Meeting of the
Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology in Boston, MA. This symposium
will provide a forum for both the synthesis of governing principles of sensory
biomechanics, as well as the approaches and findings at the cutting-edge of this
field. The presenters include men and women from a diversity of disciplines at
all career levels between graduate students to distinguished professors. In
addition to providing a scientific forum, this symposium aims to promote the
careers of young investigators.