* 0904598
* SHF:  Medium:  Collaborative Research: Throughput-Driven Multi-Core Architecture and a Compilation System
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Srini Devadas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing substrates such as multi-core processors or
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) share the characteristic of having two-
dimensional arrays of processing elements interconnected by a routing fabric. At
one end of the spectrum, FPGAs have single-output programmable logic functions,
and at the other end, multi-core chips have complex 32/64-bit processing cores.
For different applications, different programmable substrates produce the best
area-power-performance tradeoffs. This project is developing a large-scale
multi-core substrate that has hundreds or thousands of simple processing cores
along with a compilation system that maps computations onto this fabric. This
many-core architecture, named Diastolic Array, is coarser-grained than FPGAs but
&amp;#64257;ner-grained than conventional multi-cores. To efficiently exploit
such a large number of processing cores, the architecture needs spatially
mapping a computation to processing cores and communication to the point-to-
point interconnect network. To be practically viable, this mapping process must
be automated and effective. The project addresses this challenge by
simultaneously developing hardware architecture and a compilation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diastolic array chip is expected to
outperform FPGAs or general-purpose processors on an interesting class of
applications, enabling more efficient prototyping and low-volume production. The
outcomes of this project such as statically-con&amp;#64257;gured interconnection
architecture with associated algorithms for routing and resource allocation will
also be applicable to other multi-core designs. Finally, the project is
developing a new parallel processing module for an undergraduate computer
architecture class to give sophomores early exposure to parallel hardware,
experience with writing parallel programs and using compilers that exploit
parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;