* 0904625
* Finding Structure in the Space of Activation Profiles in fMRI
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nancy Kanwisher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 850,000.00

This project will develop and validate a novel approach to modeling fMRI
activations in rich experiments with multiple stimuli or tasks. Rather than rely
on a spatial correspondence across subjects to identify robust activations, the
proposed methods will employ a notion of functional consistency, removing the
need to assume spatial alignment among functional areas in different subjects.
The resulting models of fMRI activation will also naturally enable studies of
anatomical variability in homologous functional regions across subjects. The
motivation for this work comes from visual fMRI studies that present subjects
with several categories of visual stimuli. As fMRI studies move towards more
complex experiments that include more stimuli, the space of possible brain
responses grows exponentially, presenting a serious challenge for analysis
methods. Explicit representations of fMRI activation patterns that enable
exploratory search in the space of possible brain responses are at the core of
this project. Computational models of brain activity based on such
representations will significantly enrich the utility of fMRI for investigating
the functional organization of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will develop computational methods for fMRI analysis naturally suited for
experiments with a multitude of stimuli. The approach is to model the space of
all possible activation profiles, to search for stable clusters of activation
profiles, and to characterize functionally homogeneous sets of brain locations
associated with these clusters. A natural extension of the model will not only
identify stable activation profiles but also group stimuli based on the
similarity of the evoked activation profiles in the brain. Furthermore, this
approach will yield a model of spatial variability of the detected functional
areas, leading to better functionally-guided registration algorithms. The
methods will be validated in a set of empirical experiments with a large number
of visual stimuli in object perception and recognition tasks. The fMRI studies
in this project will produce new insights into the functional organization of
the ventral pathway of the visual system.&lt;br/&gt;