* 0904905
* NSCC/W:  NEW ARMIES FROM OLD:  MERGING COMPETING MILITARY FORCES AFTER CIVIL WARS
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Roy Licklider, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,550.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until the end of the Cold War it
was conventional wisdom that civil wars ended in military victories. Nonetheless
over twenty negotiated settlements of civil wars have been reached after 1989 in
places as disparate as El Salvador and South Africa. Some of these compromise
settlements have ended civil wars and have resulted in postwar regimes that are
substantially more democratic than their
predecessors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These settlements have usually involved some
form of power-sharing among the former contestants and other sectors of society.
Many of these agreements have, as a central component, provisions to merge
personnel from competing armed groups into a single national army. However,
there has been little or no analysis of how people who have been killing one
another with considerable skill and enthusiasm can be merged into a single
military force, other than a few scattered case studies and some contradictory
aggregate data analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a number of
country specialists preparing case studies of how their countries merged
competing military forces after civil wars. All of the studies respond to a
common set of questions. The authors will then attend a conference, along with a
number of specialists in comparative analysis, to refine their individual
studies and start to draw comparisons across them. The studies will then be
revised into an edited book together with chapters from some of the comparative
specialists. The goal is to suggest for policymakers both when merging
militaries is more or less likely to succeed and what techniques are appropriate
under different circumstances.