* 0904358
* Gauged Gromov-Witten theory and holomorphic quilts
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Woodward, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 401,899.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0904358&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Christopher Woodward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will carry out
projects on functoriality for Lagrangian&lt;br/&gt;correspondences in Fukaya-
Floer theory and functoriality for quotients&lt;br/&gt;in Gromov-Witten theory.
The first group of projects will have&lt;br/&gt;applications in Gromov-Witten
theory and ``cohomological'' mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry, that is, in the sense of
Givental etc. With F. Ziltener and&lt;br/&gt;his former postdoctoral advisee E.
Gonzalez he will investigate&lt;br/&gt;functoriality for Gromov-Witten
invariants under the symplectic&lt;br/&gt;quotient construction. Potential
applications include invariance of&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten invariants under
symplectic birational equivalence, to&lt;br/&gt;cohomological mirror symmetry
for complete intersections of general&lt;br/&gt;type. With K. Wehrheim and his
former student S. Mau the PI will&lt;br/&gt;study functoriality of Lagrangian
correspondences in Floer-Fukaya&lt;br/&gt;theory. Applications include
symplectic definitions of non-abelian&lt;br/&gt;Floer homology for tangles and
arbitrary three-manifolds, possible&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of Khovanov
homology and categorification of quantum&lt;br/&gt;groups. These projects will
have applications in homological mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry and low-dimensional
topology. Some of the projects have a&lt;br/&gt;graduate education component,
and the PI also proposes several&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall the research carried out under this grant
will advance the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of symplectic geometry, which is the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;language for classical dynamical systems, and the
relationship between&lt;br/&gt;gauge theory, representation theory, and quantum
physics. Gauge&lt;br/&gt;theories arise naturally in a number of physical
settings, such as&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetism. The first part of the project
concerns certain&lt;br/&gt;gauge theories with an addition "non-linear" field
taking values in a&lt;br/&gt;classical phase space, which have been
substantially studied in the&lt;br/&gt;physics literature in the linear case
under the name "gauged sigma&lt;br/&gt;models". The second part of the project
concerns the structural&lt;br/&gt;properties of "Floer-theoretical" invariants
which have been&lt;br/&gt;extensively studied in relation to dynamical systems
in recent years.&lt;br/&gt;