* 0904771
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Computing, Visualization, and Science Discovery of Turbulent Sooting Flames
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tianfeng Lu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 262,437.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Petascale Computing, Visualization, and
Science Discovery of Turbulent Sooting Flames &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Im, Hong G. [Lead] &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Michigan Ann Arbor
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: OCI-0904660 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Trouve,
Arnaud C &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland College Park
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: OCI-0904480 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Haworth,
Daniel C. &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: OCI-0904649 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Lu,
Tianfeng &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Connecticut &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: OCI-0904771 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sankaran, Ramanan
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Tennessee Knoxville &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No: OCI-0904818 &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Ma, Kwan-Liu
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Davis &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No:
OCI-0905008 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will be awarded using funds made
available by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy efficiency, the environment, and human
health can be affected by combustion-generated soot, so controlling soot is a
major technological and societal concern. This research is directed toward
achieving soot prediction from turbulent combustion by using peta-flop
computing. A team of six research groups is working together to develop a peta-
flop software package that will capture the physics and chemistry of turbulent
sooting flames at an unprecedented level of detail and realism. These research
efforts are expected to lead to breakthroughs in our fundamental understanding
of many important scientific issues related to energy conversion and pollutant
control. &lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive software package developed here will allow
detailed consideration of gas-phase chemistry, soot formation, and radiative
heat transfer phenomena. It will extend a previous teraflop code for direct
numerical simulation (DNS) of turbulent combustion by enhancing parallelism at
the grid, operator, and equation levels. Other goals include reduced chemical-
kinetic mechanisms for soot formation associated with different hydrocarbon
fuels; spectrally resolved radiative heat-transfer models for gases and soot
particles allowing arbitrary optical thickness; a soot aerosol and transport
model based on the combination of sectional and moment methods; multivariate
dataset and data-mining software; novel fault tolerance and checkpoint
capabilities; in-situ visualization; and automated feature extraction and
tracking of limit phenomena such as ignition/extinction in sooting flames. The
new simulation capability will be tested in laboratory-scale turbulent flames at
high Reynolds and Damk√∂hler numbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
research will enhance the nation?s competitiveness by engaging a new generation
of students in multi-disciplinary computational science and engineering.
Faculty, students, and the resulting software development will benefit from the
interdisciplinary interchange of computer science and domain science necessary
to ensure that the code is designed and optimized efficiently. Dissemination of
the software will occur through an open-source license. The multi-disciplinary,
multi-institutional aspects of the project will naturally lead to a number of
opportunities for sponsoring high school and undergraduate student research
programs. The activities will also complement and benefit from close
collaboration with other research groups worldwide in combustion research as
well as in computer science.