* 0904253
* Topics in the Theory of Randomization II
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* William Rosenberger, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 134,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project deals with several open topics in the theory of randomization.
While the investigator''s previous NSF grant focused on asymptotic theory, this
project deals with exact and Monte Carlo techniques, and proposes to solve
problems regarding the properties of bias, balance, and inference with respect
to randomized clinical trials. In particular, exact distributional properties of
Efron's biased coin design will allow for a detailed inspection of selection and
accidental biases, the exact balancing properties of the design, and exact
computation of the variance of the randomization test. Monte Carlo techniques
are proposed to deal with virtually every type of inference required from
randomized clinical trials, including longitudinal outcomes, incorporating
covariates either through covariate-adaptive randomization or through covariate-
adjusted regression models, and sequential analysis of treatment effects. Under
this complete theoretical and computational template, the practitioner will be
able to determine appropriate Monte Carlo sample sizes and appropriate methods
of determining power and preservation of type I error rates. Finally, the
investigator will compare exact, Monte Carlo, and asymptotic procedures where
appropriate.

This project will impact clinical medicine, and has the potential to change the
way clinical trials are analyzed. The results will provide clinicians with the
appropriate way to fully incorporate the design (randomization procedure) into
the analysis. It will impact clinical trials practice by providing analytic
tools to evaluate the properties of the trial design, which will allow the
clinical trials personnel to choose the most appropriate designs that will
minimize bias and variability of the trial results.