* 0904431
* NetSE: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards Human- Network Interaction (HNI) for the Home
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Keith Edwards, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2014
* USD 778,062.00

As networks move outside professionally-managed environments to end-users become
tasked with deploying, managing, securing, and troubleshooting their networks.
Evidence shows that end-users cannot manage networks, and their rejection of
these technologies represents a significant barrier to the adoption of advanced
applications. This research will lower the barrier, by demonstrating how the
challenges of human-network interaction must be solved with new technical
approaches. Through empirical methods, we will produce datasets detailing the
challenges, the needs of the users who both manage and live with such networks,
and the opportunities for network design. We will develop an initial
architecture that centralizes many network functions. This research will extend
this architecture and deploy and evaluate it in people?s homes. The results will
produce sound, generally-applicable principles for more usable network design.
These principles will be particularly applicable to contexts where no formal
network administrator is present.

Our work benefits society in three distinct ways. Usable home networking is on
the critical path for computing research innovation. Research results will teach
the next generation of engineers how to design usable networking. The
integration of usability concerns into the core of computing reflects the
growing diversity of careers in IT, and opens up the possibility of increasing
the participation of women and minorities in computing.