* 0904024
* Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* LeRoy Jones II, Chicago State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martha James
* 07/31/2015
* USD 2,809,750.00

The Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP) focuses
on broadening Participation by increasing the number of underrepresented
students who: choose and persist in STEM academic disciplines; attend graduate
school in STEM; and are prepared to obtain a professional career in STEM
disciplines. ILSAMP activities enhance the growth of the STEM community and
promote linkages and partnerships in undergraduate STEM education throughout
Illinois to cultivate an excellent, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce, and expand general scientific literacy. In order to accomplish these
objectives, the Alliance utilize sustained and comprehensive strategies that
include: 1) pre-college and community college bridge programs to ease the
transition and better prepare freshman and transfer students; 2) faculty and
peer mentoring to help retain students in STEM disciplines; 3) supplemental
instruction to strengthen students ability to succeed in STEM courses; 4)
academic year and summer undergraduate research to prepare, motivate and develop
students for graduate school; 5) curriculum revision; and 6) internships. As a
senior?level Alliance, particular attention is given to student persistence
toward the B.S. degree and transition to graduate study; institutionalizing
successful policies and procedures for attainment of the B.S. degree;
reaffirming community college associations; and developing relevant
international activities. ILSAMP is comprised of universities and community
colleges throughout the state of Illinois and one federal laboratory, Argonne
National Laboratory. The strategic location of the partner institutions
throughout the state of Illinois enables the Alliance to reach a large and
diverse student population and provides access to graduate and research
opportunities for undergraduate students. The ILSAMP has a strong assessment
component, with external evaluation and internal feedback. External suggestions
and assistance will be furnished by a Technical Advisory Committee, the
composition of which provides a connection with the Illinois business community,
the public high schools, graduate schools, state and national policy makers, and
national research institutions. ] The intellectual merits of the program: The
ILSAMP program is well-conceived and organized to advance students? intellectual
pursuits. The activities proposed are designed to accomplish the central goal of
increasing the number of historically underrepresented students who select STEM
disciplines, and persist and graduate from baccalaureate producing institutions;
prepared to successfully matriculate in graduate schools or obtain professional
positions in STEM. This alliance provides students with the academic and
professional skills to function at the highest levels of competency. Staff and
faculty monitoring, research lab experiences, research projects and professional
interactions along with intensive evaluation protocols help to ensure that
participating students will complete their degree. The addition of international
activities increases students? knowledge, educational richness, and awareness of
cultural diversity while increasing their scientific education.

Broader impacts of the proposed activity: ILSAMP activities broaden the
participation of historically underrepresented groups including women, ethnic
and racial minorities in the STEM enterprise by providing access to research and
science programs and by working diligently with the public schools, community
colleges, and public institutions. We advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching and learning by integrating research activities into training
K-12 teachers, participating in assisting high school students with science fair
projects and providing special mentoring for undergraduates. The ILSAMP program
not only helps to close the gap created by the paucity of underserved
individuals who are STEM professionals functioning creatively; it encourages
others who have been reticent to attempt science B.S. level work. The advisory
board will also help to broaden the impact of the program. The inclusion of an
international emphasis broadens the outlook and increases the range of
experiences for our both students and international populations they encounter.
The program will be widely disseminated.