* 0904276
* Splitting homotopy equivalences: Applications, calculations, foundations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Qayum Khan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2012
* USD 103,460.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to deepen
and enhance our understanding of geometric topology, that is, the homeomorphism
classification of closed manifolds (of dimension greater than three) within a
given homotopy type. This project focuses on splitting homotopy equivalences
along a two-sided codimension-one submanifold. The obstructions to this ideal
situation are given by the Waldhausen Nil-groups and the Cappell UNil-groups.
Hence, from an algebraic viewpoint, one theme of the project is the calculation
and foundation of the splitting obstruction groups in
L-theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the other hand, from a topological viewpoint,
splitting is a special case of the coarser decomposition into big, non-simply
connected pieces. The principal investigator proposes the use of these non-
simply connected metablocks to study the Four-dimensional Surgery Conjecture.
These metablocks allow for the more flexible notion of classifying space
B&lt;sub&gt;F&lt;/sub&gt;&amp;Gamma; for families F of small subgroups of
&amp;Gamma;. This approach would hybridize the techniques of three isolated
communities that have sprung up in the past 25 years: controlled surgery,
surgery on 4-manifolds with small fundamental group, and assembly maps for
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A manifold is a smooth shape, without any sharp
edges or singularities. &lt;br/&gt;For example, a one-dimensional manifold is a
curve, and a two-dimensional manifold is a surface. Three and four-dimensional
manifolds occur in physics, such as general relativity. &lt;br/&gt;Higher-
dimensional manifolds occur in string theory and also as configuration spaces
for robot motion planning. The mathematical classification of manifolds is
fundamental to understanding both the global structure of our universe and the
hidden routes through which a closed physical system is connected to itself.