* 0904459
* SGER: Environmentally Benign Iron Manufacture with Renewable Reductants
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2010
* S.K. Kawatra, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,994.00

0904459 Kawatra

Current processes for manufacturing iron are highly non-sustainable, as they are
dependent on fossil fuels to chemically reduce iron oxides to metallic iron. The
iron and steel industry has long believed that only carbon produced from fossil
fuels can be used in ironmaking, and so sustainable alternatives have not been
pursued. The investigator has recently discovered that, contrary to the beliefs
of the industry, it is not necessary to use carbon or other fossil fuels for
iron production. Renewable biomass materials, particularly those that are rich
in carbohydrates such as starches and cellulose, have been shown to be capable
of reducing iron oxides to metallic iron. The objective of this project is to
demonstrate the value of renewable reductants for ironmaking, and begin
necessary fundamental studies that will determine chemistry and kinetics of the
reactions between biomass components and iron oxides Intellectual Merit Recent
developments in ironmaking furnace design have made it possible to use
reductants other than metallurgical coke to manufacture liquid metallic iron.
The industry does not yet appreciate the potential of renewable reductants such
as biomass for this purpose. Industry personnel feel that the mechanisms of the
reduction are not well understood, and that it has not yet been demonstrated
that iron oxide reduction by biomass will proceed quickly or produce high-
quality iron. The proposed project will carry out the necessary preliminary
studies to demonstrate the potential of biomass technology, and to encourage
industrial support for further fundamental research needed to convert the
technology into an industrially-practical process. Broader Impact. Annually, 40
million tons of metallic iron are produced in the US from natural iron oxides.
Its manufacture consumed an estimated 23 million tons of metallurgical coal in
2006. Since it is a fossil fuel, use of this coal contributes directly to a net
increase in levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Replacing coal with biomass
will reduce carbon emissions, as every ton of carbon dioxide released will be
balanced by the growth of additional biomass as it is produced to feed the
process. As a result, carbon will be in a closed loop in the ironmaking process,
and there will be no net increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Biomass
use will also be cleaner than coal, as it contains lower levels of mercury,
sulfur, and other pollutants. It also contains lower levels of non-combustible
ash-forming minerals, and therefore solid residues in the form of slag will be
reduced in the biomass-based process.