* 0904863
* Network Conflict Theory:  Empirically-Based Models of Conflict Dynamics and Effective Conflict Management Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeremy Sabloff, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2013
* USD 496,067.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Game theoretic models
provided a simple framework for the analysis of conflict during the cold war
when the objectives of the actors (e.g. the United States and the Soviet Union)
were relatively well understood. Since the end of the cold war, threats to
national security have become unpredictable. In this context traditional game
theory provides little insight into predicting the strategies adversaries use.
One requirement of game theory that weakens its utility in the present
environment of high uncertainty is that the payoffs -- the costs and benefits of
particular decisions -- are assumed to be known. This assumption is problematic
when little information is available about the specific goals and preferences of
actors, or when these goals and preferences change frequently. A second problem
is that game theory models are typically loosely based on data and therefore are
not very predictive or valuable in suggesting real world interventions. Despite
these limitations, no robust, alternative mathematical theory for studying
conflict and predicting actor decision-making exists. Given a growing
sophistication in data collection and modeling dynamical systems, this project
aims to develop an empirically grounded network conflict theory. This includes
new mathematical tools and models to describe and predict conflict propagation
and effective conflict management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types of tools will
be developed in this project. One set of tools, called Inductive Game Theory
(IGT), can be used to extract directly from conflict event time-series data
(e.g. the sequence of bombings in Iraq and US responses, including location and
severity data) the strategies adversaries are playing without having to posit
payoffs or to assume stability. The second set of tools, called Conflict Immuno-
Kinetics (CIK), takes as input conflict variables (rate of spread, number of
actors, structure of actor interaction, etc.) and uses this information to
predict which intervention strategies (e.g. pacifying interventions, policing
interventions rooted in force, or sanctions) are most likely be effective given
properties of the conflict itself. The CIK models that in this project are
developed to study conflict at the behavioral level are inspired by the response
of the immune system to pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGT and CIK tools and
models will be developed and tested using model systems of large, heterogeneous,
captive primate societies. Non-human primates can provide a model system for the
development and testing of these tools. Data from the Yerkes National Primate
Reserach Center on the macaque genus will be used because its social
organizations have properties of broad interest. These model systems possess the
"minimum degree of relevant complexity" thereby ensuring that the methods, and
the insights generated, can be generalized to a diverse set of conflicts
including those at the human level.