* 0904387
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Formal Analysis of Choice-Adaptive Intelligent Learning Environments (FACILE) that support Future Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2012
* USD 681,541.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, new and exciting
technologies have created opportunities for developing rich open-ended learning
environments that combine a number of different learning paradigms and
resources. Students can complete quests in game environments, engage in inquiry,
interact with virtual agents, run science simulations, take quizzes, access the
web, and more generally make choices about different learning activities. These
choices can be extremely informative about student learning and diagnostic of
what students can learn once they leave highly scripted curricula. By employing
machine learning methods, such as hidden Markov Models and other sequence
analysis algorithms to analyze student choices in relatively open learning
environments and determine whether students are showing (sub) optimal behavior
patterns, the environment can then adapt intelligently by encouraging
(alternative) choices and better learning behaviors. The primary hypothesis is
that helping students develop the metacognitive abilities to make learning
choices will have strong effects on their subsequent abilities to learn in the
future in unstructured and unsupervised but resource-rich environments. The
goals for this project are to create: a) Choice adaptive intelligent learning
environments and computational methodologies that help students develop
strategies to enable them to learn on their own; b) Novel automated assessment
tools for both teachers and students that link choice and learning behaviors to
learning performance; and c) Research studies that will establish whether our
interventions that combine choice with guidance is beneficial for both strong
and weak learners in science domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this work span multiple dimensions. First, it provides an encompassing
computer science framework for bringing together a number of technology-rich,
interactive environments that are proliferating for education into a common
choice filled and adaptive architecture. Second, this choice-based framework
provides a paradigm shift in that tracking and theorizing about choice is
applied in the context of learning, which, in the past, has been dominated by
characterizations of the knowledge construct. Characterizing learning by choice
not only connects learning research to a larger body of social science research,
it is also a fundamentally new way to characterize and guide learning that is
closer to the goal of much instruction, namely intelligent future choice. Third,
the computer environment should permit the collection and analysis of large log
files by many researchers, and conceivably lead to a new database of common
choice patterns and their effects on learning. We will create the framework that
enables others to incorporate intelligence into their virtual worlds and help
achieve these proposed outcomes.