* 0905805
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Melissa Mark, Mark                    Melissa        M
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Melissa Mark is "Using physiological responses to stress to evaluate the impact
of environmental degradation on survivial and reproduction in Neotropical
breeding birds." This research will be conducted at University of California
Berkeley under the sponsorship of Dr. Dustin Rubenstein.

Environmental stress in degraded habitats can reduce survival and reproduction
in birds living in agroforestry systems such as shade coffee. This occurs
because high stress levels reduce physiological defenses against disease and
parasites. Environmental stressors in degraded habitats include changes in
microhabitat, unpredictable food availability, and higher depredation. This
study is examining how physiology, behavior, and human caused changes to the
landscape interact to affect the long term survival of birds in agroforestry
landscapes. The project is exploring the impact of these stressors, and that of
a recently introduced biotic stressor, brood parasitism by the striped cuckoo
(Tapera naevia) on survival and reproduction in the rufous-and-white wren
(Thryothorus rufalbus). This brood parasite lays its eggs in the nest of a host
bird and the cuckoo chick subsequently kills all host chicks. Specifically, this
project is evaluating differences in stress levels of rufous-and-white wrens
that raise their own chicks or cuckoo chicks in shade coffee and intact forests.

The training goals include new laboratory and field techniques in immunology and
molecular genetics to investigate the mechanisms and processes that produce
population patterns. These skills will aid the Fellow in future plans of working
on the conservation of biodiversity in modified landscapes in developing
countries. Additionally, the Fellow will serve as a mentor and role model to
underrepresented students by offering training and professional development,
with an emphasis on collaboration with Latin American countries.