* 0905273
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards Versatile and Programmable Measurement  Architecture for Future Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Chen-Nee Chuah, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Traffic measurement is central to network operation, management, and security.
Yet, support for measurement was not an integral part of the original Internet
architecture. This project aims to develop a programmable measurement
architecture that is versatile enough to support current and future measurement
needs, adaptable to dynamic network conditions, modular/lightweight, and
scalable to high link speeds.

This project proposes a new flow abstraction module and query language that can
specify arbitrary traffic sub-populations for statistics collection. Efficient
data structures to encode these queries will be developed. The team also strives
to identify a core set of data streaming and sampling primitives that can be
composed together to satisfy most of the queries. Efficient hardware
implementation for these core set of primitives will constitute the basic
measurement modules that can be easily reconfigured to measure traffic at
different desired granularity. Measurement application case studies will be
carried out to evaluate and showcase the capabilities of the proposed approach.

This project has great potential in guiding the design of a clean-slate
measurement instrumentation for future Internet. It will provide both graduate
and undergraduate students with training that span multiple disciplines, from
fundamental statistical theory, algorithm design, to hardware implementation.
The results (including the query language and underlying data structures,
sampling/streaming algorithms, and hardware building blocks) will be broadly
disseminated through publications, invited talks/tutorials, and open-sourcing
software distribution.