* 0905656
* Inference using Shape-Restricted Regression Splines
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mary Meyer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The PI develops methods in function estimation and
inference, using shape-restricted regression splines. The work includes three
broad areas in estimation and inference. First, generalized multiple regression
models is investigated, where the mean response function is assumed to be smooth
and have a shape restriction such as monotone or convex. Second, a new maximum-
likelihood method for smoothed unimodal density estimation is developed, that
allows for heavy tails such as in the Pareto family of densities. An application
is a new robust regression method that estimates the error density estimation
non-parametrically, simultaneously with the regression function. Finally, the
proportional hazards model is developed, where the hazard function is assumed to
be smooth and have a shape restriction such as monotonicity or convexity.

Many problems in data analysis involve estimation of a function. Standard
methods require the specification of the function up to a few parameters, but
the a priori knowledge about the function is often vague and qualitative. For
example, the researcher might know that a growth curve is smooth, increasing,
and concave. The expected number of nesting sites at a lake might be a
decreasing function of some pollution measure. Perhaps a hazard rate function is
known to be increasing and convex, as in modeling wear-out of a mechanical part,
or bath-tub shaped, as in modeling organ transplant failures. Nonparametric
methods in function estimation are appealing because they require minimal
assumptions, but development of practical inference methods is more difficult.
Many methods that assume only smoothness of the function are sensitive to user-
defined choices of the smoothing parameters such as bandwidth, number of knots,
or penalty parameter, and the user can not rely on inference results that change
with these choices. However, when the researcher can also assume a shape such as
increasing or convex, the fits to the data become more robust, for the simple
reason that the ``wiggling'' associated with over-fitting is obviated. The PI
develops inference methods in three important areas: first, generalized
regression models, such as when the response is a count or binary. Second, a new
method for robust regression is developed, where the error density is assumed to
be unimodal and symmetric, to allow for either heavy-tailed or thin-tailed
errors. Finally, the proportional hazards model is developed, under shape and
smoothness assumptions for the hazard function. These models are often used in
medical studies to compare treatments while accounting for possible mitigating
factors, and in industry to model mechanical systems. All three of these
research projects result in basic data-analysis tools that can be used in
virtually any area of science.