* 0905468
* HCC: Medium: RUI: Control of a Robotic Manipulator via a Brain-Computer Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Daniel Cox, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2010
* USD 742,685.00

A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a system that allows users, especially
individuals with severe neuromuscular disorders, to communicate and control
devices using their brain waves. There are over two million people in the United
States afflicted by such disorders, many of whom could greatly benefit from
assistive devices controlled by a BCI. Over the past two years, it has been
demonstrated that a non-invasive, scalp-recorded electroencephalography (EEG)
based BCI paradigm can be used by a disabled individual for long-term, reliable
control of a personal computer. This BCI paradigm allows users to select from a
set of symbols presented in a flashing visual matrix by classifying the
resulting evoked brain responses. One of the goals of this project is to
establish that the same BCI paradigm and techniques used for the aforementioned
demonstration can be straightforwardly implemented to generate high-level
commands for controlling a robotic manipulator in three dimensions according to
user intent, and that such a BCI can provide superior dimensional control over
alternative BCI techniques currently available, as well as a wider variety of
practical functions for performing everyday
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrocorticography (ECoG), electrical activity
recorded directly from the surface of the brain, has been demonstrated in recent
preliminary work to be another potentially viable control for a BCI. ECoG has
been shown to have superior signal-to-noise ratio, and spatial and spectral
characteristics, compared to EEG. But the EEG signals used at present to operate
BCIs have not been characterized in ECoG. The PI believes ECoG signals can be
used to improve the speed and accuracy of BCI applications, including for
example control of a robotic manipulator. Thus, additional goals of this project
are to characterize evoked responses obtained from ECoG, to use them as control
signals to operate a simulated robotic manipulator, and to assess the level of
control (speed and accuracy) between the two recording modalities and compare
the results to competitive BCI techniques. Because this is a collaborative
effort with the Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery at the Mayo Clinic in
Jacksonville, the PI team will have access to a pool of ECoG grid patients from
which to recruit participants for this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research will make a number of contributions in the emerging field
of BCI and thus will serve as a step toward providing severely disabled
individuals with a new level of autonomy for communicating with others and for
performing everyday tasks, which will ultimately dramatically improve their
quality of life.