* 0905502
* HCC: Medium: Robust and Accurate Modeling with Multifield Geometry
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Denis Zorin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 739,111.00

Computer tools for creating, analyzing and modifying geometry are the core
component in computer-aided design systems, indispensable for engineering and
product prototyping, surgical simulation, prosthesis design, dentistry,
architecture, computer animation and games. There is a considerable demand for
high-level modeling tools, expressing the user?s intent directly while being
capable of handling complex models robustly. Surface optimization techniques
unify traditional ab initio modeling of high-quality surfaces and manipulation
of existing geometric data in a single natural framework by specifying suitable
optimization functionals governing the surface behavior. This framework is
conceptually representation-independent: the surface can be approximated by
spline patches, subdivision surfaces, meshes or in implicit form. While this
framework is highly appealing for practical applications, surface optimization
rarely finds its way into industrial applications, as existing interactive
techniques are not sufficiently robust, while the more precise and reliable
methods are too slow to be used interactively.

This research project develops fundamental mathematical and algorithmic
techniques essential for bringing surface optimization methods to mainstream
geometric modeling applications. The research is addressing the following
problems: shape representation and its accuracy, such that the modeled surfaces
depend solely on the user input and not the particular choice of sampling or
approximation basis; robust and efficient modeling algorithms to ensure
predictable and responsive behavior in interactive applications; diverse control
to allow sufficient freedom for arbitrary shape manipulation. The investigated
approach has two key components: multifield geometry descriptions, building on
ideas from discrete geometry, high-order geometric modeling, and finite elements
and novel multiscale numerical solvers that combine robust global algorithms at
coarse scales with fast and accurate algorithms at fine scales to achieve the
performance and robustness needed in applications. The new methods are explored
in the context of high-level modeling tasks, including modeling from two-
dimensional projections or drawings, feature-based and appearance-based editing
and template fitting for dental CAD.