* 0905419
* TC:Medium:Collaborative Research:Techniques to Retrofit Legacy Code with Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Hicks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though perhaps unfortunate, as a
practical matter software is often&lt;br/&gt;built with functionality as a
primary goal, and security features are&lt;br/&gt;only added later, often after
vulnerabilities have been identified.&lt;br/&gt;To reduce the cost and increase
assurance in the process of security&lt;br/&gt;retrofitting, the aim to develop
a methodology involving automated and&lt;br/&gt;semi-automated tools and
techniques to add authorization policy&lt;br/&gt;enforcement functionality to
legacy software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main insight is that major
portions of the tasks involved in&lt;br/&gt;retrofitting code can be or already
have been automated, so the design&lt;br/&gt;process focuses on enabling further
automation and aggregating these&lt;br/&gt;tasks into a single, coherent
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, techniques and tools are being
developed to: (1)&lt;br/&gt;identify and label security-relevant objects and I/O
channels by&lt;br/&gt;analyzing and instrumenting annotated application source
code; (2)&lt;br/&gt;insert code to mediate access to labeled entities; (3)
abstract the&lt;br/&gt;inserted checks into policy-relevant, security-sensitive
operations&lt;br/&gt;that are authorized (or denied) by the application's
security policy;&lt;br/&gt;(4) integrate the retrofitted legacy code with the
site's specific&lt;br/&gt;policy at deployment time to ensure, through advanced
policy analysis,&lt;br/&gt;that the application enforces that site's policy
correctly, and (5)&lt;br/&gt;verify correct enforcement of OS policy delegation
by the retrofitted&lt;br/&gt;application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques
and tools being developed are useful not only&lt;br/&gt;for retrofitting, but
also for augmenting and verifying existing code&lt;br/&gt;already outfitted with
security functionality; hence improving the&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art in
creating more secure software.