* 0905509
* SHF: Medium: Hardware/Software Partitioning for Hybrid Shared Memory Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Walid Najjar, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 800,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid multiprocessor architectures present an
unprecedented opportunity for high performance computing through the seamless
integration of large number of processors and hardware accelerators. This
project addresses the research challenges in the design and exploitation of
hybrid multiprocessors through innovations that span across the areas of
architectures, compilers, and high-performance computing. A hybrid cache
coherent non-uniform memory access (CC-NUMA) architecture is designed that
clusters CPUs, hardware accelerators, and memories to preserve locality and
reduce memory latency. Partitioning models are developed to enable optimal
partitioning of data among CPUs and hardware accelerators. Compiler techniques
are developed for detection of parallelism, its partitioning, and assignment
across CPUs and hardware accelerators. The project enables coexistence of data
streaming (push data) and data fetching (pull data) mechanisms. The research
benefits from detailed measurements using a 64-processor SGI Altix 4700 CC-NUMA
machine with FPGAs, the Intel FSB-FPGA architecture accelerator, and Niveus 4000
workstation with NVIDIA GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has impact on large-scale scientific computing. The hybrid
multiprocessor technology is likely to be transferred to industry while the
developed software (compilers, simulators and Hybrid SPLASH-2 benchmarks) will
be distributed to researchers. The project also has impact on education and
research. The SGI Altix machine is already being used in our graduate classes
and further projects on hybrid parallel computing are introduced in
architecture, parallel processing, and compiler classes. The project contributes
to minority undergraduate education in Computer Science since UCR is recognized
for its large undergraduate Hispanic population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;