* 0905738
* Moduli Spaces Relative Singular Divisors and Lagrangians
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2013
* USD 655,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0905738&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Eleny Ionel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment &lt;br/&gt;Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at increasing understanding of
the&lt;br/&gt;structure of the moduli spaces of stable holomorphic maps
by&lt;br/&gt;combining ideas from several different fields of research.
The&lt;br/&gt;core of the project seeks to use geometric and analytical
methods&lt;br/&gt;to investigate what happens to these moduli during
certain&lt;br/&gt;natural degenerations. In particular it leads to defining
a&lt;br/&gt;version of Gromov-Witten invariants relative certain type
of&lt;br/&gt;singular subspaces, including relative both a normal
crossing&lt;br/&gt;symplectic divisor and a Lagrangian intersecting in a
prescribed&lt;br/&gt;way. It also investigates how these invariants behave
under&lt;br/&gt;appropriate smoothings of either the ambient space or of
the&lt;br/&gt;divisor and the Lagragian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
lies at the intersection of string theory and&lt;br/&gt;symplectic topology.
String theory developed as a potential&lt;br/&gt;candidate for unifying general
relativity and particle&lt;br/&gt;physics. The details of this theory have
turned out to be&lt;br/&gt;extraordinarily rich, and have inspired many
remarkable results&lt;br/&gt;in mathematics. But results in mathematics have
also guided and&lt;br/&gt;inspired many new discoveries in string theory and
mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry. It is hoped that this project will contribute to
the&lt;br/&gt;growing interaction between various fields of mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;other sciences. In particular, one of the themes running
through&lt;br/&gt;this proposal is that symplectic topology can contribute
insights&lt;br/&gt;into string theory.&lt;br/&gt;