* 0905086
* NetSE: Medium: Robust Socio-Technological Networks: An Inter-Disciplinary Approach to Theoretical Foundation and Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Mung Chiang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,107,950.00

Networks stand at the center of our society, including social networks in
virtual online space and technology networks among communication devices. Making
socio-technological networks robust is becoming a paramount concern for national
security, disaster relief, and economic stability. This project brings together
a truly &lt;br/&gt;inter-disciplinary team to develop the fundamental research
methodologies and perform large-scale human subject experimentations towards
this goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: (1) Developing Foundational
Tools for Robust Networking. We draw from a suite of mathematical and
statistical tools on two driving applications: (i) robustness against shocks,
from the angles of social structures, policy influence, and communication
recovery, and (ii) topology's impact on information value and propagation. (2)
Interacting Across Disciplinary Boundaries. This team consists of four faculty
members from three departments: Electrical Engineering, Sociology, and Political
Science. Collectively the researchers draw upon expertise ranging from large-
scale, social-network-based human behavior study to stochastic optimization over
heterogeneous communication devices. (3) Bridging Theory-Practice Gap. A major
bottleneck to social network study is the lack of an experimental testbed
involving both innovative research agenda and human subjects. There are two sets
of unique experimental platforms developed by the team: Online Gaming Community
and Sharing Mart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In addition to
innovations in curriculum development across three departments, this team also
actively reaches out to a variety of communities, from Non-Government-
Organizations to high school students and online gamers, from major companies in
the communication networking sector to undergraduates interested in the
intersection between social sciences and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;