* 0905914
* Coupling between Piezoelectricity and Charge Transport Property in ZnO Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 257,193.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Technical: The objective of this project is to study and
understand fundamental phenomena underlying the interaction between the
piezoelectric potential and charge transport behavior in ZnO one-dimensional
nanostructures. The research aims to (1) correlate the intensity and
distribution of piezoelectric potential in a ZnO nanowire with the size, strain
and carrier density and to reveal the free charge screening effect on the
piezoelectricity; (2) investigate how the carrier mobility is regulated by the
piezoelectric field across a ZnO nanowire channel; (3) establish a general
relationship between the carrier mobility and the nanowire's basic physical
properties, including size, strain and carrier density. Zinc oxide nanowires
with a rectangular cross section are synthesized and used for the piezoelectric
and electric characterization. The research also plans to fabricate
piezoelectricity-gated transistors using ZnO nanowires and to study these
transistors in order to validate the theoretical framework established under
this project. Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. The success
of the research is expected to lay a foundation for applying piezoelectric
semiconductor nanomaterials in advanced sensing and energy harvesting
nanodevices. The research component of the project is integrated with the PI's
new graduate course on Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology and an undergraduate
course on Ceramics. The project also provides an excellent opportunity for
training graduate and undergraduate students with fabrication and
characterization technologies in the frontier of nanoscience.