* 0905099
* Simulations And Analysis of Cosmic Microwave Background Polarization Data At The Petascale And Beyond
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Julian Borrill, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2013
* USD 755,604.00

AST-0905099 Simon

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) is the earliest possible image of the
Universe, consisting of primordial photons last scattered only 400,000 years
after the Big Bang. The statistics of the tiny anisotropies in the CMB
temperature and polarization encode not only the parameters of cosmology, but
also insights into fundamental physics at the highest energies. In addition CMB
science has been very successful in engaging the public. Since its discovery,
CMB experiments have sought to detect ever fainter signals at ever higher
resolution, requiring ever increasing data volumes. For the last decade the
analysis of CMB data sets has become a high performance computing challenge.
This project will take the current state-of-the-art CMB simulation and analysis
code suite and undertake the computer science research program needed to take it
from the tera- to the peta-scale and beyond, informed by the actual requirements
of some of the most computationally-challenging planned CMB polarization
experiments, including the proposed CMBpol satellite mission.

The project will start by creating a stripped-down test code that retains all of
the computational but none of the scientific complexity of the existing core
code base, which will be used to implement a range of possible solutions to
known current bottlenecks. The second phase will pass the lessons learned with
the test code back into the full science code suite, and use it to perform
previously intractable analyses as proof of performance. This includes
implementing run-time self-tuning. The project will also use its proof of
performance tests to undertake currently intractable analyses in support of
next-generation experiments, to field a new tool for application-driven whole-
system performance analysis, and to introduce a new generation of data analysts
to ultra high performance computing.

The research team includes PI Simon, an authority on high performance computing
systems and trends, as well as sparse matrix algorithms, and CoPI Borrill, who
has led the efforts to deploy high performance computing for CMB data analysis,
both on specific missions and for the international CMB community as a whole.
Long-term collaborator Stompor works with the Planck HFI data analysis team in
Paris, and faculty associates Yelick and Demmel add valuable expertise. Leading
scientists associated with many of the current ground-based, balloon, and
satellite CMB experiments have agreed to lend their expertise, as associates to
this project.