* 0905553
* III: Medium: Longview: Querying the Future Now
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Stanley Zdonik, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,200,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Traditional database systems are designed to provide the user with a clear
picture of past states of the world as is represented in the database. Recently,
stream processing systems are introduced to produce near real-time answers for
those applications applications that require up-to-date information. Thus, we
see a trend toward shrinking the ?reality gap? to zero. But for some
applications, even real-time is not good enough. There is often a desire to get
out in front of the present by delivering predictions of future events to take
advantage of opportunities or to avert calamity. Security applications are a
good example since they are typically interested in preventing a breach rather
than simply reporting that one has happened. There is currently no database
system that can effectively serve as a generic platform to support such
predictive applications.

This project aims to fill this gap by designing and building a prototype
database system called "Longview" to enable data-centric predictive analytics.
Longview facilitates the use of statistical models to analyze historical and
current data and make predictions about future data values and events. Users can
plug new predictive models into the system along with a modest amount of meta-
data, and the system uses those models to efficiently evaluate predictive
queries.

Longview treats predictive models as first-class citizens by intelligently
managing them in the process of data management and query optimization. This
involves automatically building models and determining when and which model(s)
to apply to answer predictive queries. This also involves creating and using the
proper physical data structures to facilitate efficient model building,
selection, and execution. Longview handles both streaming and historical
queries. In fact, many streaming queries need efficient access to an archive of
past values, making it necessary to seamlessly combine both stream and
historical processing. Finally, Longview investigates "white-box" model support,
in which the database leverages the operational semantics and representation of
models to improve performance.

Longview's goal is to make it much easier to build predictive analytics
applications in data intensive situations. Seamlessly combining data and model
management is key to make the process of computing with predictions far easier
to express and more efficient than the current ad-hoc application-level
approaches. The resulting technology also allows for a better understanding and
support for user-defined functions in database systems.

Longview is initially used for a real-world sensor-based tracking application
and a predictive web portal for easy experimentation with different models and
data sets. Further information on the project can be found on the project web
page: http://database.cs.brown.edu/projects/longview/