* 0905843
* Inhomogeneous Charge Dynamics in Strongly Correlated Systems near the Conductor-Insulator Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Dragana Popovic, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2013
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;In many materials with potentially
great technological importance, such as high temperature superconductors, the
electrically conducting state is created by chemically doping an otherwise
insulating material. Therefore by varying a parameter, one is able to change a
material from one that conducts electricity to one that does not (an insulator)
and vice versa. Understanding the nature of this conductor-insulator transition
represents an important issue for materials science and technology. It also
presents a fundamental problem in condensed matter physics. Furthermore, many
studies have shown striking similarities in the behavior of systems close to a
conductor-insulator transition and those of various glassy materials, the
understanding of which also presents one of the deepest and most interesting
problems in physics. Glassy behavior is exhibited by many different types of
materials, including window glasses, metals doped with magnetic impurities,
polymers, gels, etc., all of which have a wide range of current and potential
applications. This award supports a project that will address the problem of
complex, glassy behavior near the conductor-insulator transition by performing
electrical transport and noise measurements on semiconductor devices and high
temperature superconductor materials. The anticipated results are expected to
provide a fundamental insight into these problems, and may be of relevance for
future applications. The project will give graduate and undergraduate students
an excellent preparation for careers in academia, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a project that will tackle two of the grand scientific challenges in
condensed matter physics: i) How do complex phenomena emerge from simple
ingredients? and ii) What happens far from equilibrium and why? In particular,
many strongly correlated electronic materials exhibit complex, inhomogeneous
behavior near the transition from an insulating into a conducting state. The
out-of-equilibrium dynamics may very well be the smoking gun manifestation of
this emerging complexity. This project will address the problem of complexity
near the conductor-insulator transition by carrying out a comprehensive,
comparative study of charge dynamics in two types of materials: two-dimensional
systems in semiconductor heterostructures and lightly doped cuprates. The
experiments will involve transport combined with low-frequency dynamical
response measurements. The carefully designed comparative study will make it
possible to separate out the more universal behavior from the material specific
one, and thus identify the main ingredients necessary for the development of
successful theoretical models. This project will support the education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students, who will acquire valuable
technical and analytical skills for a wide range of careers in the areas of
science and technology in academic, industrial or government settings. The PI
and graduate students will also engage in a variety of outreach activities, such
as the Annual Open House at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.