* 0905239
* HCC:Medium: Collaborative Research: Effective Communication with Robotic Assistants for the Elderly: Integrating Speech, Vision and Haptics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Marquis Foreman, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Med Center
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2012
* USD 212,720.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is to
develop a communication interface that &lt;br/&gt;will enable older people to
effectively communicate with robotic &lt;br/&gt;assistants, allowing them in
this way to remain living safely in their &lt;br/&gt;homes. The proposed
communication interface will be: (1) multimodal, &lt;br/&gt;that is supporting
spoken, gestural and physical interactions, as all &lt;br/&gt;these typically
occur simultaneously when people communicate with one &lt;br/&gt;another, and
(2) adaptive so that the robotic assistant will adjust to &lt;br/&gt;the older
person rather than the older person to the robotic &lt;br/&gt;assistant. The
combination of speech, gestures and physical &lt;br/&gt;interactions (haptics)
has received only limited attention, but it &lt;br/&gt;will be critical for
successful deployment of assistive robots for &lt;br/&gt;many elderly
individuals. The transformative component of this &lt;br/&gt;research is to view
haptics as one of the drivers of the dialogue &lt;br/&gt;between the user and
the robot, and to study its relation to speech &lt;br/&gt;and gestures through
language processing methods. To adapt to each &lt;br/&gt;user, the
interpretation of the speech, gestures and haptic signals &lt;br/&gt;will be
performed by means of RISq (Recognition by Indexing and &lt;br/&gt;Sequencing),
a novel, adaptive and reliable recognition &lt;br/&gt;methodology. Finally, a
formal and modular control design methodology &lt;br/&gt;will be developed, that
guarantees that the robot responds safely and &lt;br/&gt;reliably to the
interpretation of the user intent provided by dialogue &lt;br/&gt;processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robot assistive technology holds immense promise for the
&lt;br/&gt;future. Supporting the independent functioning of older people so
that &lt;br/&gt;they can safely remain living in the community is of paramount
&lt;br/&gt;importance, especially since the world's population is aging at an
&lt;br/&gt;ever increasing pace. However, one of the main obstacles to the
&lt;br/&gt;widespread use of robot assistants is the lack of interfaces that are
&lt;br/&gt;easy to use for the elderly and allow the robot to be used in complex
&lt;br/&gt;real-world environments such as a typical apartment. The proposed
&lt;br/&gt;research aims to develop new tools that will enable robot developers
&lt;br/&gt;to fill this void. The research could also have significant
&lt;br/&gt;implications for the delivery of institutionally based health
&lt;br/&gt;care. The deployment of robots to assist nursing personnel in
&lt;br/&gt;hospitals and long-term care facilities, as well as at home, has
&lt;br/&gt;enormous implications for improved health outcomes and quality of
life &lt;br/&gt;for older patients while minimizing costs of care. Furthermore,
the &lt;br/&gt;reduction of the nursing workload by such robot assistants
promises to &lt;br/&gt;alleviate the critical shortage of nursing personnel in
the USA that &lt;br/&gt;is only expected to worsen.