* 0905631
* NeTS:Medium:Invigorating Empirical Network Research via Mediated Trace Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 800,000.00

Scientific network research relies heavily on sound, empirical analysis of real-
world network traffic. It is often not possible to robustly validate a proposed
mechanism, enhancement, or new service without understanding how it will
interact with real networks and real users. Yet obtaining the necessary raw
measurement data?in particular packet traces including payload?can prove
exceedingly difficult. Simply put, the lack of public access to current,
representative datasets significantly hinders the progress of our scientific
field. Not having appropriate traces for a study can stall the most promising
research. There have been extensive efforts by the community at large to change
the status quo by providing collections of public network traces. However, the
community?s major push to encourage institutions to release anonymized data has
achieved only very limited successes. The risks involved with any release still
outweigh the potential benefits in almost all environments. The lack of
significant progress in this direction?despite extensive efforts?is an
undeniable indication that the community needs a new approach. Towards this end,
the PIs are developing in a systematic fashion a scheme that has been used
informally numerous times over two decades of network research: rather than
bringing the data to the experimenter, bring the experiment to the data. Past
studie have packaged up an analysis for execution by somebody external who had
the privileges to access network traffic out of our reach. These people crunched
the traffic with our scripts and then manually verified that the output did not
leak any sensitive information before passing it on to us. The PIs are
establishing such mediated trace analysis as a standard approach to empirical
network research. The aim is to formalize the process sufficiently to facilitate
researchers tapping into a potentially broad pool of providers willing to
mediate access to traces for research studies. Several large-scale network
environments have already confirmed to us that they consider this model a
feasible approach, and are willing to participate. The main challenge to
overcome is the burden the process imposes on trace providers and on the
research ?development cycle?. The basic tenet is that it possible to greatly
improve many of the tedious mediation steps by devising a systematic framework
that accounts for the legitimate concerns of providers while reducing their
effort to such a degree that it becomes practical for them to provide mediated
trace analysis on a routine basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge is to
automate the common steps of the mediation process without compromising the core
requirement of the trace provider maintaining thorough control over the process.
Starting with carefully examining the threats that arise, the PIs are devising a
formal framework for trace mediations that will include a computational model
specifically tailored to the process? unique requirements, along with a powerful
suite of tools to provide extensive support for the different elements of the
undertaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mediation approach has the potential to
broadly improve how scientists tackle network measurement studies?both opening
up access to a far greater range of empirical data than is currently viable, and
instilling a greater degree of scientific rigor into the process of conducting
such research. By making empirical data available to many more teams of
researchers than occurs today, this work will significantly broaden efforts
within the field.&lt;br/&gt;