* 0905279
* ATI: Development of High-Order Adaptive Optics for the 1.6 Meter Solar Telescope in Big Bear
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Philip Goode, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 07/31/2013
* USD 895,792.00

Solar astronomers are scientists who observe and study the Sun, our local star.
Because it is so close and bright, they are able to acquire much more detailed
information about the Sun than night-time astronomers can of more distant stars.
Understanding the physical processes of the Sun thus has profound benefit to the
understanding of all stars, the building blocks of galaxies and of much of the
visible matter in the universe. One of the primary goals of solar astronomy is
to understand, in the greatest possible detail, how the magnetic fields and
other processes in the Sun affect the emission of energetic particles and of
heat, light, and higher energy forms of electromagnetic radiation such as
ultraviolet light and X-rays. These emitted particles and light are interesting
to study from a purely scientific point of view, but they also have great
relevance to life on Earth. The Sun creates "space weather" - the environment
surrounding planet Earth. Understanding and predicting how observed changes in
the Sun's characteristics will affect the Earth's environment is crucial to
mankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to see the fine detail that can reveal
the secrets of the Sun's magnetism, it is necessary to have a solar telescope
with very high resolving power. However, telescopes on the ground must observe
the Sun through the interference of the Earth's atmosphere. As light passes
through the atmosphere it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind shear and
changes in temperature and pressure within the atmospheric layers. These effects
reduce the resolving power of Earth-based telescopes. This difficulty can be
overcome to a large extent by relatively new techniques employing Adaptive
Optics (AO) where several small patches on the sun are monitored for changes
induced by our atmosphere. These changes are rapidly detected (over 100 times
per second) and the correlation among the patches tells us how the Earth's
atmosphere is distorting the light. This information is then fed into special
adjustable optics in the telescope to restore the image to (nearly) what could
be seen from above the Earth's atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Philip Goode
of the New Jersey Institute of Technology and his team are developing a
sophisticated AO system for the New Solar Telescope at Big Bear Solar
Observatory in the San Bernadino Mountains in Southern California. This
telescope is located on a pier literally in Big Bear Lake where the lake's water
ensures that the air surrounding the telescope is stable. This new telescope
with Adaptive Optics will provide the best resolved images of the Sun ever
delivered on the shortest time scales ever measured. The analysis of these data
is sure to lead to a better understanding of our local star and of the space
weather it causes.