* 0905942
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Ermitte StJacques, StJacques               Ermitte
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00



Ermitte St. Jacques

NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Measuring Transnational Social
Ties among Senegambian Immigrants in Spain

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will broaden
understanding of the relationship between immigrant integration in receiving
countries and transnationalism using Senegalese and Gambian immigrants in Spain
as a case study. This project will develop a model based on personal network
analysis to measure transnationalism and to evaluate how integration affects
transnationalism. Two major shortcomings of current models are that they measure
participation in a limited number of behaviors and do not assess the cross-
border social ties immigrants maintain. A personal network approach to
transnationalism, however, takes into account the behaviors immigrants engage in
and the content and structure of the cross-border ties they maintain. In
addition, because personal networks comprise of the people with whom an
individual interacts, personal network analysis concurrently measures immigrant
integration and thus provides a multidimensional understanding of
transnationalism.

The first stage of the project involves collecting and analyzing personal
network data. The software Egonet will be used to elicit a list of a
respondent?s network members. The respondent is asked to provide information
about each member and the type of relationship they share. The second stage of
the project includes generating a transnational score based on the portion of
members in the country of origin and the country of settlement and on the
strength of the ties. The transnational score will be correlated with each of
three common hypotheses given for variation in transnationalism that relate to
integration: length of residence in the receiving country, economic
incorporation, and experiences with racism. Stepwise multiple regression will be
used to ascertain the degree to which the hypotheses explain variation in the
participation of Senegalese and Gambian immigrants in transnationalism. The
correlation and regression analyses also allow for comparison with other models
for measuring transnationalism.

The fellow will conduct her training and research at the Annenberg School for
Communication at the University of Pennsylvania under the sponsorship of Dr.
Keith Hampton, an authority on personal and whole network analysis. Under the
mentorship of Dr. Hampton, the fellow will gain expert knowledge on the design,
collection and analysis of personal and whole network data and on social network
metrics. Dr. Hampton?s expertise on the influence of new information and
communication technologies will broaden the fellow?s research to incorporate the
use of new media and mobile communication technologies in the maintenance of
transnational ties. The additional sponsorship of José Luis Molina, an expert on
social network analysis at the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, will provide
the fellow with institutional support for conducting fieldwork in Spain. Dr.
Molina?s research on acculturation among various immigrant groups in Catalonia
will be instrumental in carrying out the project.

The postdoctoral training objectives also include professional development
leading to a tenure track position at a research university. The Annenberg
School offers an advantageous environment for the fellow to augment her
methodological skills, to receive advisement from faculty with shared
disciplinary perspectives, and to engage with colleagues across disciplines,
specifically in the Centre for Global Communication Studies. Beyond the
intellectual merit of the project, the broader impact of a more precise
understanding of the relationship between integration and transnationalism takes
on imperative for Muslim immigrant populations, such as Senegalese and Gambians,
in Western Europe. Growing Islamic fundamentalism has prompted a reconsideration
of the social integration. As immigration policies adopt assimilationist
approaches to integration, the social ties immigrants maintain with their
countries of origin become suspect





