* 0905235
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Managing Interference in Communications Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Gerhard Kramer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The ubiquity of wireless devices and services and the ever increasing bandwidth
demand make it imperative to improve spectrum utilization. Key to improving
spectrum efficiency in a multi-user networks is understanding and managing
interference. This collaborative project studies the phenomenon of interference
in communication networks and develops a theoretical foundation on how to deal
with interference under realistic operating conditions. The study addresses
several long-standing open problems; solutions to those problems should
collectively advance our understanding on interference and provide guidance on
the design of future wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
pursues a broad range of topics that are of great theoretical and practical
significance. Conventional wisdom suggests that, since interference has
structure that is not present in thermal noise, this structure should be
exploited by transceivers. On the other hand, there are situations where
interference can be essentially ignored without compromising system throughput,
as evidenced by recent breakthroughs in the study of the sum-rate capacity of
Gaussian interference channels. This project demonstrates that there are
different regimes for interference management and provide means of analysis for
various multi-user communication systems. The transformative nature of this
project lies in its ambitious goal of establishing a solid theoretical
foundation on how interference should be dealt with in complex networks, and in
providing guidance on system designs that achieve optimal
performance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;