* 0905731
* "G-SELC: A New Global Optimization Technique Using Genetic Algorithms, Tabu Search and Gaussian Processes"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Abhyuday Mandal, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this work, the investigator develops a new global optimization technique,
which is primarily motivated by applications in drug discovery. Although
identification of useful compounds is critical to improving efficiency in drug
discovery, pharmaceutical industries generally adopt ad hoc approaches to
identify promising compounds. The proposed research aims to develop an efficient
technique named G-SELC, which expedites this process. To this end, the
investigator develops a global optimization procedure using local search
techniques such as Genetic Algorithms and Tabu Search combined with statistical
modeling involving Gaussian processes. This research is also extended to
categorical variables in Gaussian process. In addition, the investigator
develops efficient numerical techniques to reduce computational burden for this
batch sequential optimization problem.

Identifying promising compounds from a vast collection of feasible compounds is
an important and yet challenging problem in pharmaceutical industry. The
proposed research helps reduce the expenditure at the early stages of drug
discovery, thus creating significant economic and social benefits. This
optimization technique is also used to identify optimal solutions in many other
scientific research problems such as computer experiments, functional magnetic
resonance imaging and nanotechnology. The investigator shows that in some
applications, categorical variables can be treated as continuous. This
simplifies the computation in Gaussian process modeling significantly. It has
far-reaching consequences not only in drug discovery, but also in complex
computer modeling where Gaussian process modeling is used extensively which
includes modeling air quality, calibration of computational models of cerebral
blood flow, predicting climate and weather, statistical mechanics of granular
flow, terrestrial models, dynamics of infectious diseases and so on.