* 0905650
* TC: Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Next-Generation Infrastructure for Trustworthy Web Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Cormac Flanagan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

Many services traditionally performed by stand-alone programs running on desktop
computers are being migrated to ?Web 2.0? applications, remote services that
reside ?in the cloud? and are that accessed through a browser. This migration
process offers a unique opportunity to re-engineer the way that software is
constructed, adding some extra capabilities that reduce the vulnerability of the
global information infrastructure to problems such as viruses, cyber-attacks,
loss of privacy, and integrity violations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this goal
in mind, this project designs and implements a next-generation infrastructure
for trustworthy web applications. It evolves the existing Web 2.0 technologies
into a more trustworthy ?Web 2.Sec? version by introducing information-labeling
and strong information-flow controls pervasively at the service provider, at the
user?s end, and on all paths in between. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key feature of
the new Web 2.Sec architecture is that all application programs are executed on
top of a virtual machine (VM) rather than directly on physical hardware. Hence
the VM retains full control over the data at all times, allowing it to enforce
information-&amp;#64258;ow policies that guarantee con&amp;#64257;dentiality and
integrity. Even a malicious or faulty program running on top of the Web 2.Sec VM
cannot cause any action that would violate these policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong educational component involving both graduate and
undergraduate students rounds off the project.