* 0905944
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Simon Sponberg, Sponberg Simon
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Information
processing in the motor control of flight." The host institution for this
research is the University of Washington, and the sponsoring scientist is Thomas
Daniel.

A central challenge in understanding the remarkable locomotion capabilities of
animals is determining how neural feedback acts through muscles and skeletal
elements to control motion. Information theory provides a common metric,
information for relating neural and mechanical signals across sensory stimuli,
motor commands, and body dynamics. However, understanding the meaning of this
information requires grounding the relevant signals in their functional context
through neuromechanical experiment, simulation, and validation. This research
develops information-based analytical tools for motor control while addressing
specific hypotheses of flight control in a winged insect, the hawkmoth, Manduca
sexta. First, an information optimization procedure is being used to reveal the
functional organization of groups of hypothesized power and control muscles.
Second, maximal information algorithms describe the components of wing
kinematics and body dynamics most informed by neural feedback through these
groups of muscles. Existing biomechanical simulations and direct manipulation of
neural and muscular activity in behaving animals are used to validate the
proposed functional link between muscle groups, wing parameters, and body
dynamics.

The general principles of information transfer from this research offer a common
language for sensorimotor integration in biological systems. On the applied
side, revealing principles of information flow in neuromechanical systems is
critical to the emerging fields of neural prosthetics, biologically-inspired
robotics, and brain-machine interfaces. Perhaps most importantly, this project
offers an interdisciplinary training approach. Specific training goals include
1) developing a new computational neuromechanics short course 2) direct
mentoring of younger (high school) researchers in projects requiring
experimental, engineering, and programming skills and 3) public outreach through
an established collaboration with the Pacific Science Center Museum of Flight.