* 0905277
* NetSE: Medium: Collaborative Research: Foundational Issues in Network Redundancy Elimination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 201,183.00

Different Internet users often access similar content resulting in identical
data repeatedly traversing the network. Several systems have attempted to
eliminate this redundant data from network links to improve network performance.
However, these only apply to point-deployments, i.e. to specific applications,
protocols, or links. Because of this, their benefits are limited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an Internet architecture where
redundancy elimination (RE) is inherently supported by the network. This
architecture subsumes localized deployments and extends the benefits of RE to
all end-to-end flows. Crucially, it improves the design of applications and
protocols. It frees application designers from concerns about using network
resources efficiently. Network protocols can leverage inherent RE to better meet
application and network constraints. This work will consider the technical,
algorithmic and economic issues in this new architecture, including supporting
RE in networks and end-hosts, reconfiguring applications to optimally leverage
RE, and incentives for ISPs and end-hosts to deploy RE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The new architecture will improve end-
to-end performance, enhance applications and protocols, and give rise to new
applications. The research will consider technical, algorithmic, and economic
issues in supporting RE and leveraging it optimally. It will advance various
fields of Computer Science, including network hardware, protocols and
applications, algorithms, game-theory and network economics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project will have a broad impact on
future applications and protocols. It will improve network management and
routing. It will also impact ISP pricing. The project has a substantial
educational component involving the introduction of new courses and cross-site
mentoring.