* 0905076
* Collaborative Research:   A Comprehensive Approach to Birdsong Dynamics: Experiments and Modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Henry Abarbanel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 08/31/2012
* USD 481,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Describing the action of the nervous
system in quantitative terms is an important goal in neuroscience, but has been
hampered by lack of appropriate techniques to describe the complex time-varying
activity patterns of individual neurons. The activity patterns a given neuron
expresses depend on the inputs to that neuron and the intrinsic properties of
that neuron. A central limitation has been the inability to determine from data
collected from real neurons the specific values of various conductances and
other properties of those neurons that define their time-varying patterns of
activity. To address this limitation, this project will combine real data
derived from targeted experiments with modeling of those data to create a new
synthesis. Data will be collected under controlled conditions from highly
studied identified populations of neurons of the avian forebrain. The
experimental procedures especially the structure and families of current pulses
in those intracellular recordings will be tightly coordinated with a parallel
effort to develop techniques to estimate the parameters of the recorded neurons.
The goal of these combined experiments is to fully characterize the parameters
of the neurons so as to describe the time-varying properties of the neurons.
Success in this effort will be broadly applicable, providing a fundamental new
approach to fully incorporating actual experimental data to characterize the
activity properties of individual neurons. In the first instance, this will be
applied to describing attributes of neuronal activity that are related to vocal
production and learning and auditory memory phenomena. This project will also
result in significant training opportunities. Biologists early in their careers
will be trained in the emerging field of computational neuroscience. Young
physicists and other quantitative scientists seeking new problems outside of
their traditional disciplines will receive training in biological thinking and
biological methods. These individuals will thus learn early in their careers a
multidisciplinary approach to scientific problems that is the emerging paradigm
for modern research.