* 0905638
* Geometric Topology in Three and Four Dimensions; August 2009, Davis, CA
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Mario Eudave-Munoz, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2010
* USD 25,000.00

In 3-manifold topology several important conjectures were resolved in the last
two years. Hass--Thompson--Thurston and independently Bachman provided examples
of a manifold with two distinct Heegaard splitting whose lowest genus common
stabilization had genus equal to the sum of the two genera, resolving a long
standing question. Another striking development is the proof by Qui and
Scharlemann of the Gordon conjecture showing that the sum of two Heegaard
splittings is stabilized if and only if one of the original Heegaard splittings
was stabilized. Kroneheimer and Mrowka used the connection between contact
structures on a 3-manifold and the induced symplectic structure on certain
related 4-manifolds to prove Property $P$. Yi Ni used the connection between
Heegaard Floer homology and sutured manifolds in his proof of the fibered knot
conjecture. All of these results are very new and the techniques used are likely
to open the doors to many other long standing problems in low dimensional
topology. The goal of this conference is to disseminate these ideas, and in
particular to introduce junior topologists to these new
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low dimensional topology studies the
structure of 3 and 4 dimensional manifolds. These are objects that locally look
like 3 and 4 dimensional balls. Many physical objects of interest to other
sciences can be studied via techniques stemming from low dimensional topology.
Examples of such objects are DNA molecules, proteins, and even our universe.
Partly because of its wide applications low dimensional topology has attracted
the attention of many mathematicians and new discoveries are being made at
breathtaking pace. The goal of the proposed conference is to bring together
leading researchers in low-dimensional topology and allow for an exchange of
information and ideas.