* 0905084
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards On-Line Analytical Mining of Heterogeneous Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Xifeng Yan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri
* 06/30/2013
* USD 368,488.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This proposal seeks to address a wide range of research
challenges involving OLAP (OnLine Analytical Processing). This collaborative
project is concerned with increasing the ability for analytical processing for
information networks. Information networks have been expanding rapidly and
attract broad scholarly interest ranging from intrusion pattern detection to
social community discovery. Typical information networks include communication
networks, social networks, the Web, and biological networks. In contrast to the
rising popularity and increasing scale of information networks, there is a lack
of general analytical processing frameworks for exploiting the information
contained in the networks. The lack of such frameworks inhibits personalized
navigation and interactive knowledge exploration. The work supports the Infonet-
OLAP framework by extending methods for structure discovery, network
summarizations, and self quality assurance of underlying networks. If
successful, the techniques would simplify information network analytical
processing and transform existing ad hoc graph exploratory work into a unified
framework as traditional OLAP does to multidimensional data analysis.