* 0905254
* Understanding Defects Generated by the Low Temperature Aqueous Synthesis of ZnO
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Frederick Lange, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Zinc oxide (ZnO) single crystal films and periodic
structures have potential applications that include energy saving light emitting
diodes (LEDs), transparent electrodes for today?s multi-billion LED industry
based on GaN alloys, and dye-sensitized solar cells. Due to its relatively high
index of refraction (n = 2.05, lambda&amp;#61472;= 500 nm), and the ability to
produce 2D and 3D periodic structures, ZnO has become an important candidate for
photonic crystal applications that confine and direct the light used for optical
communication. As an optical-electronic material, it has a wide band gap (~3.4
eV), an excitonic binding energy twice that of GaN, a high saturation velocity,
a high radiation hardness, and a high optical transparency. In fact, most of
these properties of ZnO are either similar or superior to those of GaN, which
today is the material used for LEDs that has and will light our world at
significant energy reduction. As a wide band gap semiconductor, ZnO faces the
same technical hurdle as GaN prior to the innovations made by Shuji Nakamura in
the early 1990?s. Due to advantages in properties, raw material availability and
cost, ZnO is expected to displace GaN in the multi-billion dollar solid-state
lighting industry once this technical hurdle is overcome The research will
involve undergraduate interns and a graduate student. Emphasis will be placed on
selecting underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: ZnO
epitaxial films will be synthesized, under steady-state, equilibrium conditions,
in a low temperature (&amp;#8804; 90°C) continuous, aqueous reactor that has
been constructed based on thermodynamic calculations and the retrograde
solubility of ZnO. (JJ Richardson and FF Lange, ?Controlling Low Temperature
Aqueous Synthesis of ZnO Part I and II,? Crystal Growth &amp; Design, 9 [6],
2570-81 (2009)). The continuous aqueous reactor has also been used to synthesize
periodic 2D and 3D nanostructures, with dimensions equivalent to the wavelength
of blue to red light, with potential applications as photonic crystals. The
research emphasizes the optimization of synthesis parameters, namely, pH,
temperature, ammonia concentration, and additions of rate controlling growth
agents. The primary goal is to use the continuous reactor to understand the
point defects that produce unintentional n-type conductivity, the dislocations
at low angle grain boundaries introduced by the coalescence of epitaxial nuclei,
and void formation observed during heat treatments at &amp;#8805; 250°C. This
understanding will, in turn, be used to optimize the optoelectronic properties
of aqueous synthesized ZnO so that significant steps can be taken towards band
gap engineering and intentional n- and p-type doping.&lt;br/&gt;