* 0905593
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Effective Communication with Robotic Assistants for the Elderly: Integrating Speech, Vision and Haptics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Barbara DiEugenio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 775,940.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is to develop
a communication interface that will enable older people to effectively
communicate with robotic assistants, allowing them in this way to remain living
safely in their homes. The proposed communication interface will be: (1)
multimodal, that is supporting spoken, gestural and physical interactions, as
all these typically occur simultaneously when people communicate with one
another, and (2) adaptive so that the robotic assistant will adjust to the older
person rather than the older person to the robotic assistant. The combination of
speech, gestures and physical interactions (haptics) has received only limited
attention, but it will be critical for successful deployment of assistive robots
for many elderly individuals. The transformative component of this research is
to view haptics as one of the drivers of the dialogue between the user and the
robot, and to study its relation to speech and gestures through language
processing methods. To adapt to each user, the interpretation of the speech,
gestures and haptic signals will be performed by means of RISq (Recognition by
Indexing and&lt;br/&gt;Sequencing), a novel, adaptive and reliable recognition
methodology. Finally, a formal and modular control design methodology will be
developed, that guarantees that the robot responds safely and reliably to the
interpretation of the user intent provided by dialogue
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robot assistive technology holds great promise
for the future. Supporting the independent functioning of older people so that
they can safely remain living in the community is of paramount importance,
especially since the world's population is aging at an ever increasing pace.
However, one of the main obstacles to the widespread use of robot assistants is
the lack of interfaces that are easy to use for the elderly and allow the robot
to be used in complex&lt;br/&gt;real-world environments such as a typical
apartment. The proposed research aims to develop new tools that will enable
robot developers to fill this void. The research could also have significant
implications for the delivery of institutionally based health care. The
deployment of robots to assist nursing personnel in hospitals and long-term care
facilities, as well as at home, has enormous implications for improved health
outcomes and quality of life for older patients while minimizing costs of care.
Furthermore, the reduction of the nursing workload by such robot assistants
promises to alleviate the critical shortage of nursing personnel in the USA that
is only expected to worsen.