* 0905082
* NSCC/SA  Mapping Terrorist Organizations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Martha Crenshaw, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

The purpose of the project is to identify patterns in the evolution of terrorist
organizations, specify their causes and consequences, and analyze the
development of Al Qaeda and its cohort in a comprehensive comparative framework.
The project analyzes the organizational structure of different families of
terrorist organizations and traces their relationships over time. The project
will produce a database of terrorist organizations and a series of dynamic maps
of the architecture of violent and non-violent opposition groups operating in
the same conflict zone. The project will identify common patterns of
organizational evolution, as groups form, split, merge, collaborate, compete,
shift ideological direction, adopt or renounce terrorism, grow, shrink, and
eventually decline over time. Models based on comparisons of historical
terrorist genealogies will be applied to the case of Al Qaeda and its affiliates
and associates, including the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Theories
generated from the study will thus shed light on an important national security
threat that is constantly evolving. The project will also identify or develop
computer software to assemble, organize, and display information about
organizations and their interactions over time. This award was funded through
the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National Security, Conflict, and
Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and the Department of
Defense.