* 0905046
* PetaCactus: Unraveling the Supernova -- Gamma-Ray Burst Mystery
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Adam Burrows, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,400,000.00

OCI-0905046&lt;br/&gt;Schnetter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) are
the brightest explosions in the Universe, and Core-Collapse Supernovae (CCSN)
are the most energetic events in the Universe. CCSN and the long-soft subset of
GRBs both originate from massive stars, but the details of their central engines
are essentially unknown. The CCSN and GRB problems and the possible CCSN-GRB
relationship are major current questions in astrophysics. Modeling GRBs is a
true petascale problem, needing a multi-physics approach over an extreme dynamic
range in both physical length scale and dynamic time scale. Of central
importance in any comprehensive GRB model is dynamical general relativity
combined with magnetohydrodynamics, radiation transport of neutrinos and
photons, and neutrino and nuclear microphysics. This award supports a five year
research program to develop algorithms not present today, able to address
stellar core collapse, supernovae and black hole formation, accretion dynamics,
jet formation and sustainment, jet propagation and break out. The team will
implement adaptive mesh refinement and parallel input/output to augment the
Cactus PDE solving framework so that it runs efficiently on petascale computers.
This synergistic interdisciplinary team of both young and experienced
researchers spans numerical relativity, astrophysics, and computer science. The
team consists of 12 senior investigators including computational and computer
scientists at LSU's Center for Computation and Technology led by the PI and co-
PI Gabrielle Allen, plus several computational astrophysicists from Princeton
and Santa Cruz in the US, Southampton in the UK, and Potsdam in Germany. The
award also supports at least two postdoctoral researchers at LSU and Princeton.
The team will build on already funded work on other aspects of Cactus
infrastructure, and includes members involved in the software development for
the Blue Waters project. This project is also closely connected to the NSF
supported CyberTools Louisiana statewide cyberinfrastructure
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the physics side, this research addresses
unsolved problems in modeling some of the most energetic events in the Universe.
On the computer science side, the tools and methods to be developed to address
science problems on petascale architectures such as Blue Waters will be
applicable to a wide range of other fields. The time and effort required to
develop and debug scientific software has become a bottleneck in many areas of
science and engineering, and the difficulty of developing high-performance
computing software is recognized as one of the most significant challenges today
in the effective use of large scale computers. The developed pieces for dynamic
scheduling, scalability, higher order methods, long-term accuracy, support for
multiphysics, checkpointing, and input/output, will all be available for other
projects, most of them via the open source Cactus distribution mechanism: the
Cactus Framework already provides an enabling environment for applications from
different disciplines. The research integrates with outreach programs locally
and nationally to help prepare other applications for petascale computing and
prepare the next generation of peta-savvy researchers. It also includes outreach
to students at the K-12, undergraduate and graduate levels, including summer
workshops, helping to introduce future researchers at every level to the
concepts and challenges of petascale computing.