* 0905809
* String Topology, Field Theories, and the Topology of Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ralph Cohen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 260,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal consists of several
projects using algebraic topological techniques to study questions arising from
geometric topology and geometry. Among the most exciting and active areas of
this type of study are ``String Topology", the study of the homotopy type of
moduli spaces, and the study of topological field theories. The projects in this
proposal, some long term, involve investigations into these new and very
interesting areas of topology. In this proposal, there are projects that will
apply string topology to geometry, including the development of ``Quantum String
topology" of a symplectic manifold with M. Schwarz, the study of the cobordism
type of moduli spaces of holomorphic curves with I. Madsen, and the relation of
the string topology of a manifold to the ``Fukaya-Seidel" category of the
cotangent bundle with its canonical symplectic structure,with C. Teleman and A.
Blumberg. There are also projects that will to continue to study and develop the
homotopy theoretic structure of this theory, including the construction and
study of ``higher order" string topology operations with J.D.S. Jones, and the
construction and study of the ``string topology $A infinity category" of a
manifold, and its Hochschild homology, with A. Blumberg and C. Teleman. Other
projects include the study of characteristic classes of conformal field
theories, with Madsen, and a project with N. Kitchloo, to address questions
asked by the geometers F. Lalonde and D. McDuff on the Serre spectral sequence
for bundles with symplectic fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal consists of several projects investigating the new area of research
known as "String Topology", as well as related questions. String topology, a
theory that was first introduced by Chas and Sullivan in 1999, studies
structures on spaces of paths, loops, and surfaces. This structure was motivated
by formalisms in string theory in physics. The idea is to understand how loops
(or paths) in a background space can evolve in time. Loops can evolve by
changing in size and even breaking apart. In this proposal this theory is
studied in a variety of contexts, including the mathematical formalisms of
Quantum Field Theory. Moreover the several projects understanding the
relationship between string topology and more geometric theories are pursued.