* 0905968
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jason Ernst, Ernst                   Jason          M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009 using
funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). The training and development plan is entitled "Beyond the human genome:
integrative analysis of epigenomic datasets" for Jason Ernst. The host
institution for this research is Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the
sponsorship of Manolis Kellis and the Broad Institute under the sponsorship of
Bradley Bernstein.

The DNA sequence of the human genome is virtually unchanged across different
cell types, yet cells can display extraordinary diversity in their behavior and
function. Other factors, known as epigenetic factors, are responsible for
observed differences across cell types. Technological advances have enabled the
mapping of epigenetic factors in multiple cell types across the genome, yet in
order to systematically interpret these data, new computational methods are
needed. This research is on the development of such tools, specifically,
probabilistic models for identifying important combinations of epigenetic
modifications. Additionally this research focuses on the characterization of
their function using large-scale genomic and epigenomic datasets.

Training objectives include gaining expertise on the biological aspects of
epigenetics and epigenomics, as well as related areas of genomics and gene
regulation. On the computational side, training will focus on machine learning
methods. The resulting software will be broadly disseminated in the biological
community. Jason Ernst is also conducting educational outreach activities with
local high school students to raise awareness of career opportunities at the
interface of computer science and biology.