* 0905032
* DC: Medium: Intelligent Data Placement in Support of Scientific Workflows
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ann Chervenak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 810,000.00

Transformative research is conducted via computational analyses of large data
sets in the terabyte and petabyte range. These analyses are often enabled by
scientific workflows, which provide automation and efficient and reliable
execution on campus and national cyberinfrastructure resources. Workflows face
many issues related to data management such as locating input data, finding
necessary storage co-located with computing capabilities, and efficiently
staging data so that the computation progresses but storage resources do not
fill up. Such data placement decisions need to be made within the context of
individual workflows and across multiple concurrent workflows. Scientific
collaborations also need to perform data placement operations to disseminate and
replicate key data sets. Additional challenges arise when multiple scientific
collaborations share cyberinfrastructure and compete for limited storage and
compute resources. This project will explore the interplay between data
management and computation management for these scenarios. The project will
include the design of algorithms and methodologies that support large-scale data
management for efficient workflow-based computations composed of individual
analyses and workflow ensembles while preserving policies governing data storage
and access. The algorithms will be evaluated regarding their impact on
performance of synthetic and real-world workflows running in simulated and
physical cyberinfrastructures. New approaches to data and computation management
can potentially transform how scientific analyses are conducted at the
petascale. Besides advancing computer science, this work will have direct impact
on data and computation management for a range of scientific disciplines that
manage large data sets and use them in complex analyses running on
cyberinfrastructure.