* 0905936
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kahlil Ford, Ford                    Kahlil         R
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

Although ethnic minority adolescents face many daunting challenges during their
transition to adulthood, many draw on unique cultural strengths to survive and
thrive. Racial socialization, the process by which parents and other
socialization agents give adolescents race-related messages, is one of the most
important of these cultural strengths. The main aim of this Social and
Behavioral Sciences Minority Post-Doctoral Fellowship research and training
activity is to increase understanding of processes associated with the
transmission and receipt of racial socialization messages. The prospective
project would draw on the resources of New York University's Center for Research
on Culture, Development and Education (CRCDE, currently funded by a grant from
National Science Foundation). The center's diverse collection of scholars and
focus on mixed methods will allow for the exploration of both quantitative and
qualitative data in the study of the racial socialization process. One of the
largest unresolved questions about racial socialization concerns how parent?s
messages are communicated to and received by adolescents. Racial socialization
studies have largely used either parent or child reports of racial
socialization, a practice that precludes analysis of the relation between parent
and child reports of racial socialization or a thorough examination of the
reasons behind successful communication of messages. These discrepancies between
parent and child reports of racial socialization are noteworthy and merit
further investigation for at least three reasons. First, an understanding of the
discrepancies can be used to help parents to talk to their children about race
in ways that enhance youths' identity and self-esteem. Ineffective communication
about race and ethnicity on the part of parents may undermine the protective
functions such communication is intended to serve. Second, advancement in this
literature may help mental health professionals and community leaders to further
refine interventions and social programs that help parents to talk to their
children about race in productive ways. This research will lead to evidence-
based interventions and programs that improve mental health and academic
outcomes for ethnic minority adolescents. Third, explaining the gap will link
the racial socialization literature with a broader socialization literature that
has already grappled with discrepancies between parent and child reports of
socialization. An initial goal of the proposed research is to explore how parent
and adolescent reports differ on three aspects of racial socialization: messages
stressing group differences and racial bias; messages that teach children about
their culture; and messages stressing distrust between racial groups. The
proposed research will also examine how racial socialization is affected by the
broader context of parenting, including parenting style and family functioning.
Finally, the project seeks to broaden understanding of the racial socialization
process by examining the full range of contexts in which race socialization
occurs. Increasing knowledge of the race socialization process will inform
interventions that promote healthy conversations about race between parents and
children. During the time at the CRDCE, the fellow will collaborate with an
interdisciplinary team of scholars, including many minority researchers. The
proposed activity consists of research projects, seminars, and coursework that
will enhance the fellow?s understanding of ecological and developmental
influences on the race socialization process. The fellow will also enhance his
knowledge of research methods by taking courses and consulting with scholars on
qualitative, mixed, and observational methods. The fellowship will also allow
for the potential fellow to work on at least three first authored publications
and to work on other papers at the center. The fellow's time at the center will
provide increased preparation for a tenure track position at a research
university.