* 0905977
* Topics in Measurable Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Alexander Furman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 460,192.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0905977&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Alexander Furman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project contains three research directions involving&lt;br/&gt;infinite groups
and dynamics of group actions. These three&lt;br/&gt;directions include: (1) A
uniform approach to a number of higher&lt;br/&gt;rank superrigidity phenomena.
This approach, based on the notion&lt;br/&gt;of a generalized Weyl groups,
should cover many known results,&lt;br/&gt;including the original Margulis'
superrigidity, and its cocycle&lt;br/&gt;version due to Zimmer, results for
abstract products, new results&lt;br/&gt;for groups acting on exotic affine
buildings. (2)&lt;br/&gt;Measure-theoretic notion of imbedding between countable
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The project is to study the resulting equivalence classes
of&lt;br/&gt;Measurably Bi-Imbeddable groups, and the order between
these&lt;br/&gt;classes. The techniques include cocycle superrigidity
results&lt;br/&gt;obtained in part (1). (3) "Moduli space" of invariant metrics
on&lt;br/&gt;a Gromov-hyperbolic group taken up to bounded distortion.
The&lt;br/&gt;guiding and motivating source for such metrics are metrics
lifted&lt;br/&gt;from Riemannian metrics of negative curvature on a fixed
closed&lt;br/&gt;manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project belongs to an area
of research where Algebra,&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and Dynamics interact. The common
theme of the project&lt;br/&gt;is the study of intrinsic symmetries of certain
structures which&lt;br/&gt;appear in Dynamics, Algebra and Geometry, and the
impact that&lt;br/&gt;such intrinsic symmetries have on the studied objects.
The&lt;br/&gt;proposed problems suggest new points of view and
possible&lt;br/&gt;generalizations to some important recent results in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;