* 0905965
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Marcus Casey, Casey                   Marcus         D
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will foster
the development of new knowledge in the analysis of neighborhood transition and
the concomitant issue of persistent racial segregation. Speci cally, this
project will construct a dynamic model of housing choice in which expectations
over neighborhood attributes is explicitly introduced into the individual deci-
sion process. This research will overcome current limitations in standard models
of housing choice. Furthermore, the results will yield new insights into the
mechanism behind the persistence of seg-regation and potentially inform
development of new public policy aimed at mitigating segregation. The Fellow
will conduct his postdoctoral research under the supervision of Dr. Patrick
Bayer in the Duke University Department of Economics. Dr. Bayer's work is in the
vanguard of innovative re-search on urban economics, racial sorting, and
segregation. In particular, his contributions include theoretical research on
neighborhood sorting, tractable estimation of static behavioral models of
neighborhood choice, and new methodology to overcome endogeneity of neighborhood
racial and socioeconomic composition with unobservable quality. Moreover, Duke
University is an ideal location to achieve the fellow's proposed research and
training goals chiefy because of the comparative strength of its Economics
Department, ample research and computing resources, and emphasis on
interdisciplinary research.

The social science literature has established both the persistence of high
levels of segregation in US cities and its social and economic consequences.
Less research, however, has been devoted to studying why segregation persists.
The persistence of pervasive segregation is particularly puzzling given the
decline in racist attitudes and the convergence in minority-white socioeconomic
outcomes. Understanding this phenomenon requires identi cation of the relevant
behavioral mechanisms underlying this process. Standard models are largely
unsuccessful in explaining this behavior because they can not accommodate
dynamics. To address this shortcoming, this project will exploit the
availability of new longitudinal data on housing transactions and demographics
and recent break-throughs in econometric modeling of dynamic optimization models
to construct a tractable dynamic model of housing choice. Once estimated, the
model will reveal how expectations over future hous- ing appreciation and racial
preferences interact to spur neighborhood transition and the persistence of
racial segregation. In particular, the model will assess the extent to which
beliefs about housing price appreciation as opposed to racial preferences lead
to the observed migration behavior.

Moreover, through policy simulations, the model will yield predictions about
responses to potential policy options aimed at fostering integration. Overall,
this research will improve knowledge about the determinants neighborhood
transition and segregation across the social scienti c disciplines and
potentially foster new methodological advances in this eld of research. The
Fellow's training objectives are to invest in new theoretical and econometric
modeling skills for the study of housing market behavior. In addition to
completing his fellowship project, these skills will aid the Fellow in attaining
a tenure-track position at a research university. In addition, the fellow's
training will include attending seminars and lectures by researchers involved in
developing behavioral and statistical methodology in economics, sociology, and
related elds. Furthermore, the Fellow will develop skills that complement his
research output by taking advantage of opportunities to present to and interact
with scholars in his eld. In sum, the Fellow's research and training will
generate new methodological and substantive knowledge in the study of racial
segregation and invest him with the relevant skills for future contributions in
this important area of research.