* 0905406
* Collaborative Proposal: Security Services in Open Telecommunications Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 404,383.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of telecommunications
networks is rapidly changing. Commodity smart mobile phone frameworks such as
Android and Openmoko invite developers and end users to build applications,
modify the behavior of the phone, and use network services in novel ways.
However, while simultaneously spurring incredible innovation, the move to open
systems alters the underlying performance and security assumptions upon which
the network was designed. Such changes invite vulnerabilities ranging from
merely vexing phone glitches to catastrophic network failures. The current
infrastructure lacks the basic protections needed to protect an increasingly
open network, and it is unclear what new stresses and threats open systems and
services will introduce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research analytically and
experimentally investigates defensive infrastructure addressing vulnerabilities
in open cellular operating systems and telecommunications networks. In this, we
are exploring the requirements and design of such defenses in three coordinated
efforts; a) extending and applying formal policy models for telecommunication
systems, and provide tools for phone manufacturer, provider, developer, and end-
user policy compliance verification, b) building a security-conscious
distribution of the open-source Android operating system, and c) explore the
needs and designs of overload controls in telecommunications networks needed to
absorb changes in mobile phone behavior, traffic models, and the diversity of
communication end- points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research symbiotically
supports educational goals at the constituent institutions by supporting
graduate and undergraduate student research, and is integral to the security and
network curricula. This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).