* 0905561
* Development of Statistical Methods for High-dimensional and Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Montserrat Fuentes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

As technology advances, scientists are challenged by more and more high-
dimensional and complex data. For example, genetic data from microarray
experiments are very large in size and new techniques are needed to identify
specific genes for various diseases. Longitudinal data on various variables over
time on millions of individuals produce interesting challenges. Such data call
for new statistical techniques. Some of the challenges in high-dimensional data
include variable selection from a large group of variables. Some of the existing
methods also suffer from a high false discovery rate. In addition, in quantile
regression methods, an odd phenomenon of quantile crossing needs to be
addressed. Finally, spatial and longitudinal studies require special efficient
methods for estimating the covariance patterns. Motivated by different features
of high-dimensional or complex data, the PI develops several methods. In this
grant application, the PI proposes: 1. new techniques for variable selection for
high-dimensional data and new methods to reduce the false discovery rate; 2. new
techniques to handle the phenomenon of quantile crossing with application to
class probability estimation; 3. new methods to estimate covariance structure
for spatial data and longitudinal data; and 4. parametrically guided
nonparametric estimation for the quasi-likelihood method. The proposed methods
will be studied theoretically for their asymptotic behavior and compared with
some of the existing methods both theoretically and through simulations.

High-dimensional variable selection techniques are called for by many scientists
to efficiently analyze large-scale complex financial, environmental, and
biomedical data such as gene expression, proteomics and metabolomics, or brain
imaging data. These types of data require techniques to identify important
features. To achieve this goal, the PI proposes a screening method to select
appropriate statistical models. This screening method can be applied to
biomedical data to locate important genes responsible for diseases of interest
such as breast cancer and leukemia. Spatial and longitudinal data are sparsely
and irregularly observed also in environmental and clinical studies. For such
data, many efforts have been devoted to studying their covariance structures. In
this proposal, the PI proposes a flexible convolution-based method to estimate
covariance structures nonparametrically. This method can be applied to many
environmental data such as precipitation and wind to improve our understanding
of environmental changes including the well-known "climate change" issue. This
research has many societal applications. In addition, the PI takes advantage of
the mentoring program in the department to work with US doctoral students,
especially women and minorities. The PI also works with undergraduates from NSF-
CSUMS program in the department as it is important to train computationally
strong critical thinkers for the future.