* 0905250
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Effect of Subglottal Resonances on Machine and Human Speaker Normalization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Mitchell Sommers, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 520,791.00

Last Modified Date: 05/02/09 Last Modified By: Tatiana D. Korelsky &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
large acoustic differences in the speech of various talkers, humans are
generally able to understand each other quickly and easily. The mechanisms by
which humans map such variability onto a set of phonemes has been the subject of
research for more than 50 years. This "speaker normalization" problem has
generally been thought of in terms of normalizing the formant frequencies of a
particular speaker with a reference set of formants. In this project, a novel
approach to speaker normalization is explored, in which not formants but
subglottal resonances &lt;br/&gt;(SGRs) are normalized. SGRs have previously
been shown to define a set of frequency bands within which formants may vary,
yet retaining the same phonemic vowel quality. Normalizing SGRs (and associated
frequency bands) therefore reduces formant variability in an effective way. In
this project, effects of SGR normalization on automatic speech recognition
&lt;br/&gt;(ASR) performance are evaluated for both adult and child speakers of
English and Spanish. In parallel, effects on human speech perception in multi-
talker conditions are explored. Results are expected to improve ASR performance
and shed light on human speech production and perception. The project will
result in speech databases (including direct recordings of SGR acoustics) and
ASR tools, which are critically useful for research in speech production,
perception, speaker identification, and speech processing algorithms for
cochlear implants and multi-lingual ASR. The collaboration in Engineering,
Linguistics, Speech &amp; Hearing, and Psychology facilitates a
multidisciplinary learning environment. &lt;br/&gt;Publications, results,
databases, and tools will be disseminated to the research community. &lt;br/&gt;