* 0905970
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Yael Katz, Katz                    Yael
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Information
processing in animal groups" for Yael Katz. The host institution for this
research is Princeton University and the sponsoring scientist is Iain D. Couzin.

Grouping organisms, such as schooling fish, often have to make rapid decisions
in uncertain and dangerous environments. Decision-making by individuals within
such aggregates is so seamlessly integrated that it has been associated with the
concept of a "collective mind". As each organism has relatively local sensing
ability, coordinated animal groups have evolved collective strategies that allow
individuals to access higher-order computational abilities at the collective
level. This research integrates various approaches to understand the functional
organization of collective biological systems. On the theory side, this research
investigates whether analogues to the strategies used by neural systems to
integrate information over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales lead to
biologically realistic behaviors in schooling models. On the experimental side,
this research uses a laboratory schooling fish system that is easy to observe at
high resolution and can interact in real-time with robotic fish. Computer-vision
software is being developed to track the fish and use tools from statistical
physics to uncover the dynamics of the fish-schooling network, investigate how a
focal point of information spreads among individuals leading to a change of
state, and test mathematical models that link the behavior of individuals and
group-level properties.

Training goals include learning about fish biology and ecology, computer vision,
robotics, programming of graphics processing units, and how to effectively
coordinate and communicate research across disciplines. The research findings
will be published in scientific journals and made publically available through
the internet. A deeper understanding of collective animal behavior can be
applied to an extremely diverse array of research areas that benefit society,
such as plague prevention, tumor suppression, and traffic control.