* 0905331
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Unifying Network Coding and Cross-Layer Optimization for Wireless Mesh Networks: From Theory to Distributed Algorithms to Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charlie Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 549,899.00

Wireless mesh networks promise a flexible and cost-effective solution for
bringing high-bandwidth low-latency applications to the home. Two orthogonal but
immensely attractive approaches for designing high-performance mesh networks are
network coding and cross-layer optimization. The former exploits the interfering
wireless media as a broadcast channel by ingenious information processing, while
the latter intelligently allocates and shares network resources across the
layers. This project investigates the long-overdue and highly challenging
synergistic union of network coding and cross-layer optimization.

The characterization of intersession network coding (INC), coding across
different network flows, is NP-hard. Nonetheless, the problem can be made
tractable under important practical settings. Based on new path-based
characterizations, this project rigorously quantifies the network capacity in
presence of different practical INC schemes. A new network-coding based cross-
layer paradigm is developed for controlling mesh networks that takes into
account practical considerations such as robustness, scalability, and time-
varying wireless broadcast environment. New distributed, low-overhead protocols
are constructed and validated over a mesh testbed on the Purdue University
campus. Undergraduates and under-represented students are actively recruited for
the project. Research results are disseminated via the web and through
publications in conferences and journals. The results of the project, spanning
from theoretic exploration to protocol deployment on a practical testbed lead to
the significant performance gains necessary to realize the full capability of
mesh networks, which in turn has the potential to revolutionize the
telecommunications industry.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).