* 0905344
* RI: Medium: Robust Intelligent Manipulation and Apprenticeship Learning for Robotic Surgical Assistants
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Wyatt Newman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,359,881.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop models,
algorithms, and testbeds for robust intelligent manipulation that will enable
supervisory control for robotic surgical assistants (RSAs). Drawing on the
combined expertise of the investigators, the research is focusing on both
analytic and empirical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using analytic
approaches, the investigators are defining mathematical models of system state,
deformable tissue dynamics, and stochastic uncertainty. These models are used to
develop robotic motion planning and control algorithms to plan and perform
grasping and manipulation of deformable objects under uncertainty. Using
empirical approaches, the investigators are developing machine learning
techniques to efficiently find dynamic control policies and characterize
performance metrics based on expert demonstrations. Simulation and hardware
testbeds for a common set of benchmark problems are being developed to evaluate
these algorithms and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
basic scientific understanding by developing new analytic methods for robust
grasping and manipulation of deformable objects. This project will also advance
empirical approaches by developing controllers that learn deformable object
manipulation skills by observing expert demonstrations. The project will extend,
compare, and evaluate analytic and empirical methods and seek to develop new
hybrid methods within the focused context of providing robust intelligence for
RSAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust intelligent manipulation for RSAs will improve
patient health and reduce costs by enhancing surgeon performance, reducing
tedium, and decreasing operation time. Outreach to local girls' high schools and
predominantly minority Cleveland high schools is pursued as part of the project
to encourage participation of underrepresented groups in engineering and
computer science.