* 0905516
* HCC: Medium: The Accessible Aquarium Project: Access to Dynamic Informal Learning Environments via Advanced Bio-Tracking and Adaptive Sonification
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Aaron Bobick, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,216,002.00

The goal of this project is to make dynamic exhibits in informal learning
environments (ILEs), such as zoos, science centers, and aquaria, accessible and
engaging for visitors with vision impairments by providing real-time audio
interpretations. Our efforts will also enhance the exhibit experience for all
visitors, regardless of visual ability. We focus on the aquarium domain, since
virtually every exhibit is dynamic, and the aquatic nature of the facility
provides unique and interesting challenges to bio-tracking. The principles and
techniques we develop will be immediately applicable to zoos, museums, and other
ILEs with dynamic exhibits, potentially leading to a dramatic increase in the
educational and entertainment opportunities for people with vision impairments.
The project will employ focus groups and innovative simulations to test
prototype exhibits during the development stages. The tracking and auditory
displays will then be evaluated through laboratory studies and field testing in
exhibits in a large public aquarium. The ability to design exhibits and
interpretation materials that are accessible to visitors with vision impairments
is a growing concern. In addition to persons with specific vision impairments,
the underserved population includes their family members, as well as the
millions of older adults who have some vision loss that impacts their ability to
read signage, see artifacts, and follow the activity in a dynamic exhibit. The
results of our project will also enhance the experience for those with full
vision, but for whom mobility, height, or other problems make it hard to see
traditional signage. Indeed, all visitors will benefit from an audio enhancement
that allows them to learn about the exhibit, while keeping their visual
attention on the exhibit itself.