* 0905671
* RI: Medium: Integrated Analysis and Synthesis for Data Mining in a Video Network
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Bir Bhanu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

The University of California-Riverside is awarded a grant to develop a new
research para-digm in which both analysis-by-synthesis and synthesis-by-analysis
are integrated in a closed-loop learning framework for developing robust,
scalable systems for video mining in network of cameras. This paradigm allows a
principled transition from limited domains to large-scale de-ployment. The
collaborative project brings together three institutions (UCR, UCLA, and SUNY-
SB) for aggregating and interpreting information and discovering patterns of
human behavior from multiple video streams and evaluating them in realistic
virtual and real-life scenarios such as video surveillance, traffic monitoring,
and elderly care.&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces four novel elements. First,
it develops methods for incremental model-ing and scaling of Bayesian nets for
videos and glues together the analysis and synthesis. Sec-ond, it employs
multiple strategies based on game theory and a multi-objective optimization
framework for cooperative and distributed on-line control of active cameras.
Third, it uses multi-ple representations in a framework of hierarchical Bayesian
and Markov random fields and sta-tistical tensor models for learning long-term
models of activities. Finally, it involves new models based on dynamical systems
theory for seamless tracking and recognition in a video network. The project
blends the theoretical and algorithmic contributions with the development of a
prototype that integrates a network of video cameras with a virtual vision
simulator which incorporates sophisticated artificial life models of humans. It
builds increasingly sophisticated models of humans, vehicles, context,
illumination, texture, shape, and motion over time. The software tools
integrating the analysis and synthesis are widely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;