* 0905142
* Radiation Response and Defect Dynamics in Strained Si
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Lin Shao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2012
* USD 296,362.00

Technical: This project investigates the role of strain in damage cascade
formation and subsequent defect clustering in ion irradiated and annealed Si.
The approach places emphasis on the growth of Si under different strain using
molecular beam epitaxy. Cluster ion bombardment will be used to study
amorphization mechanisms of the strained Si. In a parallel study using monomer
ion irradiation, boron doped Si superlattice structures will be used to detect
the flux of Si interstitials during post-irradiation thermal annealing. The
measured transient interstitial supersaturation will be used as input to an
inverse modeling of Ostwald ripening to obtain formation energies of defect
clusters as a function of cluster size. Combining the experimental approaches
with molecular dynamics simulations, the project aims for a comprehensive
picture of defect development in strained silicon.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. The capability to predict processing
parameters in strained silicon is critical to promoting strain technology,
optimizing the doping and annealing process in device fabrication, and
evaluating device reliability in harsh environments involving particle
irradiation. The project integrates research and education, and conducts
outreach through the following activites: (1) increase minority participation in
emerging materials research; (2) develop curricula; (3) create e-learning
resources to integrate research, teaching and curriculum development for
promoting public learning in frontiers of materials science; and (4) develop the
Center of Ion &amp; Materials Research at Texas A&amp;M University and use it as
a platform for interdisciplinary research and teaching.