* 0905536
* Data Flow across Heterogenous and Frustrated Protein Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Olivier Lichtarge, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,000,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses a core problem in
biology: to predict function from massive and diverse experimental data that
identify individual cell components, such as proteins, or suggest interactions
among them. The approach will model all such information as networks. New
network analyses methods will then be developed to overcome conflicting
information due to experimental errors or inherent biological complexities.
Other methods will aim at weighing optimally different types of information so
that they may be best combined together. The result will pool biological data on
a dramatically larger scale than previously feasible to yield a self-consistent
and improved picture of protein function. More broadly, however, the network
analysis techniques developed here should apply widely and efficiently to any
massive, diverse and conflicting data, typical of complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigators will integrate
information from frustrated networks by diffusing diverse evolutionary,
structural and functional data along the edges of protein graphs. To cope with
the large network sizes, and data inconsistencies or alternative interpretation,
semi-supervised learning algorithms will be extended, in aim 1, to test
prediction accuracy under different network information diffusion mechanisms
and, in aim 2, under alternative weighing strategies to pool complementary
information networks. The outcome will (1) implement realistic biological
networks with millions of nodes and edges to benchmark computational efficiency;
(2) predict protein function and the phenotypes they induce based on integrated,
massive and heterogeneous biological data sets; and (3), since high
computational efficiency will be maintained even in networks with spin glass
type frustration, these results will be transformative across a wide variety of
fields by extending graph-based semi-supervised learning to a broad, cross-
discipline class of complex networks with random interactions. Students will be
trained at the interface between computational science and biology and developed
software tools will be made public to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;