* 0905411
* The Berkeley Archaeological XRF Laboratory Instrument Maintenance, 2009-2011
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* M. Steven Shackley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 58,667.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In 2007 the National Science Foundation granted funding (BCS 0716333) to
purchase a new Thermo Scientific Quant-X EDXRF spectrometer for elemental
analysis, and established a new lab in the Department of Anthropology. The
instrument is installed and calibrated and a number of undergraduate, graduate,
government, NSF and private sector projects are underway or have been concluded.
A benefit of the new digital system is the ability to analyze smaller pieces of
obsidian (volcanic glass) debitage, now down to at least 7 mm in smallest
dimension, and faster analysis times. The lab is the core of a continually
taught two semester course in XRF in Archaeology by the PI.

The University of California, Berkeley, has been a leader in the use of x-ray
fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) in the service of obsidian provenance studies.
For nearly 40 years XRF has supported obsidian studies for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and faculty research from regions worldwide. The
lab analyzes literally thousands of samples, most obsidian and other volcanic
artifacts, each year. Many of these projects are student projects from Berkeley,
but also other national and international universities. The lab has supported
NSF, federal government, and private sector studies for over 19 years now. The
lab is an integral part of the archaeology program at Berkeley, and is the basis
for a field/lab course of study in Geoarchaeological Science cross-listed in the
Earth and Planetary Science department and a physical science credit for non-
majors. Additionally, the Archaeological XRF Laboratory is the only lab that
places the elemental composition, location, and significant other data of
western North American obsidian sources on the web for others to use
(http://www.swxrflab.net). The current funding as well as the19 years of the
lab's work has formed the foundation for the understanding of exchange, group
interaction, the procurement of stone used in prehistory, and issues of social
identity in prehistory..

This NSF award provides essential support to maintain lab productivity, and also
provides Graduate Student Researcher funding for one year and one summer to
maintain the system, and continue the training of graduate students in
geoarchaeological science. The Geoarchaeological XRF Laboratory is a leader in
geoarchaeological science, and this grant will augment the funding available to
continue the leadership of the research and student training. This National
Science Foundation funding will help to maintain the excellence in
geoarchaeological research, student training in geoarchaeology and
archaeological science (Archaeometry) and provide an crucial geoarchaeological
service to archaeologist throughout the nation.