* 0905448
* New Frontiers at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory: The Beginning of Solar Cycle 24
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Wesley Swartz, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 8,290,912.00

This project represents a five-year continuation of the Cooperative Agreement
between the National Science Foundation and Cornell University that supports
upper atmospheric research at the Jicamarca Radio Observatory. Operated by the
Geophysical Institute of Peru. Jicamarca is the equatorial anchor of the Upper
Atmospheric Facilities radar chain and is the scientific community's main source
of information about the equatorial ionosphere and upper atmosphere. Multiple
new lines of scientific inquiry will be pursued at Cornell and Jicamarca
expressly under this award. The broad goal is to quantify chemistry, transport,
energetics, and dynamics in the equatorial ionosphere with radar and optical
observations and compare the results with prevailing and emerging theories and
models. Our investigations are organized into two priority areas -understanding
the stable ionosphere and understanding the unstable ionosphere. They are driven
by specific, fundamental questions pertaining to 1) topside composition and
thermal structure, 2) F region photoelectrons, 3) E region thermodynamics, 4) D
region physics, 5) forecasting equatorial spread F, 6) understanding anomalous
plasma irregularities found in the valley region during the day and at twilight,
7) understanding the anomalous "150-km echoes", and 8) investigating meteor-
related phenomena. This research will be carried out with the implementation of
novel radar remote sensing modes and the development of enabling technologies
which exploit Jicamarca's unique capabilities.

In the course of this project, the main radar at Jicamarca and some of its
peripheral systems are to undergo upgrades and modernization to facilitate the
research outlined above. The new Integrated Plan for the NSF Upper Atmospheric
Facilities identified ten experimental requirements for facilities, and our
upgrade plans are organized along the lines of these requirements. Improvements
to our transmitters, receivers, antennas, data acquisition system, cluster
instruments, and databases will be made. Jicamarca's most important activity is
providing service to the scientific community. This entails developing observing
modes of general use or on demand for visiting or remote users, providing
observing time and collecting and archiving the data that result, providing
access to the data through an intuitive and accessible database, and allowing
real-time access to the data to the greatest extent possible. Jicamarca is
taking steps to improve community service with plans to 1) implement common
programs for standard incoherent scatter data acquisition modes, 2) streamline
the scheduling process, 3) unify the numerous databases used to distribute
Jicamarca data, 4) improve and expand real-time analysis and diagnostic
capabilities, and 5) improve facility visibility and transparency.

In terms of broader significance, the study of the Earth's ionosphere in general
and the equatorial ionosphere in particular, aims to better understand the
adverse effects it has on systems on which our technological society
increasingly depends. The effects include the disruption of satellite-based
communication and navigation systems like GPS, interference with terrestrial HF
communication and over-the-horizon (OTH) radar systems, and the production of
artifacts in synthetic aperture (SAR) and other kinds of radar imagery.
Meteoroids of the size observed at Jicamarca could also pose a threat to space
vehicles and habitats. Equatorial spread F (ESF) is nature's attempt to release
free energy bound up in the ionospheric configuration near the equator, which
becomes unstably stratified at twilight. The release involves plasma dynamics
occurring over scale sizes ranging from centimeters to hundreds of kilometers,
producing rapid flows and deep plasma depletions; these plasma irregularities
function as a diffraction screen for radio signals passing through it.

Jicamarca's mission also complements the primary mission of Cornell University,
which is education. Cornell and other undergraduate, graduate, and professional
students benefit from research at the observatory through direct participation
in advanced research projects as well as through additions to the engineering
curriculum. Societal impact comes largely through education and career
development in the strategic area of radar remote sensing and also through
technological and mathematical contributions to other disciplines in aeronomy,
space physics, radio science, and astronomy.