* 0905399
* CSR:Medium:Collaborative Research: Stochastically Robust Resource Allocation for Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Howard Siegel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,042,470.00

Stochastically Robust Resource Allocation for
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallel,
distributed, and Internet-based computing, communication, and information
systems are heterogeneous mixtures of machines and networks. They frequently
experience degraded performance due to uncertainties, such as unexpected machine
failures, changes in system workload, or inaccurate estimates of system
parameters. It is important for system performance to be robust against
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;What does it mean for a computer system to be ?robust??
How can robustness be described? How does one determine if a claim of robustness
is true, or if a system will fail? How can one decide which of two systems is
more robust? These are the types of issues we address in this project, with our
team of faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate students from Colorado
State University and the University of Colorado, and colleagues in industry
(DigitalGlobe) and a national laboratory (NCAR, National Center for Atmospheric
Research).&lt;br/&gt;We are designing models, metrics, mathematical and
algorithmic tools, and strategies for (1) deriving system resource management
schemes that are robust, and (2) quantifying the probability of meeting
performance requirements given uncertainties. We are validating our research by
working with DigitalGlobe, which supplies images to Google Maps and Microsoft
Virtual Earth, and NCAR, whose research activities include the prediction of
severe and catastrophic weather. The robustness concepts being developed have
broad applicability, and will significantly contribute to meeting national needs
to build and maintain robust information technology infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;