* 0905958
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Benjamin Blackman, Blackman Benjamin K
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Environmental
contributions to gene expression evolution during local adaptation and gene
family expansion" for Benjamin Blackman. The host institution for this research
is Duke University and the sponsoring scientist is John Willis.

Evolutionary changes in gene regulation often play important roles in how
natural populations adapt to their local habitats and also how different copies
of the same gene persist after duplication. This research examines how variation
in gene expression contributes to habitat adaptation and gene family
diversification in the yellow monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus. Next-generation
sequencing technology is being used to assess variation in gene expression
observed in Mimulus grown across a variety of habitats: coastal areas with high
soil salinity, inland dry habitats, and hybrid plants, reared both in
greenhouses and in the wild. Analyzing expression on a genomic scale in multiple
environmental conditions provides insight into three questions regarding how the
environment and gene expression evolution interact. First, how are mutations
affecting environmental regulation of gene expression distributed in the genome
relative to the position of the gene they regulate? Second, how are ancestral
and evolved environmental responses in gene expression related? Finally, to what
extent do gene families diverge with respect to expression in different
environments?

Training objectives include learning laboratory, computational, and programming
skills necessary for collecting, analyzing, and distributing genome-scale
datasets. Broader impacts include an important database (an initial expression
atlas for Mimulus) and new bioinformatics tools for analyzing gene expression
patterns. This research also advances knowledge about the molecular basis of two
important agronomic traits, responses to drought and salt stress.