* 0905236
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Fixing Real Bugs in Real Programs Using Evolutionary Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Stephanie Forrest, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Fixing software bugs is a difficult and time-consuming process, accounting for
up to 90% of the lifetime cost of a typical program. Because the number of
defects outstrips the resources available for repairing them, most software is
shipped with both known and unknown bugs. All previous approaches to debugging
multiple types of defects have been manual. This research will develop a fully
automated method for repairing bugs in existing software, thus reducing some of
the cost of software maintenance.

The research will be broadly applicable, targeting off-the-shelf, legacy
applications created without program annotations or special coding practices.
The technical focus of the work is an automated repair approach using
evolutionary algorithms. Program variants are evolved, using analogues of
biological processes such as mutation, until one is found that both retains
required functionality and avoids the defect. Standard software test cases are
used to represent the bug and to encode program requirements. Generated repairs
can be presented to developers or applied to the program directly. Significant
potential outcomes include: an automated program repair methodology and freely
available tools; advances in program analyses; advances in evolutionary
algorithms; significant efforts in outreach and education; and dissemination of
the results.