* 0905229
* Microstructure and Mechanical Behavior of FeNiMnAl Eutectic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 09/30/2013
* USD 387,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The objective of this proposal is to understand and model the microstructure and
deformation mechanisms controlling the strength and ductility as a function of
temperature and strain rate for different lamellar spacings in a recently-
discovered, high-strength, ductile, two-phase, FeNiMnAl eutectic alloy,
Fe30Ni20Mn35Al15, using state-of-the-art techniques. At Dartmouth College, work
will focus on microstructural characterization, mechanical testing, determining
deformation mechanisms and modeling. Microchemical measurements using a LEAP and
microstructural characterization of interfaces using a Hitachi 3300 HRTEM will
be performed through collaborations at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. While
the work is focused on a particular eutectic alloy, it is expected that the
resulting experimental observation-based modeling will have applicability to
eutectic alloys as a whole providing a transformative paradigm for improving the
strength and ductility of polycrystalline lamellar microstructures.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The aim of this project is to understand the deformation mechanisms controlling
the strength and ductility of a recently-discovered, high-strength, ductile,
FeNiMnAl alloy, a material that could potentially be used in high-temperature
power plant applications. The work will use a variety of advanced materials
characterization techniques both at Dartmouth College and at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. The project will also evaluate existing models of strength
and ductility of similar materials and develop new models based on the
experimentally-observed deformation mechanisms with a view to developing a
paradigm for how to improve the strength and ductility of both FeNiMnAl alloys
and alloys with similar microstructures. The results of the research will be
published in refereed journals, presented at conferences, and documented on a
web page. The project will lead to the training of both a Ph.D. student and
several undergraduates. In spring 2008, Dartmouth's Thayer School of Engineering
launched a Ph.D. "Innovation Program" designed to teach students the skills
needed to be effective in the innovation process. Innovation fellowship funding
is available to support the student's research after the 3rd year of their Ph.D.
The undergraduates, who will integrate closely with the Ph.D. student's studies,
will be supported by Dartmouth's nationally-honoured Women In Science Project or
Dartmouth Presidential Scholarships. In addition, a DOD/NSF-funded summer
student will work on the project each year.