* 0905842
* The Influence of Nanostructure and Pressure on the Properties of Low and Negative Thermal Expansion Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Angus Wilkinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2012
* USD 433,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Thermal expansion plays a very important role in determining
if a material will be suitable for a particular application. The proposed work
will lead to an enhanced understanding of both structure property relationships
in low and negative thermal expansion (NTE) materials, and strategies for
controlling thermal expansion. The pressure dependence of thermal expansion (TE)
in a variety of low and negative TE materials will be examined to establish the
factors that lead to highly pressure dependent coefficients of thermal expansion
(CTEs) in such materials. It is hypothesized that low pressure phase transitions
in NTE materials will lead to the quite widespread occurrence of extreme
pressure sensitivity. The pressure dependence of CTEs is a design consideration
for composites where a NTE filler may experience stresses. The control of
thermal expansion, by modifying the O:F ratio, in oxyfluorides with a ReO3
framework structure, will be examined and the underlying structure property
relationships established by separately interrogating the response of M-F-M and
M-O-M links to temperature and pressure using total scattering methods.
Substitution of fluoride for oxide, as a means of controlling thermal expansion,
is an unexplored arena with great potential for interesting findings. The local
structures of AX2O7 (A - Zr, Hf; X - P, V) will be examined using total
scattering to better understand their high temperature phase transitions and how
the nanostructure (local structure) of their disordered high temperature phases
can lead to low or negative thermal expansion, as only the disordered forms of
these materials display interesting expansion characteristics

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The thermal expansion characteristics of a material play
a very important role in determining if it is suitable for use in a wide variety
of applications. The proposed work will lead to an enhanced understanding of
strategies for controlling thermal expansion, and the preparation of new
materials. This will be of value in the search for new useful engineering
materials. As an integral part of this work, graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in a wide variety of synthetic and materials characterization
techniques, introduced to important concepts in materials chemistry/science, and
engaged in activities that develop professional skills. These skills are of
considerable value to the US economy. A significant component of the proposed
experimental work will be conducted using major x-ray and neutron scattering
facilities located at Department of Energy (DOE) national laboratories. The work
at DOE laboratories enhances the educational experience of students, and leads
to collaborations that professionally benefit both university and government
laboratory employees.