* 0905799
* Current Density Based Electrical Impedance Tomography, an Emerging Hybrid Imaging Technique
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Alexandru Tamasan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 140,545.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his collaborators
study a new non-invasive method for imaging the electrical conductivity of the
inside of the body. Inner knowledge of the conductivity has found applications
in various fields ranging from Medicine, Geophysics, Environmental Sciences, to
Nondestructive Testing and Mine Detection, to mention only some. The model is
based on the Maxwell system and combines methods from Electrical Impedance
Tomography and Current Density Imaging. The novelty lies in the augmentation of
the Maxwell model with the knowledge of the magnitude of the current density
field generated while maintaining a voltage at the boundary. The latter data is
currently obtained by using Magnetic Resonance measurements of the magnetic
field. Mathematically, the problem is to study minimal surfaces in a singular
Riemannian space with a metric determined by the magnitude of the current
density field. Alternatively, the problem can be reduced to a Non-smooth
Optimization problem. Taking advantage of the tools from the areas of Inverse
Problems, Partial Differential Equations, Riemannian Geometry, Geometric Measure
Theory and Non-smooth Optimization the investigator and his collaborators aim to
change the existing and accepted theories and provide mathematical support and
methods to image inner conductivity accurately and with high
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation belongs to the current
government research priority on Information Technology. The results of this
study are to produce new methodologies for non-invasive imaging of the interior
of conductive bodies, such as the human body. The benefits to society are
important since one componenent of the results of this study concerns the
affordability of the new methods applied to Medical Imaging. More precisely, the
new technology is to complement the classical Magnetic Resonance Imaging scan,
method which is fairly expensive at the moment. This investigation integrates
research and education in two ways. On the one hand, an integrate part is the
training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, including from
the under-represented categories of students. On the other hand, the
investigator is concurrently designing a special topics course, whose scope is
based on this study.