* 0905184
* Instrument Development and Data Analysis in LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Warren Johnson, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,605,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) consists of 4 km
baseline detectors in Livingston, Louisiana, and Hanford, Washington, and an
additional 2 km detector in Hanford. LIGO's operating principle is to use
precision laser interferometry to measure the relative motion of seismically-
isolated test mass mirrors due to the extremely small forces from gravitational
waves (GWs) emitted by distant astrophysical events. Louisiana State University
(LSU) is located approximately 40 km from LIGO Livingston Observatory (LLO) and
has a long-term collaborative relationship with LIGO as a member of the LIGO
Scientic Collaboration. The LSU group is heavily involved in the Detector
Characterization group, the Calibration Committee, and the groups searching for
gravitational waves from Coalescing Binary Compact systems, and for waveform-
independent searches for Burst signals. In a broad context, the funded
activities involve LSU faculty, postdocs, graduate students and undergraduates
at LIGO, bringing LSU people the benefits of working with experienced LIGO and
LIGO Scientic Collaboration (LSC) scientists, and with apparatus that allows an
excellent possibility of signicant scientic discovery. LSU shares its libraries,
networking facilities, and workshops. LIGO personnel participate in the LSU
Physics and Astronomy departments' colloquia and astrophysics discussion groups,
and often work directly with students. This impact on LLO, a close and extensive
relationship with a nearby research university, is expected to be strengthened
with continued collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this award
provides funds to(1) Characterize LIGO data to be taken in 2009-2010 with
Enhanced Detectors (S6 science run), monitoring the noise characteristics and
short transients; (2) Continue contributions to the detector calibration team
for the calibration of data in S6 with Enhanced LIGO, developing methods to
improve the precision of the calibration and the monitoring of systems changes
in time that affect calibration; (3) Search the LIGO data to be taken in S6 for
inspiraling compact objects, and for unmodeled burst sources; (4) Contribute to
reducing the technological risk in the Advanced LIGO upgrade by participating in
the commissioning, and performance studies of optical readout and seismic
isolation systems in Enhanced LIGO.