* 0905867
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jeremy Brown, Brown                   Jeremy         M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "New Statistical
Approaches to Inferring Phylogenies with Genomic Data" for Jeremy Brown. The
host institution for this research is the University of California - Berkeley
and the sponsoring scientist is John Huelsenbeck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA
sequence data are being gathered at an extraordinary pace, which offers a wealth
of new information for inferring the evolutionary relationships (phylogenies)
between living things. Understanding these relationships is crucial both in
answering basic biological questions about organismal evolution and for a number
of applied problems related to human health and well-being (e.g., infectious
disease transmission and biodiversity conservation). However, the problem of
inferring phylogenies with such massive data sets presents unique analytical
challenges. This research develops new statistical approaches to analyze genomic
data with more accuracy and efficiency. In particular, this research designs new
models of DNA sequence evolution that are able to flexibly incorporate variation
in evolutionary forces such as mutation, selection, and drift, which can be
markedly different across genes. This research also develops metrics for
assessing when statistical methods are likely to be misleading and return
incorrect phylogenetic estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training objectives
of this work include the development of skills at the intersection of
statistics, computer science, genetics, bioinformatics, and organismal biology.
Such an interdisciplinary view is essential to solving longstanding, important
problems in biology with the new flood of genomic data. Expected are improved
methods of analysis that are used in thousands of studies per year, resulting in
better answers to a range of important biological questions.