* 0905059
* Collaborative Research: Petascale algorithms for multi-body, fluid-structure interactions in viscous incompressible flows
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dongwook Lee, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 08/31/2013
* USD 449,530.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
collaborative study is to develop petascale tools applicable to multi-body,
fluid-structure interactions in laminar and turbulent flows. Numerical
simulations of fluid flows interacting with dynamically, complex-shaped, moving
boundaries are among the most challenging problems in computational mechanics.
Petascale machines in the near future can tackle large-scale fluid problems
involving the interaction of millions of deformable bodies but involve two
significant challenges: i) achievement of high-performance on multi-core
processing nodes with small memory per core and ii) development of strategies to
address the complexity of load balancing and scaling due to the sheer number of
processing elements. In the proposed work a multidisciplinary team from the
University of Maryland and the University of Chicago with expertise in
computational mechanics, multiscale modeling and parallel computing will address
the above issues and develop scalable algorithms and software. The PIs will
directly target applications in dense suspensions of deformable particles, such
as whole-blood simulations from first principles. The proposed work will make
available to the broader computational mechanics community an open source fluid-
structure interaction, petascale solver. This will enable research on unexplored
problems in complex suspensions of rigid and/or deformable particles that are
ubiquitous in biosystems. The results of the blood flow simulations, or example,
will enable the development of better hemolysis and thrombosis models in the
short term and therefore blood-compatible cardiovascular devices in the long
term. This can have significant impact on healthcare. In terms of education, the
project will provide training and research opportunities for high school and
undergraduate research assistants, as well as additional summer outreach
internships.