* 0905381
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Effect of Subglottal Resonances on Machine and Human Speaker Normalization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Abeer Alwan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2015
* USD 639,694.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Despite large acoustic differences in the speech of various talkers, humans are
generally able to understand each other quickly and easily. The mechanisms by
which humans map such variability onto a set of phonemes has been the subject of
research for more than 50 years. This "speaker normalization" problem has
generally been thought of in terms of normalizing the formant frequencies of a
particular speaker with a reference set of formants. In this project, a novel
approach to speaker normalization is explored, in which not formants but
subglottal resonances (SGRs) are normalized. SGRs have previously been shown to
define a set of frequency bands within which formants may vary, yet retaining
the same phonemic vowel quality. Normalizing SGRs (and associated frequency
bands) therefore reduces formant variability in an effective way. In this
project, effects of SGR normalization on automatic speech recognition (ASR)
performance are evaluated for both adult and child speakers of English and
Spanish. In parallel, effects on human speech perception in multi-talker
conditions are explored. Results are expected to improve ASR performance and
shed light on human speech production and perception. The project will result in
speech databases (including direct recordings of SGR acoustics) and ASR tools,
which are critically useful for research in speech production, perception,
speaker identification, and speech processing algorithms for cochlear implants
and multi-lingual ASR. The collaboration in Engineering, Linguistics, Speech &
Hearing, and Psychology facilitates a multidisciplinary learning environment.
Publications, results, databases, and tools will be disseminated to the research
community.