* 0905530
* TC:Medium:Collaborative Research: Technological Support for Improving Election Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 482,000.00

This project is developing and evaluating the application of iterative process
improvement technology to assure the privacy, security, reliability, and
trustworthiness of elections, which are the very cornerstone of democracy. The
focus of the project is to locate mismatches between existing voting systems and
the processes that are currently using them in the conduct of elections. These
mismatches can result in vulnerabilities or inaccuracy in elections. This
project demonstrates how to remediate such vulnerabilities through the use of
iterative process improvement. The methodology uncovers vulnerabilities by
modeling processes and examining how discrepancies between the characteristics
of these processes and the behaviors of voting systems that are used by the
processes can lead to such vulnerabilities. In this way, this project is making
a novel and important contribution to defending one of the most critical
processes of democracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests the results on
the election processes and systems of Yolo County. Part of the research is to
model that county's processes using the process definition language, and
examining what these processes require and expect from the voting systems they
use. The existing voting systems can then be examined to determine whether they
meet the requirements and expectations of the processes using them. Where
mismatches occur, the vulnerabilities created by such mismatches can be
assessed, improvements suggested, and the methodology can show how the suggested
improvements address the mismatches and remove the vulnerabilities.