* 0905175
* Molecular Interfaces to Heterostructures of Low Dimensional Carbon
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 375,153.00

Technical: Doping and carrier scattering are of fundamental importance to
materials being considered for electronics and sensor application. The ability
to synthesize and fabricate materials of reduced dimensionality has provided new
platforms with which established performance limits can be surpassed. When
materials are of atomic thickness, as is the case with graphene and carbon
nanotubes, they also represent the ultimate limit in terms of sensitivity to the
local chemical environment. Hence, while much potential exists, experimentally
observed properties can be and often are altered by the environment. This
project, supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) Program and
Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) Program, addresses the effects of
ambient surrounding and interfaces on the observed properties of low-dimensional
carbon (graphene and nanotubes) - to distinguish intrinsic characteristics and
to elucidate how extrinsic factors alter them. Studies on interactions with
substrates can also lead to systems where the effects of mechanical strain can
be explored. Successful implementation of this project is expected to lead to
new insights into mechanical distortions and Kohn anomaly effects that lead to
static and dynamic band gap opening in graphene and metallic carbon nanotubes.
Non-technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials sciences with high technological relevance. Insights gained on
chemical and mechanical effects at the low-dimensional carbon/polymer interfaces
will enable emerging areas such as flexible electronics and transparent
conductors. Studies on strained crystalline interfaces and mechanical effects
may lead to accessible routes to tuning the band structure of both graphene and
nanotubes opening up new directions in carbon-based high-performance
electronics. The interdisciplinary nature of this project provides educational
and training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate researchers who
will become the future leaders at the forefront of science and engineering. The
results of this project also provide new concepts and demonstration materials
for enriching course curricula at the PI's institution and beyond.