* 0905686
* Multi-Scale Theory Guided Development of Transformative Polymeric and Dendritic Electroactive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* BRUCE ROBINSON, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2013
* USD 399,959.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Real-time, time-dependent density functional theory
and pseudo-atomistic Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics calculations will be used to
guide the design of the molecular and supermolecular (nano/mesoscale) structure
of new polymeric and dendritic materials for the realization of transformative
electroactive (nonlinear optical, optoelectronic, and electronic) properties.
New experimental techniques will be developed and used to verify theoretical
prediction of properties. New processing methodologies such as laser-assisted
electric field poling and the use of charge-controlling interfacial layers
between disparate materials will be investigated. Materials developed will be
integrated with silicon photonics and other emerging technologies to demonstrate
technological gains and to stimulate knowledge and technology transfer to
industry. The resultant theory-guided protocol will implemented through material
synthesis, characterization, processing, and prototype device fabrication and
evaluation. Anticipated outcomes include a dramatically improved understanding
of soft matter and nanoscale engineering together with improved technological
performance of materials related to applications such as chipscale integration
of electronics and photonics. The fundamental and applied nature of the research
is of great interest to students and strong collaborations have been developed
with minority serving institutions as well as undergraduate/graduate programs at
the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is development of a systematic
approach for the transformative improvement of the properties of soft matter
(e.g., organic) nonlinear optical, optoelectronic, and electronic materials
based on integration of state-of-the-art quantum (molecular scale) and
statistical (nano/meso/macroscopic scale) mechanical theoretical guidance.
Preliminary research has demonstrated that an understanding of the direction-
dependent interaction among complex molecular components can be used to achieve
an exponential (Moore?s Law) improvement in properties such as electro-optic
activity (the ability to interconvert electrical and optical information as in
downloading information from a computer to the Internet). Potential
technological impacts include enabling chipscale integration of electronic and
photonic (optical) information technologies, photovoltaic devices with
significantly improved efficiencies, and a new generation of sensor
technologies. The organization structure of this effort is a small group of
researchers with interdisciplinary expertise that coordinates, in an end-to-end
manner, theoretical design, material synthesis, material characterization,
material processing, and device fabrication. This research and development
environment has proven attractive to students and to industry. Strong
interactions with minority serving institutions and with industry have been
developed yielding new products and workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;