* 0905505
* HCC: Medium: Haptic Simulation Design for Motor Rehabilitation and Skill Training
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Yuan-Shin Lee, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 654,373.00

The PI seeks to design and investigate novel features and strategies for use of
virtual reality based haptic simulations to retrain impaired motor functions and
train new fine motor skills in veterans (medics) with traumatic brain injury
(TBI). Previous approaches to haptic simulation design have typically focused on
completeness of presentation relative to reality. However, simulators may be
used for many different tasks, so completeness may not ensure usefulness. The
PIs argue that the role of the simulation for a user and its required
functionality are the more important design questions, and that consideration of
critical applications like motor skill training in haptic simulation design will
promote effective design from a human performance perspective. Thus, they
propose a cognitive-oriented approach to haptic simulation design and
evaluation. In this project, the PIs will test their ideas by designing and
prototyping advanced VR haptic simulators for drawing and surgical tasks. The
simulations will be defined in terms of the type and resolution of (medical)
data sources used for virtual object modeling, the type of visual and force
presentation for motor skill and brain function assessment, and the approach to
graphic and haptic rendering of the simulation. Through human factors
experimentation with the simulations, the PIs will also assess interventional
strategies for motor development, including virtual haptic aids (e.g., force
boundaries and potentials) and force graduation across rehabilitation trials.
Finally, they will validate the effect of the haptic simulations on
neurocognitive and motor performance using behavioral indices and advanced
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Cognitive tasks analyses will be conducted
with expert neuropsychologists and surgeons on psychomotor task performance and
surgical operations to inform the simulation design process. Simulation design
manipulations will include source data reduction through approximation of point-
cloud data using graphical methods, development of a haptic-based motor skill
training workstation with an effective human-computer interface, and
optimization of visual and haptic representation using GPU-based graphics and a
smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) model for reduction of CPU overhead in
haptic object rendering with force feedback. The simulation design will also
reflect results on baseline motor performance and VR drawing and surgical
simulator practice. This testing will be followed by fMRI of subjects in motor
tasks in order to examine activation of brain regions mediating motor control.
Subsequently, a series of motor training sessions will be conducted using the
haptic simulators. Subjects will be exposed to the various settings of the
simulation design parameters along with the virtual haptic aids and gradual
reduction of force feedback, relative to nominal forces, across sessions. Post-
therapy motor and simulator tests, as well as follow-up fMRI scanning, will be
conducted. Motor recovery and neuroimaging of brain regions mediating motor
performance will provide evidence of the effectiveness of the simulation design
and rehabilitation efficacy. The PIs' hypothesize that experience with a haptic
simulation design based on motor skill training demands and human performance
metrics will accelerate skill development relative to a fidelity-centered
approach to design. They also expect that haptic-simulator experience will
improve fine motor control and motor planning (praxis), that experience on the
drawing-simulation device will generalize to improved performance on the
surgical-simulation device, and that brain blood flow will increase in regions
mediating motor control.

Broader Impacts: This work will make contributions to the design of computer
graphics and haptic rendering, in terms of better understanding of optimal
computational modeling for VR haptic simulation. It will also advance the state
of the art in computer-based therapeutic approaches to motor skill development
with haptic simulation, and enhance our understanding of brain-behavior
relationships governing motor output and the nature of neural recovery following
motor rehabilitation. Improvements in existing VR-based rehabilitation
strategies for motor and praxis impairment in individuals suffering from TBI
will be identified; rehabilitation treatment regimens will be identified that
may have implications for various populations suffering from brain injuries
(e.g., stroke patients).