* 0905060
* Collaborative Research: NSCC/SA:  Behavioral Insights into National Security Issues
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Catherine Eckel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 10/31/2013
* USD 440,183.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the wake of recent terrorist
activities, a number of game theoretic models have been developed around
terrorism, counterterrorism, prevention and security. However, very few of these
theories have been tested for behavioral accuracy, either in the field or in the
wind-tunnel environment of the experimental laboratory. This study uses the
methodology of experimental economics to test three types of theories that
capture key features of security decisions. The first set of experiments
investigates attack and defense games, where two players allocate limited
resources over a fixed set of targets, and the side with the most resources on a
target wins it. The second set tests theories of cooperation among countries in
the decision whether to pursue terrorist organizations, protect their own
territory, or do nothing, a situation that has been modeled as a nested
prisoner's dilemma game. Through the experiments the investigators will examine
how these games are played and explore institutions (such as trade sanctions or
cost sharing rules) that have the potential to enhance cooperation. The third
set of experiments addresses suicide attacks. Such attacks are often motivated
by retaliation for economic inequality between nations. The researchers will
create unequal groups in the lab, and vary the extent of the inequality and the
strength of group identity. Participants in the disadvantaged group can
volunteer to sacrifice their earnings to improve the performance of their own
group. The researchers will assess how sacrificing behavior changes in response
to variation in the group properties. In summary, this research addresses the
question of whether (and when) these theories provide good descriptions of how
people act, and suggests improvements and domain limitations to increase their
prescriptive power. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity stems from
the development and testing of games designed to model strategic situations in
national security. On the development side, this study refines existing games to
better capture specific underlying strategic situations, and, for the third
category, develops new games to capture the incentives to volunteer in between-
group competition. On the testing side, the experiments represent the first data
on any of these games, and thus contribute to knowledge of how individuals act
in strategic situations. The goal is to identify robust psychological
regularities which are likely to apply across a large segment of the population.
The broader impacts of the proposed activity stem from increased understanding
of how individuals act in these strategic situations. This enables improved
decision making by the US and its allies, by identifying and avoiding common
mistakes that lead individuals to make sub-optimal decisions. It also improves
decision making by identifying the mistakes enemies are likely to make, and
helping to describe strategies to exploit them.