* 0905322
* Investigation of the Thermoelectric Performance of PbTe-Ag2Se Derived Pseudo-solid Solutions, Nanostructures and Nano-composites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Fivos Drymiotis, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2011
* USD 200,977.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project investigates structure formation and electrical and thermal
transport properties of PbTe-Ag2-äSe alloys. Solid-solutions of PbTe-Ag2-äSe
display extremely interesting structural behavior, low electrical resistivity
and very low thermal conductivity. Hence, this system has the potential to give
rise to a new state-of ?the-art thermoelectric material for power generation
applications. In addition to the favorable transport properties exhibited by the
system, the resulting alloys are stable and mechanically robust thus allowing
excessive manipulation for optimization of the thermoelectric performance. It
has been observed that dense solid-solutions of PbTe-Ag2-äSe (1:1 molar ratio)
result in a predominantly single phase alloy which crystallizes in the NaCl
structure. Stabilization of a predominantly cubic single phase alloy in the
presence of such a high level of structural disorder is remarkable. PbTe appears
to dictate structure formation from the melt and not Ag2Se - which stabilizes in
an orthorhombic structure at low temperatures and cubic at high temperatures.
The PbTe-Ag2-äSe alloys are degenerate semiconductors whose electrical transport
correlates with Ag concentration. Preliminary measurements on several samples
with ä = 0.1 showed p-type behavior and a high-temperature (~ 400 oC) total
thermal-conductivity value êT< 0.6 W/m-K. This work will investigate the
structure formation of these alloys using x-ray diffraction and microscopy, and
study the effects of structure manipulation, i.e. further alloying, nano-
structuring and nano-composites, on the thermoelectric properties. This research
will provide excellent training for graduate and undergraduate students in
material synthesis and characterization.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This proposal will utilize solid-solutions, nano-structuring and band-gap
engineering in order to obtain a high efficiency thermoelectric alloy for power
generation applications. Development of thermoelectric materials for power
generation is an essential component in our scientific effort to achieve energy
independence and security. Thermoelectric materials convert wasted heat to
electricity, which implies that any heat source, either man-made (automotives)
or natural (hot springs) can be utilized for production of electrical energy.
The presence of a temperature gradient across the thermoelectric will give rise
to a voltage. Thermoelectric materials also offer the mechanical advantage of
absence of moving parts, which eliminates the need for lubrication and frequent
maintenance. This work will research the structure formation and high
temperature thermoelectric performance of PbTe-Ag2-äSe alloys. These alloys have
been shown to have very low thermal conductivity and good electrical
conductivity. Both are needed in order to obtain an efficient thermoelectric
material. Additionally, the high temperature thermoelectric performance will be
optimized through the chemical and mechanical processing of these alloys. This
research will provide excellent training for graduate and undergraduate students
in material synthesis and characterization. One graduate student and two
undergraduate students will be working on this project and will be involved in
all aspects of this investigation. The PI actively encourages the participation
of women and minorities in his research.



