* 0905395
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integral-Equation-Based Fast Algorithms and Graph-Theoretic Methods for Large-Scale Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Shidong Jiang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The phenomenal advance in computer technology in terms of processing speed and
capacity, closely described by Moore's law, in the last four decades has been
outpaced by the explosive amount of data that are used to describe more
realistic models in scientific computing. For instance, the number of unknowns
in a linear system has grown from hundreds in the past to tens of millions
nowadays. Fast algorithms such as the celebrated fast multipole method (FMM)
have provided a computational tool for narrowing the gap. At the same time,
there is a great need and challenge to develop better computation techniques and
utilize the present and emerging computers, with the gain in speed up to a
couple of orders of magnitude. The goal of the proposed research is to advance
computational theories and techniques, in order to meet the demand and challenge
for large scale simulations of complex systems in scientific, medical and
engineering studies.

The research team proposed to investigate, innovate and integrate the key
simulation steps, from analytic re-formulation of system models with complex
geometries to combinatorial optimization in mapping numerical algorithms to
computing architectures. Many traditional models are formulated in terms of
linear or nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) with boundary
conditions on complex geometries. By the work of other researchers and principal
investigators, integral equation (IE) formulations have lead to better numerical
algorithms in both efficiency and stability, and more importantly enabled
certain important large-scale simulations. It is proposed first to study the
reformulation of traditional PDE models into IE models, as a direct and
analytical approach to innovative algorithm design. Next, preconditioning
techniques will be studied as an indirect and stabilization approach.
Furthermore, Graph-theoretic methods will be applied to optimize the FMM-based
algorithms on various modern computer architectures, especially, parallel
architectures. These key components will be studied in conjunction, not in
isolation.

The intellectual merits of the proposed work are three-fold. It sheds lights on
(1) the model reformulation into IEs of the second kind as a fundamental
analytic-algorithmic approach to accelerating and stabilizing numerical
computation, (2) the connection between reformulation and preconditioning, and
(3) on the mutual dependence of numerical algorithms and computer architectures.
The proposed work will have broader impacts on various applications through
timely dissemination with demonstration of case studies. Three application areas
of specific concern are electrostatics calculation in molecular dynamics
simulations, computational fluid dynamics, and the study of oxygen delivery in
tissues and tumors via microvascular networks. The proposed work involves
interdisciplinary research collaboration and cultivation of young and new
researchers with multi-disciplinary backgrounds. Finally, the findings and
algorithms will be embodied in open source high performance software to
facilitate research computing by and large and to be used in classrooms.