* 0905602
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Securing Concurrency in Modern Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vitaly Shmatikov, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 799,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concurrency-related vulnerabilities are
pervasive in modern computing&lt;br/&gt;systems. Concurrency exploits include
time-of-check-to-time-of-use&lt;br/&gt;(TOCTTOU) race conditions in file
systems, attacks on signal handlers,&lt;br/&gt;and evasive malware that uses
concurrency to escape sandboxing&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms. As processors feature
ever more parallelism, and&lt;br/&gt;computers process more of our sensitive
data, defending against&lt;br/&gt;concurrency attacks is a key challenge for the
coming decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal is to protect legitimate
applications from concurrency&lt;br/&gt;attacks when they access system
resources (e.g., prevent TOCTTOU&lt;br/&gt;attacks on file accesses and
exploitable race conditions in signal&lt;br/&gt;handlers). The objective is to
provide application programmers with&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and policies for
synchronizing access to system resources&lt;br/&gt;so they can avoid
unintentional vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal is to
provide strong confinement of untrusted code in&lt;br/&gt;the presence of
concurrency, i.e., blocking intentionally malicious&lt;br/&gt;behavior. Today's
malware abuses concurrency mechanisms to bypass and&lt;br/&gt;circumvent
containment mechanisms like reference monitors and system&lt;br/&gt;call
wrappers. Providing robust system support for containing&lt;br/&gt;malicious
code is a critical challenge in intrusion detection
and&lt;br/&gt;prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern computing systems
fundamentally depend on concurrency for their&lt;br/&gt;performance and
functionality. Making sure that concurrency is used&lt;br/&gt;securely is
essential for building a trusted cyber infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;This research
will have a significant impact on the practical&lt;br/&gt;development of secure
software, and enable security-critical&lt;br/&gt;applications to realize the
performance benefits of today's highly&lt;br/&gt;parallel
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;