* 0905973
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Loyal Goff, Goff                    Loyal          A
* Fellowship Award
* Julie Dickerson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. This
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Small non-coding RNAs
guide epigenetic regulation at target genomic regions" for Loyal Goff. The host
institution for this research is Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the
sponsoring scientist is Manolis Kellis.

Within the eukaryotic cell, including human cells, DNA is densely wrapped around
large protein complexes called histones. Various chemical modifications to these
protein complexes can determine whether a neighboring gene is turned on or off.
This 'epigenetic regulation' by histone modifications is one mechanism by which
cells control the timing and synchronization of gene expression. While the
proteins that mediate these modifications are well characterized, the ways by
which they are recruited to target DNA sequences remains elusive. Recent studies
have suggested that small RNA molecules may be involved in regulation of histone
modifications. Small RNAs have the potential to interact with histone modifying
proteins and scan through the genome to guide these proteins to target specific
genomic regions. This research identifies and describes the small RNAs produced
during stem cell differentiation, a normal growth process in which dramatic
changes in histones take place. The regulation in this system appears to be
novel in the way in which the cells turn genes on and off in a coordinated way.
The research uses experimental and computational approaches to locate and
describe the small RNAs produced during early cell differentiation by searching
for regions of intersection between the discovered chromatin-associated small
RNAs and specific histone modifications, determined from publicly available
epigenomic maps.

The training goals are to acquire the computational and informatics skills for
the conduct of the research and to provide a solid foundation to begin an
academic career that combines computational and experimental biology. Broader
impacts include providing both software and data necessary to explore deep
sequencing libraries of smRNA sequences and how these sequences affect chromatin
availability. There is also a strong focus on teaching and mentoring developing
computational biologists.