* 0905345
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jose Colon-Gaud, Col¾n-Gaud              JosÚ           C
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2012
* USD 65,251.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Jose
C. Colon-Gaud is "Food webs and energy flow in tropical vs. temperate headwater
streams: roles of consumers in ecosystem function." The host institution for
this research is the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras under the sponsorship
of Dr. Alonso Ramirez.

Much of our knowledge of tropical streams has been based on a few short-term
studies that generally focus on consumer diversity or abundance estimates, and
comprehensive investigations linking consumers to ecosystem processes are
generally lacking. Consumers play an important role in the functioning of
ecosystems and can influence processes such as nutrient cycling, decomposition,
and energy flow. In light of declining biodiversity, understanding the roles of
consumers in ecosystems has become a central theme in ecological research. This
study is developing quantitative food webs for headwater streams in the Luquillo
Long Term Ecological Research site in northeastern Puerto Rico by quantifying
major pathways of energy flow among resources and consumers. This is access the
overall importance of different food resources as drivers of community
structure.

The training objectives for this research include: 1) learning new experimental
techniques in the areas of analytical chemistry, ecological stoichiometry, and
food web ecology to assess the roles of consumer in ecosystem processes; 2) gain
experience in the development and coordination of large-scale experiments; 3)
mentoring young scientists through participation in internship programs at the
University of Puerto Rico. Broader impacts include increasing the participation
of under-represented groups in research experiences in the field of ecology, as
well increasing our knowledge of understudied systems.