* 0905120
* GOALI:  Advanced NMR Studies of Fluoropolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Peter Rinaldi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 530,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this
proposal, funded by the Polymers Program of the Division of Materials Research
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, is to apply state-of-the-art
multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods to the
characterization of commercially important fluoropolymers. Over the past decade,
sculpted excitation methods have been developed to tackle problems with broad
spectral windows and collection of large proton nD-NMR datasets. These
capabilities are now a feature of state-of-the-art instruments. The
applicability of these NMR methods will be demonstrated for studying fluorine in
the structures of important fluoropolymers being developed by DuPont. The
materials to be studied include: Nafion® fluorinated ionomer or its precursor
(used as proton exchange membranes in fuel cells); Krytox® perfluoro(polyalkyl
ether) (used as performance lubricants in computer disk drives and aerospace
applications); Tedlar® poly(vinyl fluoride) (used in high performance coatings
for protection in architectural and extreme environments); and Teflon-AF® and
Viton® fluoroelastomer (used in other applications requiring the unique
properties and inertness of fluorinated materials). &lt;br/&gt;The unique
expertise and resources present in the University of Akron (UA) NMR group and
the groups at DuPont Central Research &amp; Development (DCRD) are keys to the
success of this project. The UA group has years of experience in applying nD-NMR
to the characterization of polymers. The DCRD groups provides many interesting
polymer structure problems having scientific and commercial significance,
provide access to fluoropolymer synthesis and characterization facilities, and
have expertise essential for understanding the polymer chemistry of the
materials to be studied. The collaboration with an industrial partner assures
that the results will be applied to commercially significant
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this proposal involving
collaboration between U. Akron and DuPont scientists is to apply state-of-the-
art nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods to study the structures of
commercially important fluoropolymers being developed by DuPont. The materials
to be studied include: Nafion® fluoropolymers, used in the construction of fuel
cells); Krytox® fluoropolymers, which are used as lubricants in computer disk
drives and in aerospace applications; Tedlar® fluoropolymers, which are used in
high performance coatings in architecture and for protection in extreme
environments; and Teflon-AF® and Viton® fluoroelastomers, which are used in
applications requiring their unique properties and inertness. This collaboration
with Dupont will assure that relevant problems will be studied at a fundamental
scientific level and that the results will have commercial implications.
&lt;br/&gt;After graduation, many of the students trained in this project will
continue to apply their knowledge to studies in polymer science and related
fields. The specific NMR expertise unique to the UA research group is important
to industry, as it is the only academic group in the country to focus on
advanced solution NMR studies in polymer science. Additionally, researchers at
many companies and universities have made use of the unique capabilities at the
UA to solve difficult research problems. This important resource will be
maintained through continued funding of a strong NMR research group. The
students to be initially assigned to this project are all from underrepresented
groups.