* 0905881
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,03/31/2012
* Winifred Frick, Frick                   Winifred       F
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 03/31/2012
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Application of
bioinformatics and novel visualization tools for quantifiying animal dispersal
and population dynamics of bats in the aerosphere" for Winifred Frick. The host
institution for this research is Boston University, and the sponsoring scientist
is Thomas Kunz.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Aeroecology focuses on understanding
ecological function and biological importance of organisms that rely on the
aerosphere for critical aspects of their life history. Studying behavior and
movement of volant animals (birds, bats, and arthropods) in the aerosphere
presents considerable challenges, requiring creative integration of
technological solutions for data acquisition and analysis. Remote sensing tools,
such as Doppler radar, offer much promise for investigating aeroecological
processes and dynamics at broad spatial and temporal scales. This research
applies new three-dimensional visualization algorithms to a spatially-explicit
analysis of NEXRAD radar images to model aerial dynamics of Brazilian free-
tailed bats in order to determine animal dispersal and movement patterns.
Calibration of volume-rendered 3D bat "clouds" are being developed from census
counts derived from thermal infrared imaging data to estimate aerial population
sizes and test biological hypotheses about influences of climate change on
population dynamics of Brazilian free-tailed bats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results contribute to conservation by identifying migratory corridors and
seasonal foraging areas, which will help inform decisions on where not to place
wind energy facilities, which function as mortality sinks to migratory bat
populations. Brazilian free-tailed bats perform valuable ecosystem services by
consuming metric tons of insect pests that infest cotton and corn crops. The
results predict potential economic costs of climate change on the agricultural
industry through loss of ecosystem service value of an important pest predator.
Training objectives include advancing quantitative skills in remote sensing,
visualization and imagery analysis, population modeling, and GIS.