* 0905487
* CSR:Medium:Collaborative Research: Stochastically Robust Resource Allocation for Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Richard Loft, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 31,972.00

Stochastically Robust Resource Allocation for Computing

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Parallel, distributed, and Internet-based computing, communication, and
information systems are heterogeneous mixtures of machines and networks. They
frequently experience degraded performance due to uncertainties, such as
unexpected machine failures, changes in system workload, or inaccurate estimates
of system parameters. It is important for system performance to be robust
against uncertainties. What does it mean for a computer system to be ?robust??
How can robustness be described? How does one determine if a claim of robustness
is true, or if a system will fail? How can one decide which of two systems is
more robust? These are the types of issues we address in this project, with our
team of faculty, graduate students, and undergraduate students from Colorado
State University and the University of Colorado, and colleagues in industry
(DigitalGlobe) and a national laboratory (NCAR, National Center for Atmospheric
Research). We are designing models, metrics, mathematical and algorithmic tools,
and strategies for (1) deriving system resource management schemes that are
robust, and (2) quantifying the probability of meeting performance requirements
given uncertainties. We are validating our research by working with
DigitalGlobe, which supplies images to Google Maps and Microsoft Virtual Earth,
and NCAR, whose research activities include the prediction of severe and
catastrophic weather. The robustness concepts being developed have broad
applicability, and will significantly contribute to meeting national needs to
build and maintain robust information technology infrastructures.