* 0905276
* III: Medium: Data Interoperability via Schema Mappings
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wang-Chiew Tan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,151,548.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Interoperability of heterogeneous data is a critical problem faced by every
modern enterprise that is concerned with data analysis, data migration, and data
evolution. The fundamental goal in data interoperability is to facilitate and
make transparent to end-users the extraction of information from multiple
heterogeneous data sources that reside in different locations. At the heart of
achieving data interoperability is the design and management of schema mappings.
A schema mapping is a specification of the relationship between two database
schemas. Schema mappings are the essential building blocks in specifying how
data from different sources are to be integrated into a unified format or
exchanged (i.e., translated) into a different format.

The intellectual merit of this project is the development of a solid foundation
and a suite of techniques and tools for designing, understanding, and managing
schema mappings. Earlier foundational work on schema mappings has mainly focused
on the semantics and algorithmic issues of some of the basic operators for
manipulating schema mappings with emphasis on the composition operator and the
inverse operator. While the composition operator is well understood by now, much
more remains to be done in the study of the inverse operator. One of the main
goals of this project is to investigate in depth the inverse operator and also
the difference operator, which remains largely unexplored to date. This project
addresses several fundamental questions for the inverse and the difference
operators, including the following: What is the right semantics for these two
operators? What is the exact language for expressing these operators? Are there
efficient algorithms for computing the result of the inverse operator and the
difference operator? A parallel goal of this project is the development of a set
of concepts and techniques for optimizing schema mapping and transforming more
complex schema mappings into simpler, yet equivalent, ones. The final main goal
of this project is to study the problem of using data examples to explain and
illustrate schema mappings. The design of schema mappings between two schemas
has been known to be one of the most costly and time-consuming tasks in
achieving data interoperability. Prior studies have suggested that (familiar)
data examples can be extremely powerful aids in designing schema mappings. This
project addresses the following questions: What is the right notion or notions
of illustrative data examples for schema mappings? How easy or difficult it is
to compute small examples for illustrating schema mappings? How can one
illustrate large and complex networks of schema mappings with data examples? How
can one depict the similarities and differences among multiple schema mappings?

The broader impact of this project is the development of human resources in
science and engineering through the teaching, mentoring, and research training
of graduate and undergraduate students on the foundational and system
development work of this project. Further information about publications, course
material, and software prototypes and tools developed through this project can
be found at the project web page http://datainterop.cs.ucsc.edu