* 0905798
* Complexes in low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jennifer Schultens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2013
* USD 217,414.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In "3-manifolds as viewed from the curve complex" John Hempel illustrated the
utility of the curve complex as a tool for understanding 3-manifolds. His work
introduced the techniques used in geometric group theory into the study of low-
dimensional manifolds. The Gromov hyperbolicity of the curve complex,
established by Howard Masur and Yair Minsky, provides deep insights into the
structure of the complex and the information it encodes. The fanstastic work of
Hossein Namazi, Saul Schleimer and Juan Souto deserves particular mention in
this context. In recent years, the P.I. has studied several complexes, in
particular the width complex (defined by the P.I.) and the Kakimizu complex.
These complexes shed light on many of the P.I.'s pet problems on genus, rank and
stabilization of Heegaard splittings.

The P.I. pursues research in the area of low-dimensional topology, specifically
3-manifolds. The project builds on the cross-fertilization of low-dimensional
topology and geometric group theory. The P.I. maintains several national and
international collaborations with mathematicians in the United States, Germany
and Israel. The P.I. aims to involve graduate and undergraduate students in some
aspects of the project.