* 0905197
* International Travel for Students and Postdocs to attend ISDCI-11 in Prague, June 28-July 4, 2009.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* L Courtney Smith, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

L. Courtney Smith, PI; Martin Flajnik, Co-
PI&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0905197&lt;br/&gt;International Travel for Students and
Postdocs to attend ISDCI-11 in Prague&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding will be used
to support international travel support for students and postdocs in US
laboratories to attend the 11th Congress of the International Society of
Developmental and Comparative Immunology (ISDCI-11) to be held in Prague, Czech
Republic, from June 28 to July 4, 2009. These funds will be important for
several reasons. 1) The budget for the Society alone for the previous two
meetings (2003, 2006) was not enough to provide significant travel bursaries for
students and postdocs. Travel costs are expected to be increased for the
Congress in Prague. 2) Because funding for research in the US is difficult to
obtain, it is expected that fewer numbers of students and postdocs will have
access to travel support from research grants. 3) NSF funding for students and
postdocs in US labs will enable the Society to shift some of their funds to
support students from other countries. Overall, this will aid all students and
enable more to attend, which will benefit the students and post docs, and will
benefit the Society through the influx of new ideas and new
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students and postdocs who have attended ISDCI
meetings in the past have benefited in a number of important ways. These
included: 1) the experience of presenting their data at an international meeting
for the first time, 2) the opportunity to meet and talk to other scientists with
common interests in comparative immunology, 3) the opportunity to receive
feedback on their research from leaders in the field, 4) the opportunity to meet
their future mentors and collaborators, 5) the opportunity to experience the
Society and to participate in this collegial and supportive community of
scientists. These benefits will be available to students and postdocs at
Prague.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The attendance by students and postdocs at the
ISDCI meetings brings significant benefits to the Society. 1) Often, students
and postdocs decide while at the ISDCI meetings to remain in the field of
comparative immunology. This increases the membership in the Society. 2) The
younger scientists are often those who bring to the Society new ideas and new
approaches for tackling hard scientific problems. This injection of new results
maintains vibrant research progress by all members of the Society. 3) Attendance
by students at the Congress provides opportunities for the full members of the
Society to identify future postdocs to work in their labs. 4) It is quite
possible, that some of the students supported to attend ISDCI-11 may be the
ISDCI officers of the future. For example, the current ISDCI Secretary of
Education (the PI) received funding as a postdoc to attend the 5th ISDCI
Congress in Portland OR in 1991.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;