* 0905979
* Understand and Design Amorphous-Crystalline Nanolaminates
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* T Nieh, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 09/30/2014
* USD 315,838.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This goal of this project is to understand and design high strength, ductile
amorphous-crystalline nanolaminates. This will be accomplished through an
understanding of the length-scale effects on the deformation behavior of
laminated amorphous and nanocrystalline layers, and the interplay between
dislocations and the amorphous-nanocrystalline (a-c) interfaces. The
nanolaminates are based on the Cu-Zr system and fabricated by the alternative
deposition of Cu and Zr layers followed by solid-state amorphization. The
thickness of the amorphous layer is controllable and the chemistry of the
amorphous phase, as well as the a-c interface, can also be tuned by selective
alloying with Ni and Al, for example. The microstructure, chemical and defect
distributions in the nanolaminates will be characterized using advanced
instruments such as Cs-corrected high-resolution TEM, atom probe tomography,
X-ray scattering, and small-angle neutron scattering. Deformation behavior will
be investigated by conventional tensile tests on free-standing foil samples and
a micro-compression technique. Microscale specimens (micro-pillars) with the a-c
interfaces aligned in controlled orientations will be fabricated using focused
ion beam machining. In situ straining experiments will enable observation of
dislocation-interface interactions using high-resolution TEM. High-temperature
experiments using a nanoindentation system will be performed. Preliminary
molecular dynamic simulations on the deformation of nanolaminates are proposed,
with special emphasis on the interaction between dislocations and the a-c
interfaces.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Understanding the deformation of nanolaminates at the atomistic level represents
a giant step towards a understanding the interactions between dislocations and
interfaces at the nanometer level. This ability can further aid in the design
and reliable application of multilayered devices, e.g. structures that are
widely used in various technological fields, such as advanced electronic
devices, micro- and nano-scale MEM systems, biosensors, magnetics, and thermal
barrier coatings. In addition, the study of dislocation interactions with the
amorphous-crystalline interface can shed light on the mechanical response of
grain boundaries. This project will advance and enhance the research and
education activities at UT by offering excellent opportunities to undergraduate
and graduate students. Educational materials will be developed and distributed
through a new graduate-level class for students pursuing advanced degrees in MSE
with a concentration on nanomaterials. To recruit and enhance women and minority
participation into this program, the PI will work with the College of
Engineering's (CoE) representatives of the National Consortium for Graduate
Education for the Minorities in Engineering and Science, and the CoE Pipeline
Engineering Diversity Program. The PI is working with the CoE's Tennessee Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation to mentor undergraduate students,
foster interest in research and develop potential applicants for summer-research
studies.