* 0905365
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Providing Predictable Timing for Task Migration in Embedded Multi-Core Environments (TiME-ME)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Yuan Xie, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 335,000.00

Assuring deadlines of embedded tasks for contemporary multicore architectures is
becoming increasingly difficult. Real-time scheduling relies on task migration
to exploit multicores, yet migration actually reduces timing predictability due
to cache warm-up overheads and increased interconnect
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work promotes a fundamentally new approach to
increase the timing predictability of multicore architectures aimed at task
migration in embedded environments making three major
contributions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The development of novel strategies to
guide migration based on cost/benefit tradeoffs exploiting both static and
dynamic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The devising of mechanisms to increase
timing predictability under task migration providing explicit support for
proactive and reactive real-time data movement across cores and their
caches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The promotion of rate- and bandwidth-adaptive
mechanisms as well as monitoring capabilities to increase predictability under
task migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work aims at initiating a novel
research direction investigating the benefits of interactions between hardware
and software for embedded multicores with respect to timing predictability. This
project fundamentally contributes to the research and educational infrastructure
for the design and development of safety- and mission-critical embedded systems.