* 0905541
* From Frames to Events: A Statistical Approach to Activity Analysis in Multi-Camera Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Janusz Konrad, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/2013
* USD 507,364.00

From Frames to Events: A Statistical Approach to Activity Analysis in Multi-
Camera Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Venkatesh Saligrama and Janusz Konrad,
Boston University, MA 02215&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike other sensors, cameras
provide excellent resolution, long viewing range,&lt;br/&gt;wide field of view
and low latency thus permitting pervasive, wide-area
visual&lt;br/&gt;surveillance. However, most network cameras deployed today are
simple&lt;br/&gt;capture/compression/transmission devices, at most supporting
rudimentary motion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;detection; all higher-level processing
is highly centralized. This centralized&lt;br/&gt;architecture stems from human-
centric visual analytics as well as limited&lt;br/&gt;in-camera processing
capacity, and is not scalable to large multi-camera&lt;br/&gt;systems. With over
30 million surveillance cameras in use in the United States&lt;br/&gt;today,
that produce 4 billion hours of video footage per week, monitoring
by&lt;br/&gt;human operators is obviously not sustainable. An autonomous,
distributed,&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth-efficient, real-time video analytics system is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes a step towards building such a
system. At its core is a&lt;br/&gt;novel statistical framework for activity
discovery and analysis that departs&lt;br/&gt;from the centralized model and
leverages processing power of camera nodes.&lt;br/&gt;While traditional activity
analysis operates at object level, e.g., objects are&lt;br/&gt;identified,
tracked, and tested for abnormality, methods under development in&lt;br/&gt;this
project employ activity analysis at pixel level. If the abnormal
activity&lt;br/&gt;is reliably identified, then object extraction and tracking
focus on region of&lt;br/&gt;interest and thus are relatively straightforward,
on account of absence of&lt;br/&gt;clutter. In order to reliably identify pixel-
level abnormalities, or more&lt;br/&gt;generally activities, a novel event-based
video representation is used that&lt;br/&gt;decomposes video into iid samples
lending itself to the application of&lt;br/&gt;statistical learning. In order to
facilitate multi-camera collaboration,&lt;br/&gt;geometric invariance of dynamic
events is exploited thus bypassing the&lt;br/&gt;difficult issues related to 3-D
geometry dependent on viewing angles.&lt;br/&gt;