* 0905390
* RI: Medium: Algorithms for Robust Barter Exchanges, with Application to Kidneys
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 06/30/2012
* USD 855,259.00

In the US alone, over 30,000 fall sick with lethal kidney disease each year, and
over 77,000 await for a kidney transplant, many more than any other transplant.
That demand far exceeds the supply of cadaver kidneys. It is possible for a
living person to donate a kidney, e.g., to a relative or a friend, and both can
live well. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that a given donor can donate to a
given patient due to blood type and tissue type incompatibilities. This opens
the door for kidney exchange. Consider two donor-patient pairs, A and B. Say
that each of the pairs is incompatible. Yet Donor A may be able to donate to
Patient B, and Donor B to Patient A. This constitutes a cycle of length two.
Somewhat longer cycles are also practical. The principal investigator's prior
research has proved that the exchange clearing problem is NP-complete, and
developed an exchange algorithm that scales to the nationwide level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award is scaling up and expanding the
functionality of the exchange algorithms to develop (a) faster exhange
algorithms (e.g., through search-tree reorganization), (b) online algorithms for
deciding which cycles to select in light of changing donors and recipients, (c)
algorithms that are robust to last-minute failures, and (d) using machine
learning to predict the survival duration of kidney transplants and failure
probabilities of last-minute tests. Some of the techniques and theory developed
to address these issues also apply to other combinatorial search
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).