* 0905802
* Groups in Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Kapovich, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,783.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0905802 Principal Investigator: Michael Kapovich

This proposal is a continuation of Kapovich's research of previous years in the
areas of geometry, topology and geometric group theory. Most subjects of the
planned research revolve around geometry of group actions on various spaces and
geometric structures on manifolds, as well as geometry of buildings. The
research planned by Kapovich covers geometry of buildings with applications to
representation theory, in particular, Kapovich intends to continue his study of
the geometry of the moduli spaces of polygonal linkages in symmetric spaces and
buildings in relation to the algebraic groups. Other topics of research include
discrete groups in algebraic groups (in particular, the coherence problem for
arithmetic lattices), real-projective and complex-projective structures.

Groups appear naturally as symmetries of mathematical and physical objects, like
wall-patterns, minerals, snowflakes and, ultimately, the entire universe. This
project studies relation between algebraic properties of groups and geometry of
spaces for which groups appear as symmetries. This two-way relation is
beneficial for both group theory (which is a part of algebra) and geometry. An
example of such relation is provided by the theory of "buildings." Comparing
various ways to navigate in buildings can be mathematically described in terms
of certain inequalities. Such inequalities in turn provide answers to various
questions about symmetry groups of buildings.