* 0905695
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Valerie Taylor, Taylor, Valerie J
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will advance
our understanding of the emotional, behavioral, and interpersonal consequences
of witnessing a racial group member behave stereotypically during an ongoing
interracial interaction. Research documents that the anxiety caused by
interracial interactions raise many interpersonal concerns that affect people?s
experiences with members of other racial groups. However, much less research has
explored how the stereotype-confirming behaviors of ingroup members affect such
interactions. This project will examine whether minority (Blacks, Latinos) and
majority (Whites) group members experience negative mental health outcomes,
compensate for ingroup members behavior, or avoid interactions with outgroup
members during an interracial interaction after ingroup members have committed
stereotype-confirming behaviors. This research will provide novel insights
regarding the experiences of people during interracial interactions and
highlights how the behavior of racial group members, rather than one?s own
behavior, can impact individuals? mental health and behavior in interracial
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will perform her research at
Princeton University, under the sponsorship of Dr. Nicole Shelton in the
Psychology Department. Princeton University has a wealth of resources and
courses that will assist the fellow in acquiring new methodological and
statistical techniques regarding intergroup interactions, mental health, and
behavior. Dr. Shelton is one of the premier researchers on intergroup relations
in the country. Broadly, her research focuses on 1) the concerns of ethnic
minorities and Whites during interracial interactions and 2) the mental health
and psychological outcomes of minorities. In her work, she shows that the
different interpersonal concerns of ethnic minorities and Whites not only affect
the quality of interracial interactions, but the impressions people have about
racial outgroup members. Additionally, she examines the psychological adjustment
of minority youth and, in another line of work, she investigates how racial bias
and mental illness stigma leave people vulnerable to mental health problems.
Learning from Dr. Shelton?s expertise in intergroup relations and mental health
outcomes, the fellow will be trained to conduct dyadic interaction and mental
health research with diverse populations.&lt;br/&gt;To date, there has been a
dearth of research on how stereotype-confirming behavior affects people?s mental
and behavioral outcomes during interracial interactions. People are aware that
the stereotypic behaviors of ingroup members are often generalized to them;
thus, they may experience negative mental health outcomes (e.g., shame, anxiety,
low state self-esteem) in the face of ingroup members? stereotype-confirming
behavior during interracial interactions. Previous research suggests that such
mental health outcomes will lead to avoidance behaviors uniformly. However, the
current proposal suggests that rather than disengage from interracial
interactions when ingroup members behave stereotypically, individuals may
exhibit approach behaviors and show improved performance in an attempt to
disprove negative group stereotypes. To test these hypotheses, four experimental
studies will focus on the mental health and behaviors of racial minorities
(Latino/as, Blacks) and Whites after witnessing an ingroup member behave
stereotypically during intra- and interracial interactions. To explore the
breadth of this phenomenon, all four studies use different racial groups,
stereotypes, and situations. This work will provide novel insights into how
negative mental health outcomes experienced during interracial interactions
after witnessing ingroup members behave stereotypically may be
motivating.&lt;br/&gt;The postdoctoral fellowship will allow the fellow to learn
new theoretical perspectives on intergroup relations and provide her with
methodological and statistical training in this area. With these goals in mind,
the fellow has five training objectives while at Princeton: 1) to learn
methodology appropriate for studying dyadic interaction; 2) to enhance her
statistical knowledge by taking advanced statistics courses; 3) to attend
psychology colloquia and seminars by premier researchers in the field; 4) to
publish research; and 5) to attend and present her work at national conferences.
With the training and resources at Princeton University, the fellow will
demonstrate how stereotype-confirming behavior may cause negative mental health
outcomes, but also lead to unexpected approach behaviors in interracial
interactions. Ultimately, the postdoctoral training will prepare the fellow for
a tenure-track position at a research university.&lt;br/&gt;