* 0905777
* Efficient Analysis of Competing Risks Models with Missing Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yanqing Sun, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

In the HIV vaccine efficacy study, a very high percentage of marks of interest
may be missing and the problem is attributed to the evolving nature of the HIV
viruses. This proposal proposes some efficient statistical methods for dealing
with missing marks under competing risks models. The investigator will
investigate the mark-specific proportional hazards model and the mark-specific
Cox model with time-varying effects. The mark-specific vaccine efficacies can be
expressed in terms of one of the regression functions under the proposed models.
To evaluate mark-specific vaccine effects and its dependence on the mark, the
investigator studies the mark-specific proportional hazards model and the mark-
specific Cox model with time-varying effects that hold at each level of the mark
variable. There is a built-in structure between the mark, failure times and
covariates. Arbitrary modeling of the conditional distributions of the mark
variable given theauxiliary variables, as did in the existing literature, may
run into conflicts with the underlying models and result in inconsistency. The
investigator proposes a two-stage approach to achieve more efficient estimation
procedures. The inverse probability weighted complete-case estimators are
derived in the first stage. The two-stage efficient estimation procedure is
obtained using the idea of the augmented inverse probability weighted complete-
case method and based on the first stage estimators. The statistical procedures
will be developed to more effectively evaluate HIV vaccine efficacies. The
problems of missing marks in competing risks models are not unique to the HIV
vaccine efficacy trials. The analysis of other statistical models using
competing risks data with missing marks will also be studied. The proposed
methods will be justified theoretically, evaluated in simulations and applied to
analyze the HIV vaccine efficacy
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An objective of randomized
placebo-controlled preventive HIV vaccine efficacy trials is to assess the
relationship between the vaccine effect to prevent infection and the genetic
distance of the exposing HIV to the HIV strain(s) represented in the vaccine
construct. The investigator proposes some efficient statistical methods to
evaluate the HIV vaccine efficacies when a high percentage of the genetic
distances (or marks) may be missing due to the evolving nature of the HIV
viruses. The missing marks can also occur in competing risks data from other
medical studies. The investigator proposes to study the vaccine efficacies under
the mark-specific proportional hazards model and the mark-specific Cox model
with time-varying effects. These models have clear biological interpretations
for studying HIV vaccine efficacies. Other statistical models using competing
risks data with missing marks will also be studied. The proposed research would
provide critical statistical tools needed for developing more effective vaccines
and enrich a collection of statistical tools which have important impact on the
risk analysis of competing risks data.