* 0905959
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,08/31/2013
* Yi-Hsin Tsai, Tsai                    Yi-Hsin        E
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2013
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Understanding forest
responses to climate change through fossils, genetics, and models" for Yi-Hsin
Eric Tsai. The host institution for this research is Louisiana State University,
and the sponsoring scientist is Bryan Carstens.

Current changes in global climate force the geographic ranges of species to
shift, leading to the assembly of unique forest communities. Since the last ice
age to present day, range changes of a variety of species have been investigated
using ecological niche models, phylogeographic genetic data, and fossil pollen
data. This research 1) uses a bioinformatics approach to compile already
available genetic and fossil pollen data sets and to generate new ecological
niche models for over 35 eastern North American and European tree/shrub species,
in order to determine past constraints on range expansion for these species.
Secondly, this research groups species according to the major factors preventing
range expansion, in order to link these factors with life history
characteristics. Thirdly, this research employs a hypothesis-testing approach to
assess relevance of specific geographic barriers and historical events on
present-day distribution of multiple taxa. This research contributes to
improving predictions regarding future migration patterns in order to devise
best management practices for conservation.

Training goals include extending skills in ecological modeling, geographic
information systems, and spatial statistics. Furthermore, because of the
interdisciplinary nature of the project, it necessarily helps establish
collaborations between the fields of community ecology, paleoecology, and
phylogeography with mentoring opportunities at all levels. The conceptual and
methodological advancements as well as software tools produced can then easily
be applied by other researchers to other datasets and regions around the world.
This project contributes to the broader understanding of patterns of
biodiversity (both historical and future) shifts, which is important to
forecasting the biological impacts of global change.