* 0905758
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship for FY2009
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Luz Gilbert, Gilbert                 Luz            B
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Luz
Gilbert is "Transitioning a parasite into a symbiont: experimental evolution in
Rhizobia." The host institution for this research is the Centre Nationale de La
Recherche Scientifique (Castanet, France) under the sponsorship of Drs.
Catherine Masson-Boivin and Jacques Batut.

From the bacterial species tree, closely related microbes can display
dramatically different lifestyles: symbiotic, saprobic, or pathogenic. How a
microbe can, over time, transition into one kind from another is still
unresolved. The rhizobial symbiosis is an ecologically important association
between leguminous plants and a diverse set of bacteria. The bacteria provide
nitrogen in a form the plant can use and the bacteria receive food and shelter
in the structure specific to this association, the nodule. This project is
identifying molecular changes in evolved bacteria by exploring the genes
responsible for the symbiosis from Cupriavidus taiwanensis to its pathogenic
relative Ralstonia solancearum using genome sequencing.

The training objectives of this project are to develop a suite of microbial
tools and techniques to dissect the evolutionary process in a new model system.
The expertise at the location of this work, a French institute focused on
microbial symbiosis and pathogenesis, opens new research opportunities and
networking opportunities internationally as the Fellow is one of a handful of
minorities and the only American working in the department.