* 0905748
* Geometry, topology and group theory of surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Leininger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 289,270.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0905748 Principal Investigator: Christopher J. Leininger

This project aims to study the geometry of various structures on surfaces,
actions of the mapping class group on these spaces, and topological/dynamical
aspects of surface homeomorphisms. This includes (1) an ongoing project with
R.P. Kent on convex cocompactness in the mapping class group, with a focus on
free groups and surface groups; (2) a topological investigations of algebraic
relations in the mapping class group and the closely related braid groups with
D. Margalit; (3) a study, via geodesic length functions, of certain singular
euclidean geometric structures on surfaces and their degenerations in a joint
project with M. Duchin and K. Rafi; (4) a continuing project with B. Farb and D.
Margalit to provide a topological model for "minimal complexity" surface
homeomorphisms.

Surfaces---like the surface of a ball or a doughnut---have been studied for
hundreds of years, and are fundamental and beautiful objects in mathematics. The
study of surfaces is intrinsically interesting, but is also responsible for the
creation of entire fields of mathematics, as well as the development of
techniques in many others. As such, the theory of surfaces and their geometries
lies at the juncture of several fields of mathematics including complex
analysis, differential geometry, low-dimensional topology, geometric group
theory and dynamics. Many geometric objects can be described using surfaces as
the basic building blocks. To study these objects one naturally encounters the
notion of a "homeomorphism" of a surface: this is a kind of "symmetry" which
preserves only the most basic properties of the surface. The set of all
homeomorphisms is somewhat unwieldy, but the most important features can be
distilled into a more manageable structure called the "mapping class group."
This project proposes the study of several related problems about surfaces,
their homeomorphisms and mapping class groups, and the implications of these
studies to related geometric objects.