* 0905041
* CRCNS data sharing: Whole Mouse Brain Neuronal Morphology and Neurovasculature Browser
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Louise Abbott, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2011
* USD 130,924.00

This award supports the preparation and sharing of high-resolution, high-
quality, whole mouse brain neuronal and vascular data obtained from the Knife-
Edge Scanning Microscope (KESM). KESM is capable of slicing and imaging whole
small animal organs (such as the mouse brain) at less than 1 um resolution
within 100 hours, with a resulting data size exceeding 2 TB per specimen. The
amount and complexity of the KESM data necessitates innovative approaches in
data organization, storage/retrieval, and dissemination. The research team will
develop an informatics framework for 3D volume data dissemination and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KESM, developed and housed in the PI's
laboratory, has been used to dissect and image two whole mouse brains so far,
one stained in Golgi to reveal the neuronal morphology, and the other in India
ink to show the microvascular network in fine detail. The two data sets are
unique in their detail and extent compared to other currently available data
sets (orders of magnitude higher resolution along one or more of the x-, y-, and
z-axis, and/or higher extent in the imaged volume). Such data enable researchers
to conduct a full quantitative analysis of various morphological statistics and
their variability across different brain regions and nuclei, estimate
morphological parameters for computational simulation, and eventually help link
structure to function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A hybrid approach will be employed
that integrates a web-based light-weight data browser and a local data
viewer/analyzer, under a multi-scale data scheme. The specific objectives of
this project are as follows: (1) Standardized data sets for improved access and
interoperability with other data sources, (2) Light-weight web-based volume
browser with an open Application Programming Interface (API) for enhanced
freedom of access and annotation, and (3) Unit volume viewer for the
visualization and analysis of small unit volumes downloaded through the web-
based interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and software tools, including
documentation, will be released in the public domain, to build a user/developer
community that will help continued use and evolution of the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;