* 0905812
* Estimating the Geometry of Riemann Surfaces in Dynamical Systems and Hyperbolic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Jeremy Kahn, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 113,939.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will pursue three directions
related to the estimation of the geometry of Riemann surfaces. The first is the
continuation of the work with Mikhail Lyubich toward proving the bounds for
renormalization of iterated complex quadratic polynomials, with the eventual
goal of proving the local connectivity of the Mandelbrotset. The second is the
continuation of work with Vladimir Markovic on randomly generated covers of
finite type Riemann surfaces, with the hope of proving the Ehrenpreis
conjecture. The third is the&lt;br/&gt;development of the theory of degenerate
complex structures, with possible applications to the characterization of
conformally realizable finite subdivision rules, the computation of the Heegard-
Floer invariants of Ozsvath and Szabo, and necessary conditions for a hyperbolic
component in the moduli space of rationalmaps to be non-compact. It is possible
to render beautiful pictures of the Mandelbrot set on the computer with a
program that iterates a simple function that depends on two parameters. The work
with M. Lyubich will rigorously demonstrate many of the phenomena that have been
empirically obsevered in these computer pictures. The work with V. Markovic on
the random generation of two-dimensional geometric objects may prove to have
applications to material science, chemistry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
Riemann surface is an abstractly realized surface on which small circles can be
drawn everywhere on the surface in an internally consistent way. The shapes of
these surfaces are central to the theory of strings that currently ominates
high-energy physics, and the theory of degeneration of Riemann surfaces may find
applications in string theory and the Standard Model of particle physics. It is
possible to render beautiful pictures of the Mandelbrot set on the computer.
These pictures have been widely circulated in many venues inlcuding on well
known post-cards and are familiar to many non-mathematicians.