* 0905562
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: User-Controllable Policy Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Paul Hankes Drielsma, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 723,789.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As both corporate and
consumer-oriented applications introduce new functionality and increased levels
of customization and delegation, they inevitably give rise to more complex
security and privacy policies. Yet, studies have repeatedly shown that both lay
and expert users are not good at configuring policies, rendering the human
element an important, yet often overlooked source of vulnerability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and evaluate a new family of
user-controllable policy learning techniques capable of leveraging user feedback
and presenting them with incremental, user-understandable suggestions on how to
improve their security or privacy policies. In contrast to traditional machine
learning techniques, which are generally configured as ?black boxes? that take
over from the user, user-controllable policy learning aims to ensure that users
continue to understand their policies and remain in control of policy changes.
As a result, this family of policy learning techniques offers the prospect of
empowering lay and expert users to more effectively configure a broad range of
security and privacy policies. &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques to be developed in this project will
be evaluated and refined in the context of two strategically important domains,
namely privacy policies in social networks and firewall policies.&lt;br/&gt;In
the process, work to be conducted in this project is also expected to lead to a
significantly deeper understanding of (1) the difficulties experienced by users
as they try to specify and refine security and privacy policies, and (2) what it
takes to overcome these difficulties. The latter includes developing models of
the types of policy modifications users can relate to and exploit as well as an
understanding of the tradeoffs between usability and the number of policy
modifications users are presented with. It also includes understanding how the
effectiveness of user-controllable policy learning is impacted by the
expressiveness of underlying policy languages, modes of interaction with the
user (e.g. graphical versus text-based), and the topologies across which
policies are deployed,