* 0905220
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computational Methods to Advance Chemical Genetics by Bridging Chemical and Biological Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Michael Walters, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2015
* USD 854,732.00

The recent development of various government and University funded screening
centers has provided the academic research community with access to state-of-
the-art high-throughput and high-content screening facilities. As a result,
chemical genetics, which uses small organic molecules to alter the function of
proteins, has emerged as an important experimental technique for studying and
understanding complex biological systems. However, the methods used to develop
small-molecule modulators (chemical probes) of specific protein functions and
analyze the phenotypes induced by them have not kept pace with advances in the
experimental screening technologies. Developing probes for novel protein targets
remains a laborious process, whereas experimental approaches to identify the
proteins that are responsible for the phenotypes induced by small molecules
require a large amount of time and capital expenditure. There is a critical need
to develop new methods for probe development and target identification and make
them publicly available to the research community. Lack of such tools represents
an important problem as it impedes the identification of chemical probes for
various proteins and reduces our ability to effectively analyze the experimental
results in order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying biological
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop novel algorithms in the areas of cheminformatics, bioinformatics, and
machine learning to analyze the publicly available information associated with
proteins and the molecules that modulate their functions (target-ligand activity
matrix). These algorithms will be used to develop new classes of computational
methods and tools to aid in the development of chemical probes and the analysis
of the phenotypes elicited by small molecules. The key hypothesis underlying
this research is that the target-ligand activity matrix contains a wealth of
information that if properly analyzed can provide insights connecting the
structure of the chemical compounds (chemical space) to the structure of the
proteins and their functions (biological space). Novel methods will be developed
to: (i) better analyze the screening results and identify high affinity and
selective hits, (ii) build models that can predict the compounds that are active
against a novel protein target and select a set of compounds to be included in a
high-throughput screen that will be enriched in actives, (iii) virtually
generate a set of core molecules (scaffolds) for a given protein target that can
be significantly different from those currently available in the various
libraries and have a high probability of being active against the target, and
(iv) identify the proteins being targeted by compounds in phenotypic assays. In
addition, the research will be facilitated by creating a database to integrate a
large portion of the publicly-available target-ligand binding data along with
information about the targets and the compounds involved. The successful
completion of this research will transform the &amp;#64257;eld of chemical
genetics by establishing a new methodology by which the increasing amount of
target-ligand activity information is used in a systematic way to explicitly
guide the discovery of new probes and the analysis of phenotypic assays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The ability to discover chemical
probes for a wide range of novel protein targets will make it possible to
identify drugs for pharmaceutically relevant proteins, positively impacting the
rate of drug discovery. In addition, it will greatly increase the set of
proteins that can be selectively modulated via small organic molecules, expand
the various biological processes that can be investigated via chemical genetics
approaches, and allow researchers to use chemical genetics techniques to gain
insights on the mechanisms of action associated with certain phenotypes. This
will provide a better understanding of the dynamics of these processes and will
supplement existing approaches based on molecular genetics. To further aid in
the broad dissemination of the results and enhance scientific understanding, the
computational methods developed will be made freely available via stand-alone or
web-based services to aid researchers working in the area of chemical genomics.
Finally, the project integrates the research with an educational plan that
focuses on interdisciplinary undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate
education in the areas of Computer Science, Medicinal Chemistry, and Chemical
Genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Words: supervised learning; semi-supervised
learning; cheminformatics; structural bioinformatics; data mining; graph
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;