* 0905603
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: MIMO-Pipe Modeling, Scheduling and Delay Analysis in Multi-hop MIMO Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111- 5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental differences between
multi-hop networks and point-to-point settings indicate that leveraging MIMO
gains in multi-hop networks requires a paradigm shift from high SNR regimes to
interference-limited regimes. This project undertakes a broad research agenda
centered around developing fundamental theory towards achieving optimal
throughput and delay performance in wireless networks. The first key step is to
take a bottom-up approach for solid model abstraction of MIMO links while taking
into account interference, and to extract a set of feasible rate/reliability
requirements, corresponding to meaningful MIMO stream configurations. Under a
common thread of MIMO-pipe scheduling, this project focuses on tackling the
following challenges: 1) Developing rate/reliability models for ``MIMO-pipes''
in multi-hop networks; 2) MIMO-pipe scheduling for throughput maximization and
delay minimization; and 3) Real-time scheduling of MIMO-pipes with delay
constraints (for time-critical traffic). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the formulation of new fundamental theories for multi-hop MIMO
networks, which have direct impacts on many wireless applications. Particularly,
real-time scheduling sheds much light on leveraging MIMO gains in VANET to
deliver timely information reliably to save lives and improve quality of life.
Underrepresented undergraduate students as well as graduate students participate
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;