* 0905087
* Topological symmetries and intrinsic properties of graphs embedded in 3-space
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Erica Flapan, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2013
* USD 182,226.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project has two goals, both concerning graphs embedded in 3-space. The
topological symmetry group of a graph embedded in 3-space is defined as the
group of automorphisms of the graph which are induced by homeomorphisms of
3-space. Our first goal is to characterize which groups can occur as the
topological symmetry group of a particular embedded graph or family of graphs.
The second goal of our project concerns intrinsic properties of a graph --
properties of an embedded graph which do not depend on the particular embedding.
For example, a graph which has the property that every embedding of it in
3-space contains a nontrivial link is said to be intrinsically linked, while one
which has the property that every embedding of it contains a nontrivial knot is
said to be intrinsically knotted. We have previously shown that for any natural
number n there is a graph such that every embedding of it contains a link with n
components such that every pair of components has linking number at least n, and
every component is a knot with minimal crossing number at least n. However,
there cannot exist a graph which has the property that every embedding of it
contains at least one composite knot. We would now like to study for which
measures of complexity of knots and links there are graphs which are arbitrarily
intrinsically complex by that measure.

A molecule can be represented as a graph in 3-dimensional space. Most molecules
are rigid, and the geometry of their graphs determines many of their properties.
However, some molecules can rotate around particular bonds, and others are large
enough to be somewhat flexible. For these non-rigid molecules, their topology is
important in predicting their behavior. The study of the topology of graphs
embedded in 3-dimensional space is used in determining the symmetries of non-
rigid molecules. In particular, while the group of rigid symmetries of a
molecule (known as the point group) is useful for analyzing the symmetries of
rigid molecules, a molecular structure which is not rigid may have symmetries
which are not included in the point group. The topological symmetry group was
created in order to classify the symmetries of non-rigid molecules. The main
goal of our project is to characterize all topological symmetry groups.
Understanding molecular symmetries has many important application in chemistry.
Symmetry is used in interpreting results in crystallography, spectroscopy, and
quantum chemistry, as well as in analyzing the electron structure of a molecule.
Symmetry is also used in pharmacology and in designing new molecules and new
types of reactions.