* 0905237
* CSR:Medium:  Systems and Software Research for Compute-Intensive Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2016
* Richard Wolski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

A recent trend in the commercial, high-technology sector has been to make
large-scale, proprietary computing and storage infrastructure available to the
public. Companies such as Amazon, Google, and many others, enable access to
these vast resource collections via the Internet, and provide a wide range of
services for accessing them (tools, APIs, resource scheduling and accounting,
etc.). Users are encouraged to think of the infrastructure as a an opaque
computing ``cloud'' that delivers compute and storage capabilities in the same
way that the network ``cloud'' delivers network connectivity: through a client-
provider relationship governed by well-defined interfaces. Unfortunately, at
present, cloud computing technologies provide support for only a limited set of
applications from the web service domain. As a result, remotely managed web
hosting is, by far, the most prevalent usage model for cloud systems.

With this research, the PIs propose to design, implement, and evaluate the
extensions to the services offered by the two most prevalent cloud purveyors
(Amazon.com and Google) to facilitate usage by a more broad developer base
(e.g., scientists and students) who require support for general compute-
intensive applications. The basis of this work will be two novel research
projects that are able to implement commercial cloud computing functionality in
academic settings: AppScale and Eucalyptus. The PIs will employ these
infrastructures to investigate and contribute the three fundamental technologies
that are missing from extant cloud technologies but that are necessary to enable
support of high-performance, compute intensive applications within cloud-based
clusters: efficient support of shared-memory inter-process communication, high-
performance file system support, and system-wide, adaptive performance
monitoring and analysis.

