* 0905665
* SHF: Medium: Early Reliability Modeling and Prediction of Embedded Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Leana Golubchik, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 210,000.00

To build high quality software, it is increasingly important for engineers to
reason quantitatively about critical system properties, such as performance and
reliability, as early as possible in the design process. Ideally, these
properties are assessed before significant time and cost are expended on
implementation. However, making useful predictions in early design stages is
difficult at best due to the interplay among many relevant factors, such as
complex properties of software components, effects of the firmware, and
conflicts between desired system attributes. In this project, we focus on
design-time evaluation of architectures with respect to one key attribute:
reliability. The approach we pursue will enable an engineer to build a multi-
faceted, hierarchical model of a system and assess its reliability in an
incremental, scalable fashion. Moreover, we particularly focus on the area of
embedded systems. Embedded systems present a rich target of opportunity for this
work as (1) they demand close interplay of software and execution substrate; (2)
they are often unencumbered with legacy concerns, allowing easier introduction
and exploration of new techniques such as the one we propose; (3) they often
have stringent and complex requirements, yet are seldom approached from a
software architectural perspective. An extensive evaluation of our research
focuses on two measures of interest: tractability (intended to address
scalability issues existing in real, complex systems) and sensitivity (intended
to address issues of confidence in our predictions under numerous design-time
uncertainties).