* 0905636
* Workshop: SFF Symposium Student Support 2009, Austin, Texas, August 3-5, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides student support for the Twentieth International Solid
Freeform Fabrication Symposium to be held August 3-5, 2009 in Austin, Texas. The
meeting is comprised of plenary and parallel session technical presentations and
a poster session. There is ample time allotted for informal interactions of
world-class researchers and students in formal meeting settings and also at
informal social events during the meeting. Approximately 120 persons will
attend, with 50 of these participants being students. A new event this year is
an annual award for both an outstanding senior and junior (35 years old or
younger) researchers. The junior award will serve both as recognition for a
deserving candidate and also to provide young researchers including students a
role model for excellence. All meeting papers will be published in a conference
proceedings to be distributed to all participants including students.
Approximately 50 students will be supported. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference is a mechanism for transfer and dissemination of knowledge and
understanding in the field of additive, freeform manufacturing. It is a model
for advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and
learning. The networking of world-class researchers with students is strong. The
meeting is a pinion for research infrastructure. Through the heavily cited
proceedings, information is widely disseminated to an extensive network of
researchers and students around the world. The societal impact includes
identification of pre-commercial technologies and sharing of information
pertaining to freeform fabrication that will eventually be developed and
implemented into machines and processes that will enhance domestic productivity.