* 0905283
* Geometry and Analysis of Locally Symmetric Spaces and Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lizhen Ji, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 96,408.00

This proposal aims to study analysis and geometry of locally symmetric spaces
and the moduli space of Riemann surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surfaces with
canonical metrics are important examples of locally symmetric spaces. Though
their moduli spaces are not locally symmetric spaces in general, it has been
recognized for a long time that they share many similar properties with locally
symmetric spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed, many topological properties of the moduli
spaces have been found by following this principle. This proposal proposes to
pursue further the analogues between them and understand and contribute more to
common properties of locally symmetric spaces and the moduli spaces of Riemann
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;For example, the spectral theory of locally symmetric spaces
is fundamental in automorphic forms and the celebrated Langlands program, and
one project of this proposal is to understand the spectral theory and the
geometric scattering theory of the moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces with
respect to some canonical complete Riemannian metrics.&lt;br/&gt;Another project
is to understand the Gauss-Bonnet formula and the index theory of the moduli
spaces. The reduction theory for arithmetic groups is crucial for understanding
locally symmetric spaces and quadratic forms, and this proposal also proposes to
study analogous reduction theory for the moduli spaces of Riemann
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry is a very important concept and has
played a fundamental role in science and art. It is not only effective but also
beautiful.&lt;br/&gt;For example, many basic laws in physics and nature are
derived from the principle of symmetry, and beautiful forms and designs also
follow the principle of symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical language of
symmetry is group theory and related symmetric spaces. Probably the most
symmetric space is the Euclidean space.&lt;br/&gt;Indeed it is one of the
important class of spaces called symmetric spaces, which include the hyperbolic
spaces and spheres.&lt;br/&gt;Quotients of symmetric spaces are called locally
symmetric spaces and they are closely related to another important class of
spaces in mathematics, moduli spaces which classify mathematical
objects.&lt;br/&gt;