* 0905295
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Angelia Seyfferth, Seyfferth               Angelia        L
* Fellowship Award
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Angelia Seyfferth is "Physiological Mechanisms Underlying Arsenic Uptake and
Transformation in Field-Grown Rice (Oryza sativa L.)." The research and training
supported by this fellowship is being conducted at Stanford University under the
sponsorships of Drs. Scott Fendorf, Devaki Bhaya, and Peter
Vitousek.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is feared that arsenic (As) contamination of
groundwaters in southern and southeastern Asia is causing the largest exposure
in human history where more than 140 million people are drinking water with
hazardous levels of arsenic. Exposure to arsenic through consumption of rice
irrigated with this contaminated groundwater may be of equal or greater
importance than exposure through drinking water, particularly for populations
that rely on rice for sustenance. Plants do not deal with the various chemical
forms of arsenic in the same way. Therefore, it is important to understand the
different mechanisms of entry into rice roots and subsequent translocation
toward the edible grain. Which chemical form is predominant in the rhizosphere
of field-grown rice and within different plant fractions is presently
unresolved. The overall goal of this research project is to elucidate the
predominant mechanism of arsenic uptake, accumulation, and in planta
transformation within field-grown rice utilizing both X-ray absorption
spectroscopy and mass-balance with radiolableled arsenic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific training objectives are to gain field
experience at the interface of biology, chemistry, geology, and environmental
science and to learn new analytical tools and techniques to achieve the stated
scientific goals. The broader impacts include outreach to local Cambodian rice
farmers and mentoring graduate and undergraduate students.