* 0905905
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Jason Brown, Brown                   Jason          L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Integrating species
distribution models, Geographic Information Systems and coalescent phylogenetic
methods into phylogeography studies" for Jason Brown. The host institution for
this research is the University of Michigan, and the sponsoring scientist is
Lacey Knowles.

Integrating species distribution models, coalescent-based phylogenies and
geographic information systems provides a novel perspective on biogeography and
could substantially improve our understanding of current and historic species
distribution patterns. A better understanding of these factors is particularly
important for the conservation of amphibians (the focal taxa of this project),
many of which have dramatically declined in the past quarter-century. Species
distribution models are calculations that predict the distribution of a species
using various climatic and geographic variables (e.g. temperature, rainfall).
The resulting model generates a habitat suitability map based on a species'
ecological tolerance, indicating areas of high and low suitability. This allows
species distributions to be treated as gradients of suitable and unsuitable
habitat; thereby more accurately reflecting the dispersal potential across
particular landscapes. Using these "dispersal landscapes," coalescent-based
phylogenies and geographic information systems, this research (1) estimates
realistic dispersal networks between genealogical lineages, which can then be
used to estimate key dispersal routes for each target species at several periods
in time, and (2) uses modified "dispersal landscapes" to test biogeographic
hypotheses at different periods in time.

The training and education objectives in include computer programming,
theoretical biogeography and hypothesis testing, coalescent phylogenetics, and a
continued development of expertise in Geographic Information Systems, with
particular emphasis on the development of a rigorous and cohesive method for
evaluating species dispersal networks, and statistical tests of reliability. The
broader impacts of this research are to better understand species distributions
for consideration in conservation and restoration projects.