* 0905149
* CSR:Medium:Improving Software Reliability and Security Through Multicore Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Satish Narayanasamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

Society depends heavily on computers functioning correctly and securely.
Unfortunately, software continues to be plagued by bugs and security
vulnerabilities, and these problems are likely to get worse as multicore
processors become ubiquitous and more programs become multithreaded. Yet
multicore technology also provides the opportunity to use parallelism on
commodity computers to improve software robustness.&lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to improve the reliability and security of software by using multicore
processors to enable new types of powerful, run-time checks. The project will
make it possible to run checks in parallel on multicore systems, while
preserving the same strong safety guarantees and simple programming model of
running checks sequentially. The project will also study how to enable online
data race detection and deterministic replay for multithreaded programs running
on multiprocessors by offloading the work of data race detection onto other
cores. Finally, the project will study powerful, new classes of run-time checks
that are enabled by speculative parallel checks, multicore processors, and
deterministic replay.&lt;br/&gt;This research will benefit society by developing
techniques to make software systems more reliable and secure and by producing
open-source software artifacts that can be used by other groups. The project
will also contribute material for courses that teach how to program multicore
computers.&lt;br/&gt;