* 0905014
* NetSE: Medium: A Data Mining Approach to Diagnostic Debugging in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jiawei Han, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,001,565.00

Abstract (limited to 250 words): This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Our nation's infrastructure relies increasingly on networks that connect growing
amounts of data and systems, including those that interact directly with the
physical world. Increased connectivity leads to a higher degree of vulnerability
to attacks, malfunctions, and failures that can cascade more rapidly along
network links. The project develops techniques to improve the reliability of
emerging networked infrastructure, where computation, communication, and sensing
are intimately intertwined. Use of data mining techniques is investigated to
determine and eliminate scenarios involving cascaded failures and propagation of
performance problems. The complexity of emerging networked and pervasive
computing systems increases maintenance cost, challenges classical design
approaches, and makes traditional diagnostics and debugging tools less effective
at catching problems. To reverse these trends, this project develops tools that
are specifically suited to address three fundamental challenges of complex
distributed systems; namely, non-reproducible stochastic behavior, high
interactive complexity, and physical resource constraints. Other than improving
reliability, this research is integrated with education curricula at the
University of Illinois, offering real-world challenges to intellectually
stimulate both graduate and undergraduate students, while seeking avenues to
encourage cultural diversity and promote women and minority involvement in
engineering. Laboratory modules allow students to experiment with and diagnose
real-world design problems and cascading interaction anomalies in a hands-on
fashion. The project will result in improved versions of a data mining textbook
by the Co-PI, which is currently considered the standard reference in the field.