* 0905384
* TC:Medium:Collaborative Research: Mobile Personal Privacy and Security - A New Framework and Technology to Account for Human Values
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Batya Friedman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 875,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant progress has been made on
technical solutions for implementing security while preserving varying degrees
of privacy for mobile electronic devices. A largely unsolved problem involves
knowing what type of technical solutions to implement and under what
circumstances. This challenge arises because in actuality there is in general no
such thing as a clear "optimal" or "right" solution. One way to view this
problem is by focusing on the fact that such devices potentially play an
integral role in people's lives and impact important human values: security and
privacy of course, but also other values such as autonomy, trust, and physical
well-being. Further, these values are often in tension. This project will
develop a principled and systematic conceptual framework for analyzing these
value implications and tensions in the context of two archetypical examples of
future mobile devices: implantable medical devices and mobile phone safety
applications. A key component of our approach will be the application and
extension of the Value Sensitive Design theory and methodology. Researchers will
develop and evaluate new technology, as well as undertake empirical work with a
range of stakeholders, including Futures Workshops and semi-structured
interviews. Expected outcomes include a framework for analyzing the
relationships and trade-offs among privacy, security, autonomy, and other values
for mobile devices that accounts for both situational and embodied dimensions of
these values; a pallet of key technical solutions to these problems; a set of
case studies; and finally design recommendations for use by other researchers
and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will not only
develop technical mechanisms for providing the "right" level of security and
privacy for new mobile technologies, but can help influence the definition of
what "right" means in the context of the broader set of goals and values. In
society more generally, there is an increasing use of technologies that are
focused upon here: implantable medical devices and highly capable cell phones
used for personal safety. Improving human health and personal safety, while not
significantly undermining other key values such as privacy, trust, and autonomy,
will be important in the development of such technologies. It is anticipated
that the ways of analyzing such problems will be applicable to other
technologies as well, such as RFID tags on personal possessions, Smart Cards for
paying for tolls or transit fares, and many others.