* 0905606
* National Evolutionary Synthesis Center
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2015
* Allen Rodrigo, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Klein
* 11/30/2015
* USD 25,206,924.00

The National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent) was established in 2004 to
serve the needs of the evolutionary biology community by providing mechanisms to
foster synthetic, collaborative, cross-disciplinary studies. It is run by a
consortium of three universities in the North Carolina Research Triangle - Duke
University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and North Carolina
State University. This award will renew NESCent's support for an additional five
years. To date, NESCent has established a vibrant in-house community of
scientists and informatics specialists, taken the lead in developing evo-
informatics, established a wide variety of partnerships with major groups in
evolutionary biology and education, and developed diverse programs targeted to
increase participation of underserved groups. Over the next five years, NESCent
will continue its core missions of enabling synthetic research, developing and
disseminating new tools for evolutionary informatics, and increasing the public
understanding of evolution. It will continue ongoing activities while initiating
new programs that will increase its focus, build new teams of scientists to
effect synthesis, and enhance its training and educational activities. Targeted
initiatives will enable new areas of evolutionary synthesis, including areas
important to human affairs such as climate change, health and disease, and areas
of broad interdisciplinary scope such as cultural evolution. Major initiatives
are proposed that combine individual programs such as sabbaticals, postdocs and
working groups around a common topic to promote synthesis. NESCent will support
graduate fellowships that will provide training in synthesis, and pursue new
areas for major cyberinfrastructure initiatives in evolutionary biology such as
visualization. New programs are proposed to recruit underserved groups to
participate in evolutionary biology, and to communicate the science produced at
the Center to the education community and general public. Collaborating with
social scientists studying the nature of scientific collaborations and networks,
the center will establish a rigorous approach to assess its work and understand
its impact on scientific progress and its role in promoting new, potentially
transformative results through synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of NESCent's
activities are directed towards supporting the broader evolutionary biology
community in its pursuit of synthetic evolutionary biology. NESCent promotes
changes in the culture of collaboration and data sharing, and facilitates the
development, building and consensus of scientific communities that are essential
for truly transformative research. NESCent provides critical infrastructure, in
terms of funding, logistics, physical space, and informatics to allow new
synthetic breakthroughs. It provides new cyberinfrastructure resources to the
entire evolutionary biology community. It offers a wide variety of training and
outreach activities aimed at the general public, the citizen scientist, the
student, the educator and the practicing evolutionary biologist. It devotes
significant effort into recruiting individuals from groups under represented in
evolutionary biology into all its core activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NESCent
Products: https://www.nescent.org/sites/public_documents/Main_Page