* 0905878
* NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Lucas Nivon, Nivon                   Lucas          G
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Lucas Nivon is "Computational design of new enzymes: catalyzing carbon-carbon
bond formation in bi-molecular reactions." This research is being conducted at
The University of Washington under the sponsorship of Dr. David Baker.

Enzymes are responsible for the wide variety of metabolic functions in living
organisms but natural enzymes cannot catalyze most commercially important
synthetic reactions. This research tests current understanding of enzyme
function by using chemical principles to computationally design new enzymes for
non-natural reactions. Novel enzymes have been successfully produced for a
retro-Aldol (RA) addition and the Kemp elimination by using new algorithms to
search for appropriate active sites and to design atomically-accurate pockets to
bind the transition states of particular chemical reactions. These reactions are
uni-molecular. This project is tackling bimolecular, bond-forming reactions by
studying 2 reactions closely related to the RA (Michael addition and forward
Aldol addition) by re-designing RA enzymes for these bimolecular reactions.
Additionally under study is the Morita-Bayliss-Hillman (MBH) reaction, which is
widely applied in modern syntheses, but is nonexistent in nature, to ask whether
enzymes can catalyze a reaction previously known only to synthetic chemistry.

Training plans include learning computational methods of protein design and the
biochemical skills necessary to perform a wide range of enzymatic assays and
large-scale enzyme purifications. By using established theories of enzyme
function to design new proteins this project will critically test those theories
and perhaps reveal new basic principles of enzyme function. Outside of pure
biochemistry this work is useful for biotechnology and medicine, allowing the
design of new enzymes for industrial applications or for use as enzyme drugs or
diagnostics. Broader impacts also include educational outreach to students,
especially from under-represented groups.