* 0905193
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integration, Prediction, and Generation of Mixed Mode Information using Graphical Models, with Applications to Protein-Protein Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Christopher Langmead, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 370,863.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probabilistic graphical models provide
a powerful mechanism for representing and reasoning with uncertain information.
These methods have been successfully applied in diverse domains such as
bioinformatics, social networks, sensor networks, robotics, and web mining; in
turn, such application areas have posed new computational challenges driving
graphical model research. This project is motivated by challenges in emerging
application areas such as epidemiological simulation, geoscience modeling, and
studies of interacting proteins, where there are rich sets of information of
multiple types and at multiple levels of granularity. While the methods
developed will be general, the research will focus on protein-protein
interactions, which drive the molecular machinery of the cell by forming
transient or persistent complexes to propagate signals, catalyze reactions,
transport molecules, and so forth. The mixed-mode information available includes
amino acid sequences, three-dimensional structures and associated physical
models, and binary, rank-ordered, or even quantitative interaction data. The
proposed techniques address key challenges in information integration,
prediction, and generation using graphical models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
this work derive both from the new capabilities for information integration and
for reasoning with probabilistic graphical models, as well as their application
to the study of protein-protein interactions. Proteins offer, by far, some of
the most complex, multi-faceted datasets for integration using computational
methods; hence the lessons learned here can be applied to similarly rich
information spaces, such as epidemiology and geosciences. These integrated
models of interacting proteins and new algorithms for prediction and generation
will also support significant applications such as protein engineering and
systems biology, bridging interaction networks to the underlying residue-level
interactions in order to better understand and control them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project will reach out to
both the bioinformatics and larger computer science communities to maximize the
impact of our contributions. An open-source integrator platform will be
developed, aimed at integrating protein datasets and which can be extended to
information integration in other domains as well. To stimulate community
building and foster discovery, the research team will advocate situating
computer science research in the context of concrete applications. Building on
prior successes, the team will organize a workshop at a suitable venue such as
ICML/AAAI/NIPS/KDD focused on an 'information integration challenge' dataset
involving protein modeling. Finally, through programs such as Women@SCS at
Carnegie Mellon, WISP (Women in Science Program) at Dartmouth, Howard Hughes
education grant internships at Purdue, and the MAOP/VTURCS (Minority Academic
Opportunities Program and VT Undergraduate Research in Computer Science) program
at Virginia Tech, the team will provide cross-disciplinary training to
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Probabilistic Graphical Models,
Information Integration, Mixed-Mode Datasets, Bioinformatics, Proteins, Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;