* 0905349
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Novel Forensic Analysis for Crimes Involving Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Brian Levine, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 777,622.00

TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Novel Forensic Analysis for Crimes Involving
Mobile Systems

Abstract:

Our project will significantly advance forensic methods of investigating mobile
devices used for trafficking in digital contraband. While current methods and
legislation focus heavily on logical identifiers, we will design, evaluate, and
deploy new forensic techniques that focus on consistent and trackable
characteristics of mobile computing. Additionally, our work will play an
important role in understanding the limits of personal privacy in these
settings.

We will develop new radio fingerprinting techniques that detect identifying
information present in a radio's low-level components. We seek the comprehensive
understanding available from an accurate model of these processes so that we can
both determine the key causes of anonymity loss and investigate new
countermeasures.

We will develop novel techniques of traffic analysis that determine the source
of encrypted Web traffic. Our focus will be on real-world traffic scenarios,
where background traffic is present and the entire Internet is a potential
source.

We will empirically evaluate our methods in a real-world setting by using two
large, outdoor and indoor wireless testbeds that we have deployed.

Our research will directly assist law enforcement that investigate network
trafficking of images of child sexual exploitation, demonstrating the usability
of trustworthy computing. We will disseminate our results to the Internet Crimes
Against Children Task Force and the Massachusetts State Police. Additionally,
this project will define research pathways to allow students who complete their
BS and MS degrees at John Jay (a minority-serving institution) to continue their
PhD work at UMass Amherst.