* 0905063
* Theoretical and experimental analyses of neural circuits that control intersegmental differences in phase
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Brian Mulloney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 07/31/2014
* USD 963,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A major goal of neuroscience is to understand the dynamics of neural circuits.
In most circuits, ignorance of intrinsic neural properties and synaptic
organization limits our ability to understand the performance. This project
exploits new discoveries of the synaptic organization of a circuit that
coordinates limb movements during locomotion. An integrated program of
experimental neurophysiology and mathematical theory will be used to explain how
dynamics emerge from the interactions of intrinsic neuronal properties, synaptic
dynamics, and synaptic organization. Using coupled-oscillator theory to guide
neurophysiological experiments, and experimental results to constrain
development of new models, a model of the circuit will be constructed and used
to explore how intrinsic properties of different neurons and synaptic
connectivity combine to produce the stable differences in phase of limb
movements that are essential for effective locomotion. This modeling work will
search for general principles governing dynamics in coordinating circuits.
Because these circuits are central to many neural systems, the results should be
applicable to many different systems. Many components of this project lend
themselves well to undergraduate research. Undergraduate students will be
heavily involved in summer research programs and Senior Honors Thesis projects.
To augment their introduction to research, an advanced undergraduate course will
focus on weekly research seminars by speakers who are successful members of
underrepresented groups, followed by lunch and discussion with the speaker. To
hone their presentation and communication skills, students will be encouraged to
present their work in the departmental mathematical biology seminar series.
Students will also be recruited from UC Davis REU programs that support students
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds or from under-represented groups.