* 0905754
* Stochastic Controls, Games and Portfolios
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Ioannis Karatzas, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 627,519.00

This project addresses topics related to stochastic controls, games and
portfolios, including the study of relative arbitrage in stochastic portfolio
theory, where one seeks simple, descriptive conditions that allow for arbitrage
relative to a large equity market, and then tries to describe the nature of the
most efficient such arbitrage; problems of stochastic control with discretionary
stopping, and stochastic games with features of both stopping and control;
problems of stochastic control of bounded variation or "singular" type; and
problems of stochastic control and/or stopping under partial observations. In
recent years, the investigator and his collaborators have made considerable
progress in identifying simple, descriptive conditions on observable
characteristics, such as diversity or sufficient intrinsic volatility, which
allow the construction of simple (based solely on observable quantities)
portfolios that can outperform a large equity market. This project seeks to
build on these results in order to understand the nature of optimal, that is,
"least-expensive", arbitrages of this type, and their connections to stochastic
analysis (exit measures for supermartingales, degenerate diffusions), parabolic
partial differential equations (propagation of qualitative properties such as
convexity), and the fine structure of financial markets (the onset of arbitrage
opportunities, or of "bubbles", and its implications for pricing and for
hedging). Additionally, the investigator has gained considerable understanding
of stochastic control problems with discretionary stopping, when a "controller"
(a player who affects the dynamics of the game) and a "stopper" (a player who
decides the duration of the game) cooperate to minimize an expected cost. This
project embarks on an effort to understand non-cooperative versions of such
games, both in zero-sum and in non-zero-sum contexts. A rich theory seems to
emerge, and we intend fully to pursue its development as described in the
proposal. Furthermore, research will focus on such stochastic optimization
problems in the presence of unobservable parameters, modeled in a Bayesian
framework by means of random variables with known prior distributions and
continuous updating. Such problems are notoriously hard to solve explicitly, but
we have ambitious plans in this direction and some preliminary results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic portfolio theory is a relatively novel
mathematical framework for analyzing portfolio behavior and equity market
structure; it is descriptive as opposed to normative, is consistent with
observable characteristics of actual portfolios and real markets, and provides a
theoretical tool (with insights into questions of arbitrage, construction of
portfolios with controlled behavior, etc.) which is also useful for practical
applications. Optimization problems that involve features of both stochastic
control and optimal stopping arise, for instance, in the study of target-
tracking models, where one has to stay as close as possible to a certain target
by spending fuel, to declare when one has arrived "sufficiently close", and then
to decide whether to engage the target or not. Problems of combined optimal
stochastic control/stopping also arise in Mathematical Finance: in the context
of computing the upper- and lower-hedging prices of American contingent claims
under portfolio constraints; in portfolio/consumption problems with an embedded
"retirement" option; in the study of dynamic measures for managing risk; in the
context of dynamically consistent utilities; and in stochastic games of the
principal/agent type. Stochastic control with partial observations has
implications for the adaptive sequential detection of change-points, for signal
processing, for finance, and for other fields of application where learning
about unknown parameters and dynamic system optimization have to take place
simultaneously, and in real time.