* 0905964
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Ellen Martinsen, Martinsen Ellen S
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Understanding
patterns of host-use and host-switching by the avian malaria parasites" for
Ellen Martinsen. The host institution for this research is the National
Zoological Park of the Smithsonian Institution and the sponsoring scientist is
Robert Fleischer.

The ability for parasites to switch hosts has a profound impact on host-pathogen
distributions seen in nature, and thus, patterns of infectious disease
emergence. This research uses informatics tools to construct an online database
for avian malaria parasites (genera Plasmodium, Haemoproteus, and
Parahaemoproteus), a group of parasites that have led to the decline and
extinction of numerous North American bird species. The primary uses of the
database are to i) analyze the phylogenetic relationships among species of
malaria, ii) determine their geographical distributions, and iii) identify cases
of host-switching. Specific hypotheses regarding host-switching are being tested
by comparing parasites found in non-native birds (both captive and wild-caught)
to those found in native birds, which will help identify the evolutionary and
ecological factors that allow host switching to occur.

Training objectives include the development of informatics and analytical tools.
The final outcome of the research will be the above referenced online malaria
dataset, as well as a website where information on molecular methods of parasite
detection and identification can be disseminated to the public. As the project
lies at the intersection of the fields of evolutionary biology, ornithology,
veterinary medicine, disease pathology, and conservation biology, it will
involve an interdisciplinary collaborative effort of researchers from these
diverse fields in addressing the ecology of infectious disease.