* 0905231
* Precisely Functionalized Alternating Copolymers Based on Substituted Stilbene Monomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Richard Turner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2012
* USD 372,000.00

ARRA STATEMENT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability
to control functional group placement and polymer backbone structure in
synthetic polymers is important for understanding fundamental structure property
relationships as well as designing polymeric materials with important
performance characteristics. The alternating copolymerization of substituted
stilbenes and maleic anhydride or N-substituted maleimides will be studied as a
new route to synthesize macromolecules with precise control of the placement and
density of functional groups along the polymer backbone. The incorporation of
the sterically crowded 1,2-diphenylethane units, in conjunction with the five
member cyclic imide or anhydride units, results in structures that are
anticipated to be considerably stiffened when compared to less constrained
polymer chains. Synthetic targets of this research will include new sterically
crowded polyanions and polycations with a regular variation of charge densities
along the chain enabled by the alternating copolymerization of specifically
designed and prepared functional stilbenes and maleimide comonomers. The
consequences of the sterically constrained backbones and placement of functional
groups on fundamental properties such as persistence length and solution
rheological properties will be studied. Solid state NMR will be used to study
the enchainment stereochemistry of the maleic anhydride and maleimide
comonomers. The stiffened polyanions and polycations will be compared to
polyzwitterionic structures with similar chain backbones. These new
polyelectrolytes and polyzwitterions will be enchained into double hydrophilic
block copolymers (DHBC) by controlled free radical polymerization techniques.
These DHBC structures will be used to assist in establishing structure property
relationships that govern the ?like-charge? attraction observed in DNA and more
recently reported from the PI?s laboratory in a synthetic DHBC derived from a
substituted stilbene-alt-maleic anhydride zwitterionic
copolymer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
precisely functionalized polymeric materials, based on easily scaleable and
industrially practiced free radical polymerization chemistries have significant
potential to have practical impact across a broad range of advanced technology
frontiers. The fundamental research described in this proposal could foster a
new polymer platform which has the potential to be used to produce new porous
and high surface area network materials for hydrogen storage, new rigid
polyelectrolytes for control of flow in aqueous fluids, new polyelectrolyte gels
which could be applied in membranes, and new nano-particle stabilization agents.
In addition the synthesis and study of new rod-coil aqueous block copolymers,
derived from the new polymers of this study, will provide fundamental biomimetic
information that can have impact in various biomedical applications such as
therapeutic delivery. Active participation in the research project will require
graduate students to master modern polymerization and synthetic chemistries and
to interact with other scientists and engineers in a strong interdisciplinary
mode in order to fully characterize and understand the properties of these new
polymeric materials. The graduate students involved with this research will
interact with industrial researchers in Virginia Tech polymer short courses and
will mentor summer undergraduate students in the Macromolecules and Interfaces
Institute?s NSF REU program. This specific training will be valuable for
initiating viable careers for these researchers in a variety of industrial and
academic areas important for sustaining and growing the nation?s science and
technology enterprise.