* 0905988
* Dynamical Properties of Quantum Systems with Infinitely Many Degrees of Freedom
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alessandro Pizzo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 09/30/2013
* USD 209,035.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this research program is to obtain mathematical results concerning
the dynamical properties of quantum systems with infinitely many degrees of
freedom. More specifically, our interest will be focused on two main areas. 1)
Spectroscopy of systems of non-relativistic, quantum mechanical point-like
nuclei and electrons interacting with the quantized radiation field. Because of
the growing applications of quantum optics, physicists have become increasingly
interested in experimental situations where the theoretical explanation must go
beyond regular QED (quantum electrodynamics) perturbation theory. This calls for
a more refined analysis of the mathematical theory of non-relativistic QED that
describes the interaction of charged quantum matter and the quantized radiation
at low energy scales related to those phenomena. Our main goal within this
project is to improve the mathematical control on the dynamics of metastable
states where a non-perturbative analysis is necessary. To this end, we plan to
push forward the analysis of spectral, scattering, and expansion methods
developed in recent years also with the contribution of the PI. 2) Irreversible
processes and transport equations in open quantum systems. Transport theory is
intimately related to the study of many-body systems, for which a detailed
control of the dynamics is beyond both analytic and numerical methods. Therefore
we are forced to deal with effective equations for coarse-grained physical
quantities, but one one would like to derive them from the underlying quantum
dynamics. This is a mathematically challenging program that links some basic
physical concepts to rigorous results expressed in mathematical proofs which
hold, at least, in simple models with a non-trivial micro-dynamics. We will
extend some first results that we have recently attained regarding quantum
diffusion.

The concepts and techniques involved in this research project connect different
branches of analysis and mathematical physics. Our general strategy is to
address mathematical physics problems from different perspectives, because we
are confident that solid physical intuition can make links across different
mathematical contexts. Conversely we want to gain more insight in the
mathematical structures and techniques starting from the solution of physics
problems. These problems will provide doctoral research projects for students in
mathematics and in physics. The projects represent a valuable training for both
students who will pursue academic research in mathematical physics as well as
students who will apply tools from analysis and probability to model complex
systems in physical applications.