* 0905200
* CIF:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Cooperative Networking Across the Layers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Sriram Vishwanath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 391,894.00

CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Networking Across the
Layers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research goes beyond the physical layer in
defining and analyzing cooperative techniques for wireless networks. By
incorporating higher layer properties such as traffic dynamics and access
control, the investigators develop a new theoretical framework for analyzing and
designing cooperative networking algorithms across the layers, which includes
existing cooperative techniques such as cooperative relaying and network coding.
The basis of this research rests on two major points:: first, the realization
that cooperative communication at the physical layer cannot be viewed in
isolation, since it has implications at the access and network layers, and
second, the recognition . that cooperation at the higher layers, in its own
right, can significantly impact overall network performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three inter-related thrusts: The first
thrust studies resource allocation policies which stabilize the queues within
various classes of cooperative networks, if stability is indeed attainable. The
second thrust determines a family of scheduling algorithms which maximize the
volume of traffic served by a cooperative network within a finite horizon.
Finally, game theoretic models are developed for cooperative networks where
nodes in the network are allowed to pursue differing objectives, and come to a
distributed agreement on the (locally) optimal operating point for the overall
network.&lt;br/&gt;This research also considers non-stationary and non-ergodic
environments that are more appropriate representations of the wireless channel
in a network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;