* 0905584
* TC:  Medium:  Collaborative Research:  Rewriting Logic Foundations for Verification and Programming of Next-Generation Trustworthy Web-Based Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Samuel King, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The rewriting model of computation is simple, yet general and flexible. A system
of any kind, for example, an algorithm, a database, a hardware system, a
programming language, a network protocol, a sensor network, or the molecular
biology dynamics of a cell, can be modeled by a set of rewrite rules that
describe the systems behavior. The rewriting model of computation is
intrinsically concurrent, without any need for explicit concurrency constructs.

Any set of rules that apply to nonoverlapping system components can execute
concurrently. For a large distributed system such as a network or a cell, this
means that at any given time thousands or millions of concurrent transitions may
be happening in parallel.

Maude is a language based on rewriting logic. The current Maude implementation
provides a high performance rewrite engine, as well as builtin search,
unification, and model checking tools to support execution and analysis of
systems specified in Maude. To realize inherent concurrency of rewriting, the
proposed project will develop an implementation of Maude called Distributed and

Concurrent Maude (DCMaude) that will exploit the concurrency available in
multicore/multiprocessor machines, and support distributed computing and systems
programming. The rewriting semantics of Maude supports seamless transition
between concurrent and distributed execution of a system: execution in one
process, multiple processes/cores, or multiple machines. In addition to built in
strategies for concurrency, the design of DCMaude will include a means for the
programmer to control concurrency at a high level of abstraction in a
declarative way.

DC Maude will provide new methods and tools that can significantly improve both
the design and the implementation of open distributed systems, including web-
based systems and next-generation networks. Furthermore, by being directly based
on rewriting logic, DCMaude will close the gap between formal specifications and
actual implementations, making it possible to gain substantially higher
assurance about the formal requirements, including the security properties, of
such systems.

The project will be carried our jointly by Drs. Jose Meseguer (UIUC) and Dr.
Carolyn Talcott (SRI International). Both UIUC and SRI will take joint
responsibility for the DCMaude design. The DC Maude implementation will be the
primary responsibility of SRI International, while the testing, benchmarking and
development of DCMaude applications will be the primary responsibility of UIUC.

