* 0905447
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Security Services in Open Telecommunications Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas La Porta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 425,496.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of telecommunications
networks is rapidly changing. &lt;br/&gt;Commodity smart&lt;br/&gt;mobile phone
frameworks such as Android and Openmoko invite developers and end users to build
applications, modify the behavior of the phone, and use network services in
novel ways. However, while simultaneously spurring incredible innovation, the
move to open systems alters the underlying performance and security assumptions
upon which the network was designed. Such changes invite vulnerabilities ranging
from merely vexing phone glitches to catastrophic network failures. The current
infrastructure lacks the basic protections needed to protect an increasingly
open network, and it is unclear what new stresses and threats open systems and
services will introduce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research analytically and
experimentally investigates defensive infrastructure addressing vulnerabilities
in open cellular operating systems and telecommunications networks. In this, we
are exploring the requirements and design of such defenses in three coordinated
efforts; a) extending and applying formal policy models for telecommunication
systems, and provide tools for phone manufacturer, provider, developer, and end-
user policy compliance verification, b) building a security-conscious
distribution of the open-source Android operating system, and c) explore the
needs and designs of overload controls in telecommunications networks needed to
absorb changes in mobile phone behavior, traffic models, and the diversity of
communication end- points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research symbiotically
supports educational goals at the constituent institutions by supporting
graduate and undergraduate student research, and is integral to the security and
network curricula.