* 0905214
* Collaborative Research: An Ultrastable Blue Astro Comb for Exoplanet and Cosmology Research
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Sylvain Korzennik, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Great progress has been made in recent years in detecting massive planets
orbiting other stars. These exciting discoveries are an important step toward
understanding the evolution of other solar systems and whether or not they may
harbor life. Tantalizing as these discoveries are, however, they are not
conclusive. Astronomers have yet to find a planet in another solar system that
could support life as we know it. To do so would require finding smaller solid
(not gaseous) earth-like planets orbiting a star within the "habitable zone"
where the distance of the planet from the star is such that the surface
temperature of the planet can sustain liquid water.

There are at least four ways to detect a planet orbiting a star. By far the most
successful means to date has been to very carefully monitor the velocity of the
star. If the velocity tends to vary regularly about its average value, then it
is possible that some celestial body is in orbit around it and we are measuring
the reflex velocity of the star due to the changes in the position of the planet
in its orbit. This is a very exacting measurement to make and it relies on
extremely accurate velocity measurements made with a spectrograph. Large planets
create the biggest velocity wiggle and are therefore easiest to detect. But
detecting smaller earth like planets in the habitable zone requires much higher
precision than is currently available. Dr. Franz Kaertner of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology is designing a very stable and accurate calibration
mechanism to improve the radial velocity measurements. He is working with a
number of scientific colleagues and several students to design and build the
device over the next two years. This new scheme uses a very rapidly pulsed laser
to imprint a regularly spaced calibration "comb" of lines of precisely known
wavelengths through the spectrograph and onto the spectrum of the star. This new
technique will improve the velocity determination from the current standard by
about a factor of 100, enough to detect earth-like planets in the habitable
zone.