* 0905861
* Dissociating the Carbon Nanotube Exciton in Organic- and Inorganic- Semiconductor Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 337,585.00

Technical: This project addresses the potential of CNT/polymer/inorganic
composite materials for efficient photovoltaic operation. The approach includes:
synthesis of blends of semiconducting carbon nanotubes with organic and
inorganic semiconductors using wet chemical and solution-based blending
techniques; characterization of the internal morphology of these blends as a
function of processing conditions and materials selection; identification of
composite materials that will form a type II (donor/acceptor) heterojunction
with semiconducting carbon nanotubes; studies to determine mechanisms
responsible for exciton dissociation and charge collection in carbon
nanotube/semiconductor blends; quantification of rates for exciton dissociation,
charge separation, and charge recombination in the blends; and, quantification
of the electron affinity and ionization potential of monodisperse semiconducting
carbon nanotubes. It is expected that photogenerated charge carriers in carbon
nanotubes can be dissociated and collected by synthesizing donor/acceptor blends
of semiconducting carbon nanotubes with more or less electronegative
semiconductors. Emphasis is placed on understanding the interrelationship
between synthesis, processing, composition, morphology, and properties of such
blends. A variety of semiconductors will be investigated to complement the
carbon nanotubes in the blends including fullerene-derivatives, semiconducting
polymers, and semiconductor oxides. The morphology of the blends will be
characterized via scanning probe and electron microscopy as a function of the
processing conditions and materials selections. Electronic transport,
photoluminescence quenching, spectrally resolved photocurrent, and transient
photo-induced absorption measurements will be used to assess the optoelectronic
properties of these materials. Non-Technical: The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to new understanding and capabilities for materials
combinations with potential for improvements in conversion of solar power to
electricity. The scientific investigations will also train students; in addition
to supporting one graduate student, the project will promote teaching, training,
and learning through the integration of undergraduate students into a research
setting. The project also provides support for two summer students in the PI?s
laboratory through UW-Madison's SURE/REU (Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience and Research Experience for Undergraduates) program. The SURE/REU
program primarily supports students in under-represented groups. Additionally,
the project supports a UW-Madison undergraduate student for the academic year.
Topics such as ethics, how to do research efficiently, problem solving,
networking, research safety, experimental procedure, and results presentation
will be integrated with day-to-day laboratory training.