* 0905713
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Virus Inactivation in Sunlight-treated Waters:  An Investigation on the Reactions Between Singlet Oxygen and Capsid Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Krista Wigginton, Wigginton               Krista         R
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2012
* USD 143,100.00

0905713 Wigginton

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Krista R.
Wigginton to work with Dr. Tamar Kohn at Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne in Switzerland.

Solar disinfection is an effective, low-cost, and sustainable treatment option
for the removal of pathogens from wastewaters and drinking waters. For sunlit
waters, the inactivation of microbial contaminants can occur by a direct and an
indirect mechanism. In clear water, direct damage of the organism?s nucleic acid
occurs by UVB light. In highly colored waters, like those typical of waste
stabilization ponds (WSPs), UVB light extends only through the top layer of the
photic zone. As a result, direct inactivation of microbial contaminants in WSPs
is only significant in a thin layer near the surface of the ponds. UVA and
visible light, on the other hand, can penetrate further into the photic zone and
initiate indirect photo-inactivation. When oxygen is present, the
photoexcitation of sensitizers present either within the microbe (e.g.,
porphyrins, certain amino acids) or in the water column can lead to the
formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as singlet oxygen (1O2),
hydroxyl radical, hydrogen peroxide, etc. These species can subsequently react
with cell constituents of the pathogens and lead to their inactivation. Despite
the widespread use of solar disinfection, there is still little known regarding
the reactions that occur between ROS and microbial contaminants in surface
waters. As a result, drinking water and wastewater engineers are limited in
their ability to predict and optimize the efficiency of solar virus
disinfection. Previous work by Kohn, et al. examined the inactivation of
bacteriophage MS2, a commonly used surrogate for human viruses, with solar
treatment in the presence of natural occurring sensitizing materials. The
results demonstrated that singlet oxygen (1O2) was the most important process in
MS2 inactivation under these conditions. More recent work by Dr. Kohn?s group
has shown that after several logs of MS2 inactivation by 1O2, the viral RNA
inside the MS2 capsid is mostly preserved. This suggests that photoinactivation
of MS2 via 1O2 occurs from modifications on the viral capsid proteins and is not
due to oxidation of the genomic material. The aim of this research is to
identify sites of photooxidation on viral capsids, characterize the reaction
mechanisms with ROS, and determine which oxidation sites are responsible for
virus inactivation. Specifically, MS2 bacteriophage and poliovirus type 3 are
treated with 1O2 and inactivation is monitored with standard plating methods.
Alterations in capsid proteins are identified and monitored using matrix
assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS) and
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). MALDI-MS and ESI-
MS/MS have become critical tools in virology studies and have been previously
used to study the structure of virus proteins as well as entire viruses. To the
PI?s knowledge, this is the first time MS techniques have been used to study the
oxidation of virus proteins. Concurrent with the mass spectral analyses, protein
capsid photooxidation is examined with surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(SERS). SERS spectra of live and inactivated virus are combined with
multivariate statistical tools and ultimately, the PI seeks to use these
techniques to develop a predictive tool for measuring virus viability. To
confirm that the observed results occur in real waters, parallel experiments in
waste stabilization pond samples will be conducted. The results from real waters
will be compared with the laboratory water experiment results. Additionally,
inactivation pathways of the two studied virus types will be compared and then
used to predict 1O2 inactivation pathways and kinetics for a number of
waterborne human viruses.