* 0905146
* RI: Medium: Building Flexible, Robust, and Autonomous Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Richard Lewis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,199,997.00

This project is developing computational agents that operate for extended
periods of time in rich and dynamic environments, and achieve mastery of many
aspects of their environments without task-specific programming. To accomplish
these goals, research is exploring a space of cognitive architectures that
incorporate four fundamental features of real neural circuitry: (1) reinforcing
behaviors that lead to intrinsic rewards, (2) executing and learning over
mental, as well as, motor actions, (3) extracting regularities in mental
representations, whether derived from perception or cognitive operations, and
(4) continuously encoding and retrieving episodic memories of past events. A
software framework called Storm facilitates this exploration by enabling the
integration of independent functional subsystems, allowing researchers to easily
plug in and remove different subsystems in order to assess their impact on the
overall behavior of the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive
architectures are being tested by exposing them to a wide variety of novel
environments with unpredictable (and non-repeatable) extrinsic rewards, but in
which many actions could lead to intrinsic rewards (e.g., surprise). To assess
flexibility, an automated environment generator exposes agents to environments
that are unknown in advance to the artificial agent or human researcher. To
assess robustness, cognitive systems are being exposed to many variants of the
same environment to ensure that the systems can learn from past experience and
generalize when appropriate. And to assess autonomy, systems' must operate
effectively for extended periods of time in a dynamic environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the longer term, flexible and robust cognitive
architectures being devloped under this research will have application as the
'brains' of robotic and software systems in emergency, miltary, and a wide
variety of other societal and service realms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).