* 0905473
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integral-Equation-Based Fast Algorithms and Graph-Theoretic Methods for Large-Scale Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jingfang Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The phenomenal advance in computer technology in terms of
processing&lt;br/&gt;speed and capacity, closely described by Moore's law, in
the last four&lt;br/&gt;decades has been outpaced by the explosive amount of
data that are used&lt;br/&gt;to describe more realistic models in scientific
computing. For instance,&lt;br/&gt;the number of unknowns in a linear system has
grown from hundreds in &lt;br/&gt;the past to tens of millions nowadays. Fast
algorithms such as the&lt;br/&gt;celebrated fast multipole method (FMM) have
provided a computational&lt;br/&gt;tool for narrowing the gap. At the same time,
there is a great need&lt;br/&gt;and challenge to develop better computation
techniques and utilize the&lt;br/&gt;present and emerging computers, with the
gain in speed up to a couple &lt;br/&gt;of orders of magnitude. The goal of the
proposed research is to &lt;br/&gt;advance computational theories and
techniques, in order to meet the &lt;br/&gt;demand and challenge for large scale
simulations of complex &lt;br/&gt;systems in scientific, medical and engineering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team proposed to investigate,
innovate and integrate the&lt;br/&gt;key simulation steps, from analytic re-
formulation of system models with&lt;br/&gt;complex geometries to combinatorial
optimization in mapping numerical&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to computing
architectures. Many traditional models are&lt;br/&gt;formulated in terms of
linear or nonlinear partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equations (PDEs) with
boundary conditions on complex geometries. By&lt;br/&gt;the work of other
researchers and principal investigators,&lt;br/&gt;integral equation (IE)
formulations have lead to better numerical&lt;br/&gt;algorithms in both
efficiency and stability, and more importantly&lt;br/&gt;enabled certain
important large-scale simulations. It is proposed first&lt;br/&gt;to study the
reformulation of traditional PDE models into IE models, as&lt;br/&gt;a direct
and analytical approach to innovative algorithm design.
Next,&lt;br/&gt;preconditioning techniques will be studied as an indirect
and&lt;br/&gt;stabilization approach. Furthermore, Graph-theoretic methods will
be&lt;br/&gt;applied to optimize the FMM-based algorithms on various
modern&lt;br/&gt;computer architectures, especially, parallel architectures.
These key&lt;br/&gt;components will be studied in conjunction, not in
isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed work are
three-fold. &lt;br/&gt;It sheds lights on (1) the model reformulation into IEs
of the second &lt;br/&gt;kind as a fundamental analytic-algorithmic approach to
accelerating &lt;br/&gt;and stabilizing numerical computation, (2) the
connection between &lt;br/&gt;reformulation and preconditioning, and (3) on the
mutual dependence &lt;br/&gt;of numerical algorithms and computer architectures.
The proposed &lt;br/&gt;work will have broader impacts on various applications
through&lt;br/&gt;timely dissemination with demonstration of case studies.
Three&lt;br/&gt;application areas of specific concern are electrostatics
calculation &lt;br/&gt;in molecular dynamics simulations, computational fluid
dynamics, and &lt;br/&gt;the study of oxygen delivery in tissues and tumors via
microvascular&lt;br/&gt;networks. The proposed work involves interdisciplinary
research&lt;br/&gt;collaboration and cultivation of young and new researchers
with&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary backgrounds. Finally, the findings and
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms will be embodied in open source high performance
&lt;br/&gt;software to facilitate research computing by and large and to
&lt;br/&gt;be used in classrooms.