* 0905191
* The Geometry and Dynamics of Symplectic Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Dusa McDuff, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 285,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0905191&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Dusa McDuff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since a symplectic
structure allows one to measure the areas of&lt;br/&gt;two dimensional surfaces,
it is natural that the two dimensional&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds of a symplectic
manifold are key elements of their&lt;br/&gt;global structure. The choice of an
auxiliary almost complex&lt;br/&gt;structure J determines a specially
interesting class of such&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, namely those that are
J-holomorphic. Using them it is&lt;br/&gt;possible to build many interesting
homology theories, such as&lt;br/&gt;quantum cohomology or symplectic field
theory. Recently very&lt;br/&gt;intriguing connections have come to light
concerning the relation&lt;br/&gt;between the dynamical properties of the
symplectomorphisms on a&lt;br/&gt;space (in particular, how much symmetry the
space has) and the&lt;br/&gt;structure of its quantum homology ring. McDuff
recently&lt;br/&gt;discovered that if the space has a circle symmetry then it
is&lt;br/&gt;uniruled, which implies that for every choice of J there is
a&lt;br/&gt;J-holomorphic sphere though every point in the space. One of
her&lt;br/&gt;proposed projects will investigate such connections in
more&lt;br/&gt;depth. Another will investigate the structure of
toric&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, which are symplectic manifolds with maximal
abelian&lt;br/&gt;symmetric group. She also proposes a joint project with
Schlenk&lt;br/&gt;that will illuminate a very basic symplectic rigidity
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;This attempts to understand exactly when a four
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;symplectic ellipsoid can be squeezed inside a ball. This
gives&lt;br/&gt;rise to some very interesting number-theoretic questions,
and&lt;br/&gt;also indicates a connection between the combinatorics
of&lt;br/&gt;J-holomorphic curves in the blow up of the projective plane
and&lt;br/&gt;the numbers that appear as indices in embedded contact
homology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A space can have one of several fundamental
geometric structures,&lt;br/&gt;for example a way of measuring distance and
angle (as in&lt;br/&gt;Euclidean geometry) or a way of measuring the area of
two&lt;br/&gt;dimensional objects (as in symplectic geometry.) The
structures&lt;br/&gt;studied in symplectic geometry are important because they
not&lt;br/&gt;only underlie the equations of classical energy-
conserving&lt;br/&gt;systems such as the planetary system, but also appear as a
vital&lt;br/&gt;component of many of the modern theories in physics such
as&lt;br/&gt;string theory. This project aims to further our
basic&lt;br/&gt;understanding of symplectic spaces. One line of
inquiry&lt;br/&gt;concentrates on questions about the influence of structures
in&lt;br/&gt;the large (such as cohomology) on the dynamical properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;space, investigating for example the number and nature of
the&lt;br/&gt;points that are fixed under an arbitrary movement of the
space.&lt;br/&gt;Another line of inquiry investigates what one might think of
as&lt;br/&gt;the crystalline nature of small pieces of a symplectic
space;&lt;br/&gt;under pressure how do such small pieces fold so as to take
up&lt;br/&gt;less space? This second line of inquiry leads to some
very&lt;br/&gt;interesting questions in elementary number theory
and&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, the first appearance in symplectic geometry of
a&lt;br/&gt;relation between these fields. These questions can be
explained&lt;br/&gt;to high school students, and so will provide an excellent
way to&lt;br/&gt;explain to young people something of what research
mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;do today and to stimulate their interest in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;