* 0905920
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Roy Wollman, Wollman                 Roy
* Fellowship Award
* Julie Dickerson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Cross talk within the
macrophage-signaling network enhances its pathogen detection capabilities" for
Roy Wollman. The host institution for this research is Stanford University, and
the sponsoring scientist is Tobias Meyer.

The immune system's role is to identify harmful pathogens and fight diseases. To
do so, it uses specialized cell types called white blood cells, also known as
macrophages. Macrophages detect invasion by pathogens and identify the class of
pathogens that invades the body (e.g., fungi, bacteria, etc.). This research
focuses on understanding information processing within macrophages, which allows
them to reliably distinguish between different classes of pathogens. It utilizes
robotic microscopy, computer vision, and machine learning tools to collect
systematic data on macrophages' response to different pathogen-derived
molecules. This resulting data is being used to develop a mathematical model
describing the information processing encoded by the biochemical reactions
inside a cell. This model provides a better understanding of how macrophages
identify pathogens.

Training goals include computational training in the analysis of large sets of
image data using computer vision algorithms, machine learning tools for reverse
engineering of models from experimental data, and control theory for optimal
experimental design. This interdisciplinary project emphasizes the integration
of computational and experimental approaches. Educational impacts include
training for undergraduate students and the dissemination of the results by
publication this work in the scientific literature. A better understanding of
the classification capabilities of macrophages is essential for long-term
progress in the development of new treatments for infectious diseases. In
addition, understanding information processing and classification at the
molecular level has important basic science implications.