* 0905699
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Alexandra Ponette, Ponette                 Alexandra      G
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This National Science Foundation Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship
will examine land use effects on, and ecological limits to, tropical montane
forest recovery in RÃ­o Abiseo National Park, Peru. Here, centuries of livestock
grazing and burning, introduction of exotic African grasses for improved
pasturing, and temperature variation have resulted in a patchwork mosaic of
advancing and receding forest-grassland boundaries. However, the mechanisms
controlling forest-grass ecotone location across this landscape remain poorly
understood. In this study, environmental history data, observations from natural
regeneration monitoring, and experimental manipulations will together be used to
test the hypothesis that under conditions of fire and grazing exclusion,
elevation and grass species interact to control rates and patterns of forest
recovery within native alpine and exotic kikuyu-dominated grasslands. By
investigating whether or not these bottlenecks can be overcome, this project
will reveal the role of co-occurring ecological processes in mediating regional
forest dynamics, and hence potential vegetation response to climate variability,
on tropical mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will perform her research
at the University of Texas at Austin, under the sponsorship of Dr. Kenneth R.
Young in the Department of Geography &amp; the Environment. The University of
Texas has a strong research tradition in Latin American geography. It houses the
Nettie Lee Benson Latin American Collection and Plant Resources Center, both
with significant materials from Peru. The Fellow will also benefit from access
to the Environmental Information Systems Laboratory in the host department. Dr.
Young has conducted academic and consulting research in Peru since the 1980s.
His research focuses on the biogeography, ecology, and conservation of Peru?s
humid eastern montane forests in the context of landscape and climatic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to contributing to theory on grass-tree
vegetation shifts, this project will have far-reaching implications for
protected areas management, restoration, climate change, and ecosystem services.
Peru?s humid montane forests, the world?s leading biodiversity hotspot, are
integral to the long-term environmental sustainability of the Andean-Amazon
basin. An assessment of the factors driving contemporary resource use within and
outside the park will serve to re-evaluate threats to conservation in this
region and to generate practical policy recommendations related to land use and
economic development. By evaluating the most promising methods and species for
forest restoration, this project will supply land managers with practical
guidelines for degraded lands rehabilitation. Experimental manipulations will
potentially indicate species-specific responses to global warming, as well as
the suitability of these forests and key species as indicators of climate
change. Lastly, an understanding of the factors controlling tree establishment
in grasslands will be important for assessing the sensitivity of ecosystem
services, such as water regulation, to distinct land-use legacies.&lt;br/&gt;The
training objectives are to enhance the Fellow?s expertise in land use and global
change, expand the Fellow?s knowledge of experimental methods, and improve her
analytical skills. First, postdoctoral training will allow the Fellow to
continue studying the influence of anthropogenic disturbance on tropical
mountain forests, but in a remote region that has received little attention
despite its worldwide conservation importance. Second, field research will allow
the Fellow to design and conduct a suite of experiments needed to test
historical land use effects on forest dynamics. Third, data acquired from this
project will provide the foundation for future research comparing forest
recovery across degraded landscapes in Mexico, Peru and similar environments
elsewhere. In addition to providing innovative and important research
contributions, an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Fellowship will improve the Fellow?s
qualifications for a tenure track faculty appointment at a major research
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;