* 0905868
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Lisa Patrick Bentley, Patrick                 Lisa
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Linking plant scaling
models with plant physiological models through novel bioinformatics approaches
to estimate carbon and water fluxes of diverse plants" for Lisa Patrick. The
host institution for this research is the University of Arizon, and the
sponsoring scientist is Brian Enquist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
combines metabolic scaling theory with plant physiological processes to produce
a more robust framework for understanding and predicting whole-plant and
ecosystem dynamics. Specific research objectives are to (1) integrate plant
physiological models with metabolic scaling theory to estimate plant carbon and
water fluxes across a wide variety of species, ecosystems, and environmental
conditions and (2) statistically evaluate the ability of the coupled model to
account for variation in biologically meaningful parameters while quantifying
model error at each level (e.g., leaf, plant, species, ecosystem). The research
approach involves utilizing and contributing information to diverse databases;
integrating models within a hierarchical Bayesian framework; using existing data
to parameterize the coupled physiological scaling model and subsequently
estimate plant-level carbon and water fluxes across a variety of species, plant
functional types, and environments; and statistically validating the new coupled
physiological scaling model to quantify model error as well as uncertainty in
estimated model parameters and model predictions. The research makes use of
cutting-edge statistical tools and novel bioinformatics approaches to synthesize
diverse anatomical, architectural, and physiological plant data within the
context of semi-mechanistic ecological models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results are
used to improve terrestrial scaling relationships and contribute to improved
predictive power for estimating the regional and global carbon and water budgets
of woody plants and ecosystems dominated by woody plants. The training goals are
to gain the ability to conduct interdisciplinary research through advanced
training in modern statistical methods, model implementation and validation
techniques, and scaling applications in ecology.