* 0905765
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Robert Pyron, Pyron                   Robert         A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2011
* USD 70,500.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Historical causes of
biodiversity: the effects of evolution, ecology, and time on latitudinal species
richness gradients" for Robert Pyron. The host institution for this research is
Stony Brook University, and the sponsoring scientist is John
Wiens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most obvious and fundamentally important
aspects of biology is the vast amount of biodiversity observed worldwide, which
is concentrated in the tropics. A latitudinal gradient in species richness
(i.e., higher tropical biodiversity) is one of the oldest and most debated
patterns in ecology and evolutionary biology, and dozens of hypotheses have been
proposed to explain it. However, many hypotheses ignore the processes that
directly change the number of species in discrete areas (i.e., speciation,
extinction, dispersal), and no single explanation has been able to
satisfactorily explain the gradient across taxa. This research examines the
underlying causes of latitudinal diversity gradients in two of the most diverse
vertebrate groups, squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes) and amphibians (frogs,
salamanders, and caecilians) by using genomic, museum, and environmental
bioinformatic databases to quantify the contributions of ecological, temporal,
and evolutionary factors to global patterns of biodiversity and attempts to
develop new statistical methods to study these patterns. Understanding the
causes of the development and distribution of species richness is crucial given
the current biodiversity extinction crisis we now face, particularly in
amphibians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training objectives of this fellowship are
to strengthen skills related to both computational analysis using large-scale
bioinformatic databases, as well as an increased knowledge of global
biodiversity patterns, specifically in squamates and amphibians. The integration
of computational bioinformatics and organismal phylogenetics will also
permitinterdisciplinary collaborations with researchers worldwide.