* 0905387
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computer Vision and Online Communities: A Symbiosis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Marshall Tappen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 399,149.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The project represents a new paradigm for research in
computer vision related to content-based image management--?one that exploits a
symbiosis between this technology and the online communities it serves. It is
quite clear that communities stand to benefit from improved searching and
browsing tools enabled by visual technology, but we argue that the converse is
equally true. Visual information that is shared online is almost always embedded
in a social network, and these networks provide rich contextual information that
can be a boon to vision systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to build
foundations for a new generation of computer vision systems that are 'socially
aware'. These vision systems will exploit knowledge of the relationships between
individuals and the social events that occur in the embedding online community,
and in doing so they will exhibit significant performance gains over current
technology. They will be trained discriminatively using the data embedded in
existing online communities, and they will adapt in response to observations of
how they are used by community members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost every image
that is shared online is embedded in some form of online community, and any
system that seeks to analyze and catalog such imagery will gain from the
proposed research. We foresee benefits for communities that wish to share
historical image archives, scientific image collections, forensic imagery,
surveillance videos, and more. Also, while we focus on tools for searching and
browsing imagery, our work will have the important effect of improving the
quality and density of textual metadata. In this way, the research stands to
benefit all members of an online community, including those with visual
impairments.