* 0905763
* Analysis of Functional Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Rong Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,884.00

In this project the investigator develops new models, methods and associated
theory under a general framework of `Functional Time Series Analysis'. Analyzing
time series in a functional framework is increasingly practical and is gaining
importance rapidly as more and more applications involving such data sets. There
are four research projects, in the board directions of functional time series
driven by dynamic processes, distributional time series driven by dynamic
processes, functional ARMA models, and functional regression models with
functional time series errors. They are closely related but with different
focuses. The combination of the projects builds a comprehensive framework for
functional time series analysis. For each project, statistical properties of the
underlying models, statistical inference and predictions under these models, and
the theoretical properties of the inference and prediction methods are studied.
Several special and important applications are
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional time series analysis can be viewed as a
marriage between the traditional time series analysis and the field of
functional data analysis of independent functional observations. Time series
analysis is mainly interested in the dependent structure of the observations
over time, the understanding the dynamic nature of the underlying process and
accurate predictions of the future. Modern data collection capability has lead
to broader definition of `data' and more and more observations are in the form
of functions, images, and distributions. The intersection between time series
analysis and functional data analysis has not been systematically explored. In
this project, the investigator develops a general framework of functional time
series analysis that is amenable to statistical thinking and the analysis of
real problems. This project paves the way for developing a completely new
research area in statistics. It has broad impact in advancing our capabilities
of statistical data analysis. It aims to produce advanced statistical tools for
analyzing functional time series that are encountered in many important
application fields including economics and finance, environmental studies,
medical and neuroscience, ecology and meteorology. The project also actively
engages in activities related to education and research training of graduate and
undergraduate students, especially attracting minority and women students into
the field of statistics and statistical applications.&lt;br/&gt;