* 0905222
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Unification Laboratory: Increasing the Power of Cryptographic Protocol Analysis Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Deepak Kapur, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops
cryptographic protocol reasoning techniques&lt;br/&gt;that take into account
algebraic properties of cryptosystems.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, formal methods
for cryptographic protocol&lt;br/&gt;verification view cryptographic operations
as a black box,&lt;br/&gt;ignoring the properties of cryptographic algorithms
that can be&lt;br/&gt;exploited to design attacks. The proposed research uses a
novel&lt;br/&gt;approach based on equational unification to build new
more&lt;br/&gt;expressive and efficient search algorithms for algebraic
theories&lt;br/&gt;relevant to cryptographic protocols. Equational unification
gives&lt;br/&gt;a compact representation of all circumstances under which
two&lt;br/&gt;different terms correspond to the same behavior. The
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;are implemented and integrated into Maude-NPA, a system
that has&lt;br/&gt;been successful in symbolic protocol analysis. It is
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;that Maude-NPA when enriched with such powerful
unification&lt;br/&gt;algorithms can analyze protocols and ensure their
reliability,&lt;br/&gt;which could not be done
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved techniques for analyzing security are
helpful both in&lt;br/&gt;assuring that systems are free of bugs, and in
speeding up the&lt;br/&gt;acceptance of new systems based on the confidence
gained by a&lt;br/&gt;formal analysis. This research will lead to the design
and&lt;br/&gt;implementation of next generation tools for protocol
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms developed will be made available to researchers
as a&lt;br/&gt;library suitable for use with protocol analysis tools. Tools
from&lt;br/&gt;the project will help students understand concepts relevant
to&lt;br/&gt;protocol design and get hands-on experience.
Equational&lt;br/&gt;unification for algebraic theories is not only useful
for&lt;br/&gt;protocol analysis, but also for program analysis in general,
thus&lt;br/&gt;making the results of this project to be widely relevant.