* 0905865
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Eric Montemayor, Montemayor              Eric           J
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009
and is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a host
laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation in
biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to Eric
Montemayor is "Biochemical studies of an enzyme important for RNA recycling."
This research will be conducted at University of Texas under the sponsorship of
Dr. Scott Stevens.

The research supported by this fellowship investigates the role of an enzyme
known as Dbr 1 that plays a key role in the maintenance and proper functioning
of nucleic acids, DNA and RNA. Despite its key role in the cell, this enzyme is
little understood. The goal of the research is to generate a three-dimensional
picture of Dbr1. Just as a mechanic needs a diagram of an engine in order to
fully understand how the engine works, biologists need a detailed picture of
Dbr1 in order to fully understand how it functions in nucleic acid maintenance.

Additionally, this fellowship provides the Fellow with valuable training to help
him to become an independent investigator capable of performing original
scientific research and training future generations of scientists.