* 0905910
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Margaret Brown Vega, Brown_Vega              Margaret       Y
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2011
* USD 120,000.00

The Fellow's project, entitled "New Insights into Warfare: Developing Methods in
Geographic Information Systems and Applying them to a Regional Archaeological
Analysis of Central Andean Fortifications", will examine the construction and
use of fortifications in prehispanic Perú in a 15,000 km2 region of the coast, a
study that builds off of her prior dissertation research. Warfare changes
society, and is a spatial phenomenon that generally occurs at regional scales.
The spatial patterning of fortifications informs archaeologists on where people
are threatened by war or where warfare occurred, but has until recently been
difficult to assess regionally. This research addresses the need for systematic
data collection on defensive sites in a large region to better permit assembly
of scholarly contributions, and more rigorous comparison. The Fellow?s
examination of fortifications on the coast of Perú will address two time periods
during which war is rampant: the Early Horizon (ca. 900-200 B.C.) during which a
pan-Andean cult ideology is widely adopted, and the Late Intermediate Period
(ca. A.D. 1000-1476) during which the Chimú Empire expands southward. During the
fellowship tenure the Fellow will establish a database of information on
fortifications, and develop new methods and theories in Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) to apply to a regional archaeological analysis of
warfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will spend one year in Perú carrying
out fieldwork to systematically identify and map all hilltop forts from 11
coastal valleys. She will spend 2 months doing a remote survey of forts by
analyzing aerial photographs at the Servicio Aerofotográfico Nacional in Lima.
This remote survey will prepare her for 10 months of fieldwork during which she
will visit each fort to collect data. The Fellow will also date a sample of the
fortifications using radiocarbon dating. Using these data she will address the
following questions: 1. How many forts are there, where are they, and how big
are they? 2. what are the dates of each, how are they constructed, and is there
any indication of attack? 3. Where are the water sources (river, lagoon, and
ocean)? 4. What are the best routes and travel times between forts, valleys, and
the coast and highlands? and 5. What are the changes in patterns of
fortification over time?&lt;br/&gt;Regional analysis using GIS and spatial
statistics will be carried out to rigorously test models of the relationship
between human settlement, landscape use, and warfare as a social phenomenon. The
Fellow will integrate theoretical knowledge from anthropology, archaeology, and
GIS, and technical mastery of computer applications so that GIS tools can be
programmed to assess models of human interaction, fort use, and war. The Fellow
will by mentored by Dr. David Webster and Dr. George Milner of the Department of
Anthropology at Pennsylvania State University (PSU). PSU is a leader in both GIS
research and the anthropology of warfare. The Fellow will have access to
computing infrastructure and advanced analytical training that will permit new
methods to be developed to examine the regional problem outlined. Advanced GIS
training will include the construction of geodatabases, knowledge of map
algebra, and learning Python and other script languages to develop and automate
new analytical processes, and carry out very complex spatial analyses of
visibility, movement, and surfaces over a very large region. Based in the
Department of Anthropology, the Fellow will be guided in the application and
forging of new methodological and theoretical ground in GIS and
archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The broad impact of this research
will be improved knowledge of indigenous warfare and its variability, and a
better understanding of prehispanic Central Andean society and social dynamics.
The results will provide new insights into the spatial and social dimensions of
warfare. The research will contribute toward cross-cultural investigations of
war and society, a topic of heightened anthropological interest in today's
world. The research is significant for methodological and theoretical
improvement of the use of GIS in archaeology. The Fellow will acquire advanced
technical command of GIS. She will gain a high level of expertise to employ
advanced and newly developed GIS techniques tailored to archaeological
questions, transforming understandings of warfare and methods of regional
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The fellowship will aid in the Fellow?s
long-term research goal of explaining the causes of warfare and understanding
its varied social dimensions. The database created will be shared with other
investigators to provide a basis for more intensive future investigations by the
Fellow and colleagues. Radiocarbon dates will enhance current chronologies for
the Central Andes, improving temporal control in the region. Spatial control of
the distributions of fortifications and calculated routes will sharpen the
ability of archaeologists to further examine individual sites within a broader
context. The Fellow?s training will bridge anthropological archaeology and GIS,
and provide her the knowledge and skills to enable her to teach this cross-
disciplinary approach to the next generations of anthropologists and
archaeologists.