* 0905205
* DC: Medium: Collaborative Research: ELLF: Extensible Language and Library Frameworks for Scalable and Efficient Data-Intensive Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,000.00

The growth of scientific data sets to petabyte sizes offers significant
opportunities for important discoveries in fields such as combustion chemistry,
nanoscience, astrophysics, climate prediction and biology as well as from data
on the internet. However, the realization of new scientific insights from this
data is limited by the difficulty of creating scalable applications due to the
lack of easy-to-use programming models and tools. To address challenges in
creating data intensive applications, the project will build an extensible
language framework, backed by an expressive collection of high-performance
libraries (I/O and analytic), to provide a development environment in which
multiple domain-specific language extensions allow programmers and scientists to
more easily and directly specify solutions to data-intensive problems as
programs written in domain-adapted languages. The project will build on recent
attribute grammar research to build an extensible specification of C to host
domain-specific language extensions which will also address the inadequate
performance in storage, I/O and analysis capabilities in low-level language such
as C. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed extensible
language and library framework has the potential to be a transformative problem
solving environment for programmers and scientists since it allows scalable and
efficient solutions to data-intensive problems to be specified at a high-level
of abstraction. The resulting language framework and libraries will be freely
available to researchers writing applications for climate and other applications
involving spatio-temporal data. This includes many applications in the physical
sciences and engineering and thus it is expected that the framework will find
use in other scientific domains as well.