* 0905246
* CSR: Medium: Guanyin: a Thousand hands with a Thousand eyes for Distributed Software Checking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Gail Kaiser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,028,000.00

Software reliability affects virtually everyone. Thorough software checking is
unquestionably crucial to improve software reliability, but the checking
coverage of most existing techniques is severely hampered by where they are
applied: a software product is typically checked only at the site where it is
developed, thus the number of different states checked is throttled by those
sites' resources (e.g., machines, testers/users, software/hardware
configurations).&lt;br/&gt;To address this fundamental problem, we will
investigate mechanisms that will enable software vendors to continue checking
for bugs after a product is deployed, thus checking a drastically more diverse
set of states. Our research contributions will include the investigation,
development, and deployment of: (1) a wide-area autonomic software checking
infrastructure to support continuous checking of deployed software in a
transparent, efficient, and scalable manner; (2) a simple yet general and
powerful checking interface to facilitate creation of new checking techniques
and combination of existing techniques into more powerful means to find subtle
bugs that are often not found during conventional pre-deployment testing; (3)
lightweight isolation, checkpoint, migration, and deterministic replay
mechanisms that enable replication of application processes as checking launch
points, isolation of replicas from users, migration of replicas across hosts,
and replay of identified bugs without need for the original execution
environment; and (4) distributed computing mechanisms for efficiently and
scalably leveraging geographically dispersed idle resources to determine where
and when replicas should be executed to improve the speed and coverage of
software checking, thereby converting available hardware cycles into improved
software reliability.&lt;br/&gt;