* 0905044
* NCSS/W:  Substantive Expertise, Strategic Analysis and Behavioral Foundations of Terrorism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Catherine Eckel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 12/31/2013
* USD 149,885.00

This award is funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for a workshop on
the behavioral foundations of terrorism. The lead workshop organizer plans to
bring together researchers from multiple disciplines to share their knowledge
and develop future research projects. The organizer will target researchers in
three domains: 1) researchers from sociology, psychology and criminology who
investigate the particulars of terrorist organizations, including how they
recruit and operate, what motivates their members, and how they respond to
threats; 2) researchers from economics and political science who model conflict
between groups using game theory; and 3) researchers from economics and
psychology who use laboratory and field experiments to test predictions of the
game-theoretic models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop organizer plans to
incorporate in-depth knowledge from terrorism experts into game-theoretic models
and then test these models through laboratory experiments. Participants at the
workshop, under the guidance of group leaders, will present their and others'
research which illustrates the state-of-the-art in their disciplines. By
bringing together this interdisciplinary group, the organizer hopes to generate
new programs of research around national security, terrorism, and counter-
terrorism activities. Outputs from the workshop will include new,
interdisciplinary research projects, which will be disseminated via a special
issue of a journal or an edited volume. The primary broader impact of this
project is to develop more effective and informed public policies that address
issues of terrorism.