* 0905176
* Pyromellitic Diimide (PyDI)-Based Molecular and Polymeric Electron-Transporting Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Howard Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,846.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Pyromellitic (benzenetetracarboxylic) diimides (PyDIs) are
best known as segments of highly insulating polyimide dielectrics This proposal
is to build on the transformative concept that a simple PyDI structure is a
sufficiently conjugated core for the construction of electron-carrying organic
semiconductors for polymer-based electronics and energy transducers. This
structure is more readily available than the higher rylenes already
investigated, is highly transparent and chemically stable, and leads to
processable and electronically tunable derivatives. While numerous small-
molecule and polymeric hole-carrying (p-channel) semiconductors have been
developed, the list of electron-carrying (n-channel) alternatives, while
growing, remains smaller. There are particularly few examples of processable
n-channel semiconductors. Most conjugated cores for n-semiconductors have very
high melting points. Those few that are solution processable require extensive
syntheses. This proposal develops the counterintuitive idea that PyDIs can
function as molecular and polymeric semiconductors in transistors and other
devices. The PI has already shown that PyDI semiconductors can have electron
mobilities >0.1 cm2/Vs. Transistors made from PyDI derivatives are operable in
air and have very high on/off ratios. This proposal is to perform a systematic
study of N and 3,6-C substitution on PyDIs, develop solution processability, and
extend these structures into printable polymers. Fundamental issues to be
addressed include the electron energy level tunability through substitution,
relative merit of PyDI and naphthalenetetracarboxylic diimides, preservation of
solid state packing in processable solids, comparison of conjugated and
nonconjugated substituents and polymer linkages, reliability of molecular solids
versus polymers, and enhanced viscosities of polymer solutions for printing. The
morphology and crystal structures will be determined for a wide range of
derivatives, as will the orbital energy levels relative to other materials in
which the PyDIs might be blended or with which they might share interfaces.
NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: New organic and polymeric materials, though based on a
structure generally associated with insulators, will in this case further
opportunities for organic based circuit, solar cell, capacitor, and
thermoelectric technologies. They will be utilized in modules for undergraduate
and high school laboratory course teaching. One particular course is being
developed specifically to utilize organic electronic devices, and will be
transferred to predominantly undergraduate institutions such as Drew University
and University of Maryland-Baltimore County, and Anne Arundel High School. The
modules will also be presented to high school teacher workshops that include a
diverse mix of attendees from urban school districts. Mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students, including joint and visiting minority students from
Howard University, will be emphasized.