* 0905714
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Matthew Fujita, Fujita Matthew K
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 189,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009 using
funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). The research and training plan is for Matthew K. Fujita and is entitled
"Genome structure and its influence on the efficacy of natural selection in
reptiles." The host institution for this research is Harvard University under
the sponsorship of Dr. Scott Edwards.

Variation in the arrangement of the building blocks of DNA define the structure
of the genome, and this structure can have a profound influence on the
performance of natural selection. There are strong correlations between
signatures of natural selection and structural components of genomes in
organisms that are traditional models for genetics research, but not much is
known about these relationships in organisms that are not traditional models,
such as reptiles. This research (1) identifies and describes the structural
components of reptile genomes using the recently-sequenced Anolis lizard genome
and an upcoming turtle genome and (2) examines how these structural components
affect forces such natural selection that influence genome evolution. This
research provides a vision of how evolutionary biologists who study natural
populations can utilize these increasingly large and complex datasets with
important and relevant questions towards understanding the evolutionary
processes responsible for the origin of biological diversity.

Training plans include developing techniques in genomic data organization,
computational methods, and statistical analyses. There is also a strong
international component to this research that brings together researchers from
Harvard University, the Broad Institute in Cambridge, Mass. USA, and Oxford
University in the United Kingdom.