* 0905888
* Investigating connections between homotopy theory and algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Dugger, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,441.00

The project focuses on three areas: motivic stable homotopy groups, new
foundations for etale homotopy theory, and topological equivalences of
differential graded algebras. In the first area the PI will continue his work
with Isaksen on the motivic Adams spectral sequence, and will investigate
specific relations amongst the motivic Hopf elements that arise from Cayley-
Dickson algebras. The etale homotopy theory project involves using quasi-
categories to create an Artin-Mazur style homotopy theory of homotopically
cofiltered diagrams of spaces. Finally, in joint work with Shipley the PI will
continue the investigation of situations in which differential graded algebras
can give rise to weakly equivalence Eilenberg-MacLane spectra.

Homotopy theory is the part of mathematics that studies geometric objects in
higher-dimensional space via algebraic techniques. The flow of information can
go in both directions: typically one starts with algebraic knowledge and uses
homotopy theory to deduce geometric information, but especially in recent years
it has become possible to start with geometric knowledge and deduce some
sophisticated algebraic information. This research project will try to add to
our knowledge about several topics in which algebra and geometry interact in
mysterious ways. By coming to a deeper understanding of these connections, we
will be in a better position to understand certain elaborate geometric patterns
and possibly to attack some difficult conjectures.