* 0905019
* Outward on the Spiral:  Petascale Inference in Earthquake System Science (SCEC PetaShake Project)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 01/31/2012
* USD 1,600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to take
physics-based seismic hazard analysis (SHA) to a new level using petascale
computational resources. Building on the scientific and technical successes
under their current PetaApps award the PIs will incorporate better theory and
data into their earthquake simulations through their continued development of
Earthquake system science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake system science
presents some of the most challenging computational pathways in geoscience.
Taken from end to end, the earthquake problem comprises the loading and failure
of tectonic faults, the generation and propagation of seismic waves, the
response of surface sites, and ? in its application to seismic risk ? the damage
caused by earthquakes to the built environment. These pathways involve a wide
variety of interactions, some highly nonlinear and
multiscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Community Modeling Environment (CME) of the
Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) is a large collaboratory for
investigating earthquake systems using NSF?s TeraGrid facilities for high
performance computing (HPC). &lt;br/&gt;Through a series of grants, NSF/EAR and
NSF/OCI have funded the CME Collaboration to develop an integrated cyber
facility ? PetaSHA ? for executing physics-based SHA computations and managing
the resulting data volumes using the NSF?s most capable computing centers. In
this project, the PIs will continue CME development of the PetaShake platform (a
new petascale capability-computing platform). In addition to pushing their
simulations toward petascale, the PIs will equip the PetaShake platform with a
new set of simulation-analysis tools that will be needed in applying petascale
resources to make scientifically validated inferences about
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;