* 0905460
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Configuration: Supporting End-User Control of Complex Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Mark Newman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,185,194.00

This project will develop techniques that will allow users to help each other
create and maintain configurations of complex, pervasive computing and
communication environments. As personal computing environments become ever more
complex, growing to include not just desktop and laptop computers, but also
mobile phones, media devices, sensors, and more, configuration tasks grow in
importance and difficulty. In particular, it becomes challenging for end-users
to create, understand, and maintain the hardware and software configurations
that allow them to carry out the activities that matter to them. Moreover, this
problem will only get worse with time as computing environments grow to include
the hundreds or even thousands of different devices and software services that
have been forecast by computer scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach
taken in this project derives from the observation that, even as each user may
have specific devices, services, and preferences that make it difficult for her
to find information relevant to their particular needs, there frequently exists
some other user, somewhere, who has experienced and solved a similar problem.
This other user's knowledge would doubtless be of great benefit to the first
user, but existing tools for seeking help and modifying configurations do not
make it easy for such information exchange to take place. An important goal,
then, is to match each user with the knowledge she needs in order to accomplish
the configuration tasks facing her, on the assumption that such knowledge
resides with some other user with a similar system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address a number of challenges, including: 1) How can
"configuration knowledge" be identified and made available without placing undue
burden on the individuals who possess it? 2) How can help-seekers be presented
with information in a way that allows them to act on it with minimal effort and
likelihood of error? 3) How can the complexity of large spaces of possible
configurations be reduced to only the dimensions that matter for users'
decision-making? In order to address these challenges, this project will develop
the Collaborative Configuration Service (CCS) - a general service that collects
configuration information from various users of a particular system and matches
similar users with each other for the purpose of providing help. Through an
iterative study-build-evaluate process, research will construct and refine CCS
by adapting it successively to three different user communities: users of an
ambient information device (Chumby), users of an open source software-based home
media system (MythTV), and people representing the "early majority" of home
media networking users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supporting users to gain control
and receive help with the configuration and operation of open, evolving
pervasive computing environments will lower the barrier to the adoption of those
environments. This will lead to benefits to both the end-users themselves and to
the companies for whom an open marketplace for pervasive computing services and
components will present opportunities for competition and technological
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;