* 0905981
* Algebra and Topology in Interaction; Davis, CA; September 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Motohico Mulase, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 35,000.00

Under the guidance of the Scientific Advisory Board consisting of Yakov
Eliashberg (Stanford University), Nicolai Reshetikhin (UC Berkeley), and Serge
Tabachnikov (Pennsylvania State University) serving as Chair of the Board, the
PI and Co-PIs propose to organize a conference, Algebra and Topology in
Interaction, celebrating the 40 years of spectacular developments in the
interplay of these two fields since the birth of the Gelfand-Fuchs cohomology.
The conference will be held on the UC Davis campus in September 2009. The main
theme of the conference is to illuminate the particular type of interaction
which characterizes the past 40 years of developments in algebra and topology,
including the most recent results in contemporary mathematics. The topics to be
discussed in the conference will include the current exciting developments in
symplectic field theory, representations of infinite- dimensional Lie algebras,
and topological quantum field theory, as well as the recent achievements in the
topological applications of cohomology of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras,
characteristic classes of foliations, contact homology, Chekanov- Eliashberg
differential graded algebra, and Legendrian knot theory. The most important goal
of the conference is to provide an opportunity for a diverse group of
mathematicians including postdoctoral researchers, those with traditionally
underrepresented background, graduate students, and faculty from primary
undergraduate institutions, to meet and discuss mathematics with the invited
leading experts of the field. To facilitate the discussions, the organizers will
make every effort to bring the diverse audience to the conference, and request
the speakers to prepare their talks aimed at the level at which a second-year
graduate student can understand.



The conference will bring three generations of researchers together, and foster
scientific interactions across the generation, providing an opportunity to
exchange ideas and to initiate new collaborations among participants. The
younger generation can learn the newly established results, new perspectives,
and possible future directions of research specifically addressed to them from
the leading experts. The founders of the theories will inject how their
discoveries were made and what was their vision back then. Expository talks can
connect this vision with the current developments, and provide to the audience a
sense of strong current and flow of mathematics. The participants will devote
one session to compiling a list of open problems in the area that are most
likely to shape the research in the near future. The conference will also
include components for dissemination of results as well as outreach to local
high school students and the general public. The Scientific Advisory Board will
form an editorial board for the conference proceedings volume to be published.
Reflecting the tone of the conference, the authors will be encouraged to provide
expository articles, survey papers, and research papers readable to graduate
students. The talks presented at the conference will be placed on the Conference
Website by the local organizers. The outreach activity will comprise an
expository talk by a distinguished speaker in an evening session during the
conference. This talk will be an integrated component of the year-long outreach
activity of the Department of Mathematics, UC Davis, which brings as many as 400
local high school students and general public to the event.