* 0905385
* III: Medium: Provenance Analytics: Exploring Computational Tasks and their History
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Juliana Freire, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 06/30/2013
* USD 957,467.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."This proposal will address the provenance of computational
processes and the data they manipulate. These are of fundamental importance in
maintaining scientific process. Provenance (also referred to as audit trail,
lineage, and pedigree) captures information about the steps used to generate a
given data product. Such information provides documentation that is key to
preserving the data and determining the data's quality and authorship as well as
interpreting, reproducing, sharing and publishing results. It also seeks to
produce algorithms and techniques for extracting and reusing useful knowledge
embedded in workflow specifications. Workflows and workflow-based systems have
proven to be successful in capturing computational tasks at various levels of
detail and automatically record provenance information. They have recently
emerged as an alternative to ad-hoc approaches to assembling computational tasks
that are widely used in the scientific community. In order to effectively use
provenance information and to deal with a potential information overload, we
need novel tools and techniques that help users. The ability to explore the
knowledge available in the provenance of computational tasks has the potential
to foster large-scale collaborations, expedite scientific training in
disciplinary and inter-disciplinary settings, as well as to reduce the lag time
between data acquisition and scientific insight.