* 0905127
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Improving Older Adult Cognition: The Unexamined Role of Games and Social Computing Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anne McLaughlin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 770,856.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5). The goals of this research project are to understand how
variables within social computing environments improve older adult cognition,
what properties of an environment are critical, and empirically test these
properties in interventions with older adults. The applied output will be design
guidelines for a class of cognitive games for older adults and a new social
computing environment. Two interventions will be run using video games to
improve older adult cognitive and everyday abilities. The first intervention
will use a commercial game (Boomblox-Wii) that contains the hypothesized
variables necessary for cognitive improvement: novelty, attentional demand, and
social interaction. The groups in this intervention will allow measurement of
the individual and moderating effects of these variables. Pre-test and post-test
ability measures will determine which variables or combinations of variables
most improve the cognition and everyday functioning of older adults. The second
phase is to use performance and preference data from Intervention 1 to maximally
implement the variables shown to most improve cognition and functioning in a
game specifically for older adults. The process of design will result in a set
of guidelines for cognitive interventions to be used by other developers and
researchers, ideally leading to a new class of "brain games" with reliable
effectiveness.

These results will advance the knowledge and understanding of how cognitive
training reduces age-related decline. The theory that social interaction can
facilitate cognitive improvement by increasing effortful attention on a task is
suggested by both behavioral and neurological evidence, but this project
represents the first time these variables will be empirically tested, and the
first intervention in a computing environment. Knowledge gained from this
project touches the fields of cognitive aging, human-computer interaction, and
social computing - all of which need data on effective cognitive training
interventions. Results will aid designers who currently have little knowledge of
the interface and game-play needs of older players.

This research advances the understanding of age-related change and social
interaction by discovering the crucial components of successful cognitive
training for older adults. Studying these components in the context of social
computing and virtual worlds allows for world-wide impact and use by physically
isolated individuals. A social computing environment may be used by older adults
in rural communities, those separated geographically from their cohort, and
those unable to leave their homes (all under-served populations). This project
involves significant student involvement, providing varied mentorship
opportunities to the students as well as exposure to differing methodologies.
Specialized coursework will result from this project in developmental
psychology, skill acquisition, and video game design.