* 0905880
* Fluctuations and Response in Granular Matter near Jamming
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research that is
motivated by a key question in granular physics: how can one describe the
statics and dynamics of dry granular media at large length scales and long time
scales?&lt;br/&gt;The PI focuses on the nature of stress propagation near
jamming. Our ability to predict and control the response of granular materials
to external changes hinges on our ability to connect features such as force
chains observed at short length scales to the large-scale deformation of
granular media. Therefore, a theoretical framework that links the microscopic
and collective behavior of grains has the potential of transforming the
landscape of granular research.&lt;br/&gt;A property of granular materials that
is responsible for most of the non trivial phenomenology, and leads to most of
the theoretical challenges is the existence of a large number of different
microscopic metastable states that are macroscopically equivalent. This feature
is also present in a broader class of materials in their jammed states. Jamming,
the transition from a fluid state to a disordered solid state is influenced by
the presence of metastability, and granular materials exhibit strong
fluctuations close to jamming. Experiments and simulations have shown that
fluctuations in stresses, flow fields, and density have well defined
distributions characterized by only a few external parameters. The existence of
well-characterized distributions has led to notion of an underlying statistical
description for granular media. Statistical ensembles analogous to those of
equilibrium statistical mechanics have been proposed to create the desired link
between microscopic and macroscopic, fluctuations and response. The PI will use
a recently developed stress ensemble to make predictions about spatial
fluctuations in static granular packings. The rheology of granular materials is
also strongly affected by the existence of multiple, metastable states for a
given set of macroscopic parameters. In recent work, the stress-ensemble,
combined with a concept of metastability in a ?stress landscape? has been able
to reproduce the logarithmic strengthening of granular materials under shear. A
goal of the proposed project is to achieve better understanding of the dynamics
of slowly deformed granular media using models that incorporate metastabilty,
disorder and stochasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
valuable educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The
PI has a strong record of including under-represented students and faculty in
her research. The PI has also taken leadership roles in the complex fluids and
granular community by founding and organizing workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on granular materials and the
phenomenon of jamming. The granular materials encountered in our daily lives,
such as sand, salt, or rice, have remarkable properties. The cereal in the box
compactifies when shaken, rice makes pyramidal structures only when poured out
carefully, and sand flows at a constant rate in an hourglass. Failures of grain
silos are caused by unpredictably large stresses exerted on the sidewalls as the
flow arrests. Avalanches and earthquakes are examples of the unjamming of grains
leading to flow. Yet, our grasp of such behavior of granular matter is limited.
The main obstacle that hinders the understanding of granular matter is that it
is fundamentally out of thermal equilibrium. Grains are macroscopic objects that
interact through dissipative contact. The dissipative nature of the interactions
implies that energy has to be constantly supplied to maintain a steady state.
The macroscopic size makes thermal fluctuations irrelevant for changing the
state of grains, and granular materials are effectively zero-temperature systems
that do not equilibrate spontaneously. There is a growing realization that the
study of granular media offers unexpected challenges in physics, having behavior
unlike that of liquids or solids. The PI aims to develop a theoretical framework
which captures the diverse phenomena displayed by granular materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a practical perspective, granular matter and
emulsions are widespread, finding applications in the food industry, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals and geomorphology. Often, the handling of granular materials is
based on empirical methods due to a lack of understanding of these complex
systems. A fundamental basis for these systems would make it possible to develop
new procedures and reduce handling costs, thereby having a significant impact on
industry and on American competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide valuable educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. The PI has a strong record of including under-represented students and
faculty in her research. The PI has also taken leadership roles in the complex
fluids and granular community by founding and organizing workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;