* 0905478
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Multi-Perspective Bayesian Learning for Automated Diagnosis of Advanced Malware
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Rajgopal Kannan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 152,462.00

Contemporary Internet malware is constantly evolving and making antivirus and
intrusion detection systems increasingly obsolete. It is no longer acceptable to
simply rely on binary signatures for malware identification. Both current and
future generations of malware will require entirely new detection strategies
that can tolerate the rapid perturbations in binary structure and payload
delivery mechanisms. A promising direction to this end is the use of multi-
perspective, behavioral-oriented paradigms for malware identification. In this
project, we propose a new approach to 1) automatically extract infection
knowledge, based on a multi-perspective, behavior-oriented view, and 2) rapidly
apply this gained knowledge to diagnose the presence of malware in host computer
systems. For each malware family, a probabilistic profile will be automatically
extracted, which captures the invariant behavioral features of its members. This
envisioned knowledge-extraction process should provide sufficient abstraction in
its invariant behavior characterization such that future malware variants can be
recognized. We also propose a Bayesian framework for diagnosing live malware
infections on fielded computer systems. If successful, this research will
introduce a new complementary strategy for diagnosing malware infections in ways
that cannot be defeated through the current suite of antivirus countermeasures.