* 0905291
* CIF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Integrating and Mining  Bio-Data from Multi Sources in Biological Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2014
* USD 353,333.00

Networks are a natural, powerful, and versatile tool representing the structure
of complex systems and have been widely used in many disciplines, ranging from
sociology to physics to biology. Massive amounts of biological data from
multiple sources await interpretation. This calls for formal information
integration, modeling and mining methods. The functioning of complex biological
systems demands the intricate coordination of various cellular processes and
their participating components. As biological networks grow in size and
complexity, the model of a biological network must become more rigorous to keep
track of all the components and their interactions, and in general this presents
the need for new methods and technologies in information acquisition,
transmission and processing.

This research develops a set of novel methods and algorithms of integrating,
analyzing and mining biological networks that include multiple sources of
biomolecular information such as gene and protein expressions, interactions, and
regulations, the formation and dissolution of protein complexes, and
interactions between proteins and small molecules. Quantitative and qualitative
bio-data from multiple sources are iteratively integrated, mined and organized
to generate scalable hypothetical biomolecular network structures. The dynamics
of these computational hypotheses are tested and refined through dynamic
simulation and laboratory experiments. The investigators will develop an
integrated modeling and mining method for the biomolecular networks governing
cellular processes, with natural connections to both the biological knowledge
base and the design and analysis of biological experiments. We will also plan to
investigate novel graph-based theoretical models and algorithms for biological
data represented as networks or graphs.