* 0905607
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Rewriting Logic Foundations for Verification and Programming of Next-Generation Trustworthy Web-Based Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Carolyn Talcott, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2014
* USD 299,903.00

Distributed Concurrent Maude ( DCMaude ) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rewriting
model of computation is simple , yet general and flexible . A system
&lt;br/&gt;of any kind , for example , an algorithm , a database , a hardware
system , a &lt;br/&gt;programming language , a network protocol , a sensor
network , or the molecular &lt;br/&gt;biology dynamics of a cell , can be
modeled by a set of rewrite rules that &lt;br/&gt;describe the systems behavior
. The rewriting model of computation is &lt;br/&gt;intrinsically concurrent ,
without any need for explicit concurrency constructs . &lt;br/&gt;Any set of
rules that apply to nonoverlapping system components can execute
&lt;br/&gt;concurrently . For a large distributed system such as a network or a
cell , this &lt;br/&gt;means that at any given time thousands or millions of
concurrent transitions may &lt;br/&gt;be happening in parallel .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maude is a language based on rewriting logic . The current
Maude implementation &lt;br/&gt;provides a high performance rewrite engine , as
well as builtin search , &lt;br/&gt;unification , and model checking tools to
support execution and analysis of &lt;br/&gt;systems specified in Maude . To
realize inherent concurrency of rewriting , the &lt;br/&gt;proposed project will
develop an implementation of Maude called Distributed and &lt;br/&gt;Concurrent
Maude ( DCMaude ) that will exploit the concurrency available in
&lt;br/&gt;multicore/multiprocessor machines , and support distributed computing
and systems &lt;br/&gt;programming . The rewriting semantics of Maude supports
seamless transition &lt;br/&gt;between concurrent and distributed execution of a
system : execution in one &lt;br/&gt;process , multiple processes/cores , or
multiple machines . In addition to built in &lt;br/&gt;strategies for
concurrency , the design of DCMaude will include a means for the
&lt;br/&gt;programmer to control concurrency at a high level of abstraction in a
&lt;br/&gt;declarative way . &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DC Maude will provide new
methods and tools that can significantly improve both &lt;br/&gt;the design and
the implementation of open distributed systems , including &lt;br/&gt;web-based
systems and next-generation networks .