* 0905626
* AF: Medium: Center for Quantum Algorithms and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Umesh Vazirani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,352,496.00

Quantum computation has forced a dramatic change in our beliefs about the
foundations of computer science, the security of cryptosystems, and the nature
of quantum systems. This award focuses on several fundamental algorithmic
questions that arise out of this viewpoint. The first is the design of new
quantum algorithms. The challenge here is that the major paradigm for the design
of quantum algorithms - the hidden subgroup framework - has recently been shown
to have severe limitations in its applicability. The center will explore several
approaches, including a new framework for the design of quantum algorithms via
the quantum approximation of tensor networks, as well as recent work on the use
of quantum algorithms for discovering hidden nonlinear
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the limits of quantum algorithms
is equally important to the possibility of designing efficient classical
cryptosystems that are immune to quantum cryptanalysis. Such "post-quantum"
cryptosystems could have an enormous practical impact well before the first
working quantum computer is ever built. For this to happen it is necessary to
better understand the quantum hardness of concrete classical cryptosystems such
as the lattice-based cryptosystems or the McEliese cryptosystem. A different
approach would involve designing novel cryptosystems whose security is based on
already established quantum hardness results in the hidden subgroup
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center would also study fundamental
questions in quantum complexity theory, including the complexity of quantum
interactive proof systems. Arguably the most important challenge is proving the
quantum analog of the celebrated PCP theorem. This would have wide implications
including quantum hardness of inapproximability results, improved fault-
tolerance results for adiabatic quantum computing, as well as implications for
theoretical condensed matter physics. Another fundamental question is the power
of multi-prover quantum interactive proof systems. Resolving whether or not this
complexity class is NEXP as in the celebrated classical result MIP = NEXP, is
expected to provide important insights into the nature of quantum
entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;