* 0905196
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: GridPac: A Resource Management System for Energy and Performance Optimization on Computational Grids
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ishfaq Ahmad, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 339,988.00

Massive energy consumption is an escalating threat to the environment. Large-
scale computational grids consume a substantial amount of energy, and
&lt;br/&gt;their energy requirements for powering and cooling are becoming
comparable to the costs of acquisition. There is a lack of generally applicable
methods for reducing energy consumption while ensuring good quality of service.
This project will develop GridPac (Grid with Power-Aware Computing), a
middleware environment that will allow grid managers and service providers to
schedule multiple workflows across a distributed grid for system-wide
optimization. GridPac will be based on a novel framework to support a variety of
task-level workflows. The main features of this work are to develop:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Novel static and dynamic algorithms for scheduling
single and multiple workflows, which can be flexibly utilized by service
providers in scalable grid environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(b) Control
algorithms to account for dynamic adjustment of schedules using energy
monitoring of the grid resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Extensive
benchmarking using a suite of commonly used grid workflows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(d) A prototype middleware to assist IT organizations to
better support their users while reducing energy costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will lead to original scholarly
contributions while harnessing the usage of computational grids. The project
carries tremendous potential for economic, environmental, and societal impact.
We will initiate new graduate and undergraduate level courses on related topics,
and develop relevant tutorials, which will help to create awareness and educate
a large audience on a critically important research topic.