* 0905569
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Generating Effective Dynamic Explanations in Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Steven Feiner, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 803,216.00

To survive and flourish, people must interact with their environment in an
organized fashion. To do so, they need to learn, imagine, and perform an
assortment of transformations on and in the world. Primary among these are
manipulation of objects and navigation in space. This project integrates
research in computer science and cognitive science to develop and evaluate
augmented reality tools to create effective dynamic explanations that enhance
manipulation and navigation, in conjunction with identification and
visualization. Augmented reality refers to user interfaces in which virtual
material is integrated with and overlaid on the user?s experience of the real
world; for example, by using tracked head-worn and hand-held displays. Dynamic
explanations are task-appropriate sequences of actions, presented interactively,
with appropriate added information. The tools will be created in collaboration
with subject matter experts for exploratory use in indoor and outdoor real world
domains: navigating and identifying landmarks in a wooded park area, assembling
a piece of furniture, and navigating and visualizing for planning the site of a
new urban campus. Cognitive science research will determine the best ways to
convey explanations and information to people. Computer science research will
address the design and implementation of systems that embody the best candidate
approaches for identifying objects and locations, specifying actions, and adding
non-visible information. In situ experiments will be used to assess and refine
the systems.

Manipulation, navigation, identification, and visualization are representative
of important things that people do every day, ranging from fixing broken
equipment to reaching a desired destination in an unfamiliar environment. The
ways in which we perform these tasks could potentially be improved significantly
through augmented reality systems designed using the principles to be developed
by this project. Both the cognitive principles and the augmented reality tools
will have broad applicability. The systems developed will inform the design of
future systems that can aid the general public, for educational and recreational
ends, as well as systems that can assist people with auditory, visual, or
physical impairments.