* 0905778
* Variationals Methods in Imaging and in Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Irene Fonseca, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,168,561.00

Fonseca&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0905778&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In recent years there has
been remarkable progress in the mathematical rigorous understanding of nonlinear
phenomena, resulting from a deep articulation of ideas and techniques from
partial differential equations, calculus of variations, and geometric measure
theory. Common features to the problems to be addressed in this project are the
treatment of energies that involve terms of different dimensionality (bulk,
surface terms, etc.), a large range of length and time scales, higher order
derivatives, and discontinuous underlying fields. Topics include:&lt;br/&gt; -
in imaging, the recolorization and reconstruction of damaged images using the
RGB and the CB models;&lt;br/&gt; - in thin structures, the understanding of the
interplay between rigidity and brittle features;&lt;br/&gt; - within the realm
of singular perturbations, the study of foams, microphase separation of
copolymer melts, relaxation and homogenization of multi-phase, multi-component
multiple integrals, micromagnetics;&lt;br/&gt; - in epitaxially strained thin
films, the surface morphology and diffusion;&lt;br/&gt; - in micromagnetics, the
derivation of a model for large bodies from the small bodies model that exhibits
competition between the anisotropic energy and the exchange energy
terms;&lt;br/&gt; - in the calculus of variations, the development of multi-
scale theories and dimension reduction techniques for systems that go beyond
traditional (higher order) underlying gradient fields and may apply to Maxwell-
type systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The program outlined above is strongly
motivated by contemporary issues in imaging and materials science at the core of
advances in high-end technology. These include recolorization of damaged images,
the understanding of fracture in thin structures, the study of foams used in oil
recovery, detergents, and lightweight structural materials, the study of
morphology and defects in the epitaxial deposition process that are responsible
for important optical, electronic, and magnetic properties, and the prediction
of the behavior of ferroelectric, electromagnetic, and magnetostrictive
materials and composites. The underlying models are at the forefront of
traditional mathematical theories, and require state-of-the-art techniques, new
ideas, and the introduction of innovative mathematical tools. It is necessary to
bridge the multitude of scales present, and other mathematically challenging
features, by appropriate schemes of articulated theoretical, numerical, and
experimental approaches. This project is focused on the theoretical side of this
venture, with the aim of contributing to the identification of problems of
national scientific importance that offer new opportunities for the integration
of applied analysis in research and in the education of advanced graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;