* 0905793
* Fluctuations of Amorphous Metals in Time and Space from Electron Nanodiffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 09/30/2013
* USD 430,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Fluctuations in the intensity diffracted from materials illuminated with
coherent probes contain unique information about the structure of disordered
materials. In this project, a new, state-of-the-art scanning transmission
electron microscope will be used to study spatial and temporal fluctuations in
metallic glasses and glass forming liquids with nanometer spatial resolution.
Fluctuations in space give information about nanoscale structural order, which
will be used to study nucleation and growth during the primary crystallization
reaction exhibited by some high Al-content metallic glasses. The size
distribution of protocrystalline clusters as a function of time and temperature
will be measured through the phase transformation. Fluctuations in time give
information about atom dynamics, which will be used to study the glass
transition of bulk-glass forming alloys with varying fragility as a function of
temperature. In particular, direct experimental evidence of the nanoscale
spatially heterogeneous dynamical domains that underlie some models of the glass
transition will be sought. For both these efforts, coherent electron probes
spanning 0.1 to ~1000 nm in diameter will be developed. These probes will also
be useful for nanodiffraction and diffractive imaging.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Metallic glasses are a potentially useful new class of metal alloys. They have
exceptional strength and springiness, and they can be used as a stepping stone
to create new nanostructured metals with, for example, even higher strength or
useful properties as magnets. One of the stumbling blocks to exploiting these
materials is understanding their structure, particularly at a length scale
around 1 nanometer, which is a cluster of 20-50 atoms. This project supports
research using a new technique in electron microscopy to measure that nanometer-
scale structure. The new structural data will be used to explore how metallic
glasses form in the first place during cooling of a molten metal alloy, and one
of the ways metallic glasses can be used to create nanostructured metals.
Understanding how metallic glasses form from metallic liquids may shed light on
the glass transition in general, which is one of the grand challenges in
materials physics. This project will also enhance the competitiveness of the
U.S. technical workforce by disseminating advanced electron microscopy
techniques through an online database of examples
(http://tem.msae.wisc.edu/emdb/). Examples from the database are used in
classroom teaching and by working scientists and engineers who want to upgrade
their skills.