* 0905131
* TC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Towards Self-Protecting Data Centers: A Systematic Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Data centers using virtual machine (VM) consolidation are taking over old
computer rooms run by individual companies. However, consolidating services and
resources does not consolidate security automatically. To meet the top two
requirements for modern data centers, namely business continuity and information
security, this research will take a systematic approach that leverages the
emerging VM technologies to consolidate four areas of systems security research:
redundancy, microscopic intrusion analysis and detection, automatic response,
and diversity-driven protection. We will make innovative contributions on
various aspects of security consolidation, including (1) An architecture and
underlying techniques based on diversified replication towards defensive
protection against unknown attacks; (2) Novel cross-layer and cross-VM methods
for causal relation logging, event correlation, damage assessment, and
forensics; (3) New intrusion detection techniques based on unique cross-VM-
replica inconsistency checking techniques, and new cross-layer inconsistency
checking methods; (4) A novel pipelining approach towards automated intrusion
response; and (5) New techniques for on-the-fly data center intrusion
confinement and recovery.

Our research will result in significant advances in helping
mission/life/business critical applications and information systems reduce risk,
increase business continuity, and deliver data assurance in the presence of
severe cyber attacks. Broader impact will also result from the education,
outreach, and dissemination initiatives. Educational resources from this
project, including course modules and teaching laboratory designs, will be
disseminated through a dedicated Website.

Key Words: self-protection; recovery; virtual machine monitor; causal relations;
availability