* 0906067
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Laura Naumann, Naumann                 Laura          P
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2011
* USD 41,666.00

This research project extends the conceptual and methodological tools of the
Social Relations Model (SRM) to a long-standing debate in cultural psychology:
Do Asian-Americans fail to show the self-enhancement bias that Westerners often
show and instead show a more negative self-effacement bias? In particular, the
Fellow will adapt Kwan and colleagues? recent model of self-enhancement bias
which emphasizes that two factors need to be considered to accurately estimate
an individual?s self-enhancement (or effacement) bias. That is, self-perceptions
must be compared both to how an individual perceives people in general (i.e.,
perceiver effect) and how others consensually perceive the behavior of the
target individual (i.e., target effect). The Postdoctoral Fellow will extend
this SRM-based approach to cultural research by including both in-group and out-
group perceptions. She will be able to examine three kinds of differences
between Asian and European Americans within one comprehensive design: perceiver
effects (e.g., do Asians generally perceive people more critically or
negatively? Do Asians only perceive other Asians more critically?), target
effects (e.g., do Asians score lower in certain desirable social
characteristics?), and various aspects of self-enhancement bias (e.g., do Asians
perceive themselves in self-enhancing or self-effacing ways? Do biased self-
perceptions affect adjustment in a positive or negative way?). She will compare
conclusions derived from the two earlier conceptions of self-enhancement (namely
the social comparison and the self-insight perspective) and then test whether
Asian self-perceptions are realistic, self-enhancing, or self-effacing. Finally,
the Fellow will study the academic and social consequences of self-perception
biases in college students of different ethnic backgrounds. To test these
hypotheses, the Fellow will use a repeated-measures design in which participants
rate their own behavior and the behavior of the other group members in a
specific group interaction context. In a round-robin design, Asian and European
American participants (assigned to 6-person groups) will provide ratings of self
and others on several positively and negatively-valenced behavioral attributes,
as well as social adjustment variables such as liking and interpersonal
closeness. Furthermore, the mixed ingroup-outgroup feature of my design will
allow the Fellow to also compute the perceiver, target, and self-enhancement
effects specifically for one?s own ethnic in-group (e.g., Asians perceptions of
other Asians) or an ethnic out-group. This research should provide a more
complete and contextually nuanced understanding of how social perception and
self-enhancement biases differ across Asian-Americans and other ethnic groups in
the U.S. For example, this research importantly extends previous work by
controlling for individual differences in both perceiver and target effects,
thus beginning to resolve the inconsistent findings about self-enhancement for
Asian and European Americans, as well as examining if there are personal or
social consequences of this bias. Additionally, this research emphasizes the
importance of the cultural context?conclusions about self-enhancement may
critically depend on social comparison standards (e.g., comparing the self to an
out-group or one?s ethnic in-group). In the future, the Fellow plans to conduct
research that takes a cultural approach to studying social perception by
examining how other factors such as ethnic identity strength, biculturalism, and
acculturation shape self-perception processes. Specifically, she hopes to extend
this work to other underrepresented populations including African Americans and
Latinos. This proposal for postdoctoral training and research stems from earlier
research that she conducted at UC-Berkeley, which has been funded initially by a
NSF Pre-doctoral fellowship and a Ford Foundation Dissertation-Year fellowship.
The Fellow looks forward to involving future generations of undergraduate and
graduate students in research on minority and diversity issues and generating
methodologically sound research on these topics.