* 0906204
* Symplectic Topology of Hamiltonian Systems with Infinitely Many Periodic Orbits
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Basak Gurel, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 136,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0906204&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Basak Gurel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of &lt;br/&gt;2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main long-term objective of the proposed work
is to examine the&lt;br/&gt;reason for the existence of infinitely many periodic
orbits for a&lt;br/&gt;variety of Hamiltonian dynamical systems. The first part
of the&lt;br/&gt;proposal is comprised of several interconnected projects
addressing&lt;br/&gt;this question for certain classes of Hamiltonian
diffeomorphisms and&lt;br/&gt;also for specific Hamiltonian systems such as
twisted geodesic&lt;br/&gt;flows. The PI will tackle these problems by making
use of methods from&lt;br/&gt;symplectic topology including Floer homological
techniques, spectral&lt;br/&gt;invariants, Hamiltonian Ljusternik-Schnirelman
theory, the Seidel&lt;br/&gt;representation as well as methods from differential
geometry such as&lt;br/&gt;h-principles. Among more specific tools pertinent to
this&lt;br/&gt;investigation are local Floer homology, the mean index, the
properties&lt;br/&gt;of action and index spectra and of action and index gaps,
and&lt;br/&gt;geometric and dynamical properties of the symplectically
degenerate&lt;br/&gt;maxima. The techniques utilized by the PI also have
applications&lt;br/&gt;beyond establishing the existence of infinitely many
periodic&lt;br/&gt;orbits. In particular, the PI's approach to the projects in
the second&lt;br/&gt;part of the proposal draws heavily on one of her recent
works on the&lt;br/&gt;periodic orbits problem. The PI outlines a method of
proving that the&lt;br/&gt;diameter of the group of Hamiltonian diffeomorphisms
is infinite for&lt;br/&gt;many symplectic manifolds, including some new
instances. Another group&lt;br/&gt;of problems considered in this proposal
concerns the symplectic&lt;br/&gt;topology of coisotropic submanifolds and some
of its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian systems constitute a broad
class of physical systems where&lt;br/&gt;dissipative forces can be disregarded.
For example, the planetary&lt;br/&gt;motion in celestial mechanics and the
motion of a charged particle in&lt;br/&gt;a magnetic field are usually treated
as Hamiltonian systems. One&lt;br/&gt;general, but not universal, feature of
such systems is that they tend&lt;br/&gt;to have numerous periodic orbits.
Corresponding to the cyclic motion,&lt;br/&gt;this is the simplest dynamical
phenomenon after equilibrium and an&lt;br/&gt;investigation of periodic orbits
of a system is crucial in&lt;br/&gt;understanding its global behavior. For a
broad class of Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;systems, the number of periodic orbits is
known to be infinite and this&lt;br/&gt;is thought to be the case for many (but
not all) Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;systems. Yet, establishing the existence of
periodic orbits often&lt;br/&gt;requires advanced and powerful mathematical
tools. The proposal&lt;br/&gt;focuses on the existence problem for infinitely
many periodic orbits of&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian dynamical systems in a variety of
settings and on&lt;br/&gt;applications of the techniques used by the PI to
attack this problem&lt;br/&gt;to some other related questions. The projects in
the last part of the&lt;br/&gt;proposal concern a certain class of spaces which
arise, for instance,&lt;br/&gt;in the study of Hamiltonian systems with
symmetries. The proposed work&lt;br/&gt;is related to and has potential
applications in mathematical physics,&lt;br/&gt;and geometric and quantum
mechanics.