* 0906874
* Collaborative Research: Development of an Additive Selection Criteria based on Interface Complexions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Shen Dillon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

0906874, 0906931&lt;br/&gt;Dillon and Carter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The methods
for production of most ceramic materials depend on a small amount of chemical
additions that distribute non-uniformly within the material; these small amounts
can dominate a ceramic?s utility. These chemicals often produce additional
crystalline or glassy features. By selecting the right chemicals additives it is
often possible promote particular features; such approaches can often reduce the
cost of production or significantly improve the properties of the material.
Unfortunately, it remains an ongoing challenge to predict which chemicals should
be selected for any particular system and thus progress relies on trial and
error. A new approach to predicting potential chemical additives will be
developed by understanding how the different crystalline and glassy features
compete energetically and kinetically during their formation. A combination of
various experimental and theoretical techniques will be employed to achieve this
goal.The results will provide an important new predictive approach to
engineering chemistry in ceramics that may lead to cost reduction and
performance improvement for a variety of products. The project will fund and
train two doctoral students in materials science, engineering, and teamwork
throughout its duration. As part of a science outreach program, short media
clips of exciting scientific phenomena will be produced for inclusion on popular
viral web-media outlets such as www.YOUTube.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;Grain boundary complexions (such as intergranular films) are
analogous to grain boundary ?phases? whose stability is dependent on
temperature, chemistry, and grain boundary crystallography; their thickness and
structure are thermodynamic equilibrium properties. Recent studies show that
complexions depend on processing and determine properties of a number of
technologically important ceramic systems. Existing approaches to predicting
susceptible systems are inadequate and much of our knowledge in this realm is
empirical. Recent preliminary results indicate that equilibrium with relation to
complexions is often not achieved and that it is important to consider competing
processes such as precipitation. Furthermore, complexions will change their
composition and structure in use and may serve as nucleation sites for grain
boundary precipitates. Like other ?phase? selection problems in materials, this
one requires a combined understanding of activation barriers, equilibrium
thermodynamics, and kinetics. It is hypothesized that the activation energies of
the competing processes have a dominant effect on this ?phase? selection that
dramatically impacts the ultimate microstructural evolution and properties. This
novel approach holds the possibility to fundamentally reshape how scientists and
engineers approach this problem. The proposed work will quantify the relevant
parameters necessary for determining the activation energies and change in free
energy associated with the two processes, in a model ceramic system, using a
combination of experimental and theoretical techniques. Graduate students will
carry out this work and will be trained in such techniques as scanning probe
microscopy, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, calculated phase
diagram methods, and diffuse-interface phase field approaches. The results will
form the basis for new additive selection criteria for ceramics based on
manipulating grain boundary complexions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;