* 0906930
* Collaborative Research: Quantum-Cascade-Laser Active Materials Based on Silicon-Germanium Nanomembranes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Max Lagally, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 177,733.00

Technical. This project addresses synthesis/processing/fabrication research to
explore quantum-cascade (QC) mid- and far-infrared light-emitting materials
based on SiGe quantum wells (QWs). Since QC lasers are semiconductor light
sources based on intersubband (ISB) transitions (i.e., electronic transitions
between quantized states within the same energy band), their operation is
essentially unaffected by the nature of the energy band gap of the underlying
materials. Hence such considerations provide an approach for the demonstration
of laser action in silicon ? a goal complicated by the indirect band gap of
(Si)(Ge). Strain, however, associated with Si/SiGe QWs appears as a significant
challenge to progress. This project takes a new approach, in which elasti-cally
relaxed SiGe nanomembranes are used as the growth substrates and/or the active
material. Such nanomembranes will be grown epitaxially on Si(Ge)-on-insulator
substrates and then re-leased from the handle wafer by removing the underlying
oxide layer via wet etching. The de-sired result would be a free-standing
heterostructure where strain relaxation occurs via elastic strain sharing among
the constituent epilayers without the formation of defects, and thus be vir-
tually free of dislocations. The released nanomembranes could then be
transferred onto other substrates. Further challenges complicating the
demonstration of silicon-based QC lasers are provided by design issues specific
to the SiGe QW materials system, which are also being ad-dressed on this
project. An approach based on electronic ISB transitions in the L valleys of
Ge/SiGe QWs will be explored. Recent calculations indicate that this approach
may have advan-tages over the p-type structures that have been investigated so
far, including longer nonradiative lifetimes, larger oscillator strengths, and
more efficient tunneling transport. Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. The proposed use of nanomembrane
technology for the fabrication of complex semiconductor quantum structures has
the potential for broad technological impact beyond the SiGe materials system
and the QC-laser device application described above. Moreover, the project
activities will promote education through the training of students across
disciplines, ranging from semiconductor epitaxial growth to nanomembrane
synthesis and processing, bandgap engineering, and THz (terahertz) photonics. To
increase the effectiveness and scope of the program, the involvement of
undergraduates and high-school interns will be emphasized, by leveraging
existing programs with a strong focus on under-represented minorities.