* 0906324
* NICS Remote Data Analysis and Visualization Center
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jian Huang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 09/30/2013
* USD 10,000,000.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.

In recent years, researchers from a growing range of scientific domains have
experienced a widening gap in their abilities to generate data on complex
biological and physical systems and translate these data into scientific
discovery. Our data analysis and visualization capabilities have failed to keep
pace with advances in both the capacity of our computing infrastructure and the
resolution and throughput of our data acquisition systems. Translating raw data
generated by detailed simulation or collected by advanced instruments into
scientific discovery requires a coherent suite of powerful hardware and software
capabilities that is fully integrated into our national computational
infrastructure. The volume of the data and the complexity of the underlying
phenomena require an infrastructure that allows scientists to develop and
operate flexible, and the same time dependable, end-to-end data analysis and
visualization capabilities that span local and national resources. A 2007 report
composed by data analysis, management, and visualization experts concluded that
datasets being produced by experiments and simulations are rapidly outstripping
our ability to explore and understand them. One of the most significant
challenges to scientific discovery today is the extraction of knowledge and
meaning from this vast array of data and the understanding of the correlations,
trends, patterns, and interrelationships among disparate elements from an ever-
growing array of data sources. Visualization, data analysis, and knowledge
discovery are more vital than ever because they generate the data insight and
intuition that enable scientific discovery. Scientific simulation has become the
third pillar of science, supporting frameworks and experimental studies in our
understanding of natural phenomena. As simulations become larger, more numerous,
more complex, and as the scientific problems we seek to unlock become more
challenging, so does the task of understanding the data generated. This award
presents a data visualization and analysis center, based at the University of
Tennessee and coupled with the NSF TeraGrid Kraken supercomputer, that will
narrow this gap by bringing together a unique team, proven software
technologies, and advanced computing and data-handling capabilities. The center
will provide the eyes of the TeraGrid XD, our national cyberinfrastructure, as
it evolves to the XD era by empowering scientists to see and understand very
large collections of measured or simulated datasets. The hardware that
undergirds the center is a large shared memory SGI UltraViolet system, able to
provide 1,024 processors with 4 TB of shared memory for processing large
datasets. No other system in the world has this level of shared memory
concurrency for analysis and visualization. Supported by a large (1 PB)
filesystem directly connected to the Kraken supercomputer and the TeraGrid
network, this system will provide NSF researchers with an unparalleled data
understanding resource. The team of people comprising the center will draw upon
experience in visualization,statistical analysis, workflow delivery, portal and
dashboard development, remote access, and application development to provide
software resources for large scale data understanding. This team will also be
supported by dedicated user assistance, system support, education, and
application discovery staff.