* 0906751
* Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering and Fluorescence Confocal Polarizing Microscopy of Three-Dimensional Structures in Liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2011
* USD 277,903.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Liquid crystals are the key material in many modern
technologies. As stated by the Nobel Prize winner P.G. de Gennes, ''...the study
of liquid crystals is complicated because it involves...a certain sense of
vision in three-dimensional space in order to visualize complex molecular
arrangements''. Until recently, to substantiate this sense of vision...,
researchers and educators relied on indirect information, such as integrated 2D
images. This project will expand the recently developed techniques of 3D
visualization of the molecular orientation in liquid crystals, the so-called
Fluorescence Confocal Polarizing Microscopy (FCPM) and Coherent Anti-Stokes
Raman Scattering (CARS) microscopy, to the studies of complex three-dimensional
structures in liquid crystals, both static and dynamic. A unique feature of
CARS, namely, label-free chemical sensitivity, will be used to establish
orientation of chemical bonds in compounds with potentially biaxial
orientational order. FCPM will be used to explore the dynamics of colloidal
particles in the liquid crystal medium. Director distortions, introduced in the
system by finite surface anchoring at the particle surface, strongly affect the
dynamics of particle, making it radically different from the dynamics in regular
fluids. The problem is very complex and can be accessed only with a 3D
visualization tool that this project will provide. This research will be
conducted at the Liquid Crystal Institute at Kent State University which offers
well established mechanisms for graduate and undergraduate training (supported
by NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates grant), and a fertile ground for
industrial partnership (Industrial Partnership Program with about 30 companies
membership). The acquired knowledge would help in other projects with the
potential practical benefits to society, namely, in the development of fast
switching displays and liquid crystal-based optical and microfluidic devices.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Liquid crystals combine properties of both crystals and
liquids. They show optical properties similar to that of regular solid crystals
but at the very same time they are very sensitive to even the weakest external
factors, such as a small voltage pulse. It explains why the liquid crystals are
a key material in what is universally known as "LCDs", liquid crystal displays.
As stated by the Nobel Prize winner in the field, P.G. de Gennes, ''...the study
of liquid crystals is complicated because it involves...a certain sense of
vision in three-dimensional space in order to visualize complex molecular
arrangements''. Recently, researchers at the Liquid Crystal Institute, Kent
State University, Ohio, have developed special microscopy techniques to obtain
truly three-dimensional images of the complex molecular arrangements in liquid
crystals. The researchers will employ these instruments to look into the new
promising phenomena in liquid crystals that simply could not be studied before.
One theme is a search for the so-called biaxial nematic that promises to
dramatically improve the switching speed of LCDs. The second theme is to explore
principles that control a motion of a small particle in a liquid crystal
environment. The goal here is to learn whether the unique properties of the
liquid crystal can be used to propel the particles and thus create a colloidal
micromotor. This research will be conducted at the Liquid Crystal Institute at
Kent State University that combines graduate and undergraduate training with
industrial partnership program. The acquired knowledge would help in the
development of fast switching LCDs, microfluidic and optical devices. Three-
dimensional visualization of liquid crystals would help both graduate and
undergraduate students to grasp the essence of modern science of advanced
materials.