* 0906866
* Nonlinear Effects in Quantum Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education with an aim to develop nonperturbative methods for systems with strong
interactions. The PI will focus on the hydrodynamic approach which provides a
general framework for treating interacting systems. The PI aims to develop such
an approach to gain insight into quantum low-dimensional strongly interacting
systems focusing on integrable models. The linearized version of the
hydrodynamic description, bosonization, is very effective in one-dimension. The
PI plans to extend this approach to nonlinear and dispersive hydrodynamic
theory. In contrast to linear bosonization, the nonlinear theory will be
suitable for studying nonlinear effects, such as formation of dispersive shock
waves. Shock waves have been observed in systems of cold atoms, and these new
tools would be timely.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study several physical systems such
as cold atoms, quantum dots, two-dimensional electron gas in quantum Hall
regime, and spin chains using topological methods and exact results for quantum
mesoscopic transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is writing a review on the use
of topological methods in quantum condensed matter physics and delivers tutorial
lectures to researchers in condensed matter physics. The PI is developing a new
course on topological aspects in solid state physics which will be taught to
physics graduate students in Stony Brook. The PI teaches mathematics in K-12
enrichment program and teaches physics and mathematics to gifted high school
students in Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education with the aim of developing a
new approach for strongly interacting quantum mechanical systems, like electrons
in strongly correlated materials and low temperature gases of atoms trapped by
laser beams. The PI's approach builds on a method that has been successfully
applied to systems confined to one dimension. The PI will use these methods to
study some of the most challenging problems in condensed matter physics, such as
spin chains and the nature of new states of matter predicted to exist in gases
of electrons confined to dimensions in semiconductor crystals in a perpendicular
strong magnetic field. These topological states of matter may enable a new kind
of computation based on the manipulation of quantum mechanical states. Unlike
other proposals for quantum computing, topological states would be comparatively
immune from environmental effects that would interfere with the operation of a
quantum computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is writing a review on the use of
topological methods in quantum condensed matter physics and delivers tutorial
lectures to researchers in condensed matter physics. The PI is developing a new
course on topological aspects in solid state physics which will be taught to
physics graduate students in Stony Brook. The PI teaches mathematics in K-12
enrichment program and teaches physics and mathematics to gifted high school
students in Russia.