* 0906535
* AMC-SS: Stochastic Networks -- Analysis, Control and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ruth Williams, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 331,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic models of complex networks
with dynamic interactions arise in a wide variety of applications in science and
engineering. Specific instances include high-tech manufacturing, customer
service systems, telecommunications, computer systems, and gene regulatory
networks. This project involves the study of a number of mathematical problems
stemming from the challenges of analysing and controlling such stochastic
networks. Some of the problems involve the development of general theory for
broad classes of stochastic networks, while others focus on mathematical
problems directly motivated by specific applications.&lt;br/&gt;Since the
complexity of stochastic networks usually precludes exact analysis of detailed
"microscopic" models, the focus here is on approximate models. Two levels of
approximation are considered: first order approximations called fluid models,
and second order approximations which frequently are diffusion
models.&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical questions being addressed include rigorous
justification of these approximations, analysing and controlling the behavior of
the approximate models and interpreting the results for the original microscopic
models. An important subtheme is understanding the interplay between the levels
of approximation.&lt;br/&gt;Four topics are being studied:&lt;br/&gt;(i) dynamic
scheduling for stochastic processing networks,&lt;br/&gt;(ii) analysis of
processor sharing networks,&lt;br/&gt;(iii) connection level models for data
networks,&lt;br/&gt;(iv) stochastic systems with delayed dynamics and state
constraints. &lt;br/&gt;Some stochastic process aspects of these topics include
study of singular diffusion control problems, analysis of measure-valued
processes used to keep track of residual job sizes, foundational questions for
reflected processes, and the asymptotic properties of functional stochastic
differential equations with natural state constraints. Specific applications
being investigated include Internet congestion control and biochemical reaction
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic networks are mathematical
models for complex systems involving dynamic interactions subject to
uncertainty. Such networks arise in a wide variety of applications in science
and engineering, especially in operations research, computer science, electrical
engineering and bioscience/bioengineering. This grant funds research on
mathematical problems arising from the need to analyse and control such
stochastic networks. Two fundamental problems for such networks
are&lt;br/&gt;(a) to identify and understand mechanisms that stabilize the
systems, and&lt;br/&gt;(b) to quantify the performance of the systems under such
stabilizing mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;The networks under study are substantially
more general than those that have been rigorously studied to date. Through their
complexity and heterogeneity, these networks present challenging mathematical
problems. This project involves the development of new mathematical theory and
techniques as well as the application of this theory in studying specific
problems such as Internet congestion control and understanding gene regulation.
Collaborations with researchers familiar with areas of application, the training
of graduate student researchers, and the dissemination of research results
through publication in peer reviewed journals and presentations at cross-
disciplinary research conferences are integral parts of the project.