* 0906055
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Colleen Doherty, Doherty                 Colleen
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009 using
funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). The training and development plan is entitled "What Makes Plants Tick: A
Systems Approach to Assess the Role of the Arabidopsis Circadian Clock in
Growth, Development and Environmental Responses" for Colleen Doherty. The host
institution for this research is the University of California - San Diego, and
the sponsoring scientist is Steve A. Kay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large proteins
are commonly comprised of domains, which are protein "modules" that can exist
independently with their own structure and function. The combination and
arrangement of these domains are responsible for the diversity of protein
function. Polyubiquitin is an example of such a protein that is composed of a
chain of ubiquitin proteins linked together at distinct sites. Polyubiquitin
chains of different linkages signal for different events in the cell, including
protein degradation, DNA repair and cell cycle control. Little is known about
how these chains evoke different signals in the cell. This project entails
making modifications to the linkage and interface between ubiquitin proteins and
then observing how these changes affect the overall structure and dynamics of
polyubiquitin chains. Site-directed mutagenesis is employed to alter both the
length of the linker region and the "stickiness" of the interface between
ubiquitin proteins. Both experimental and computational techniques are used to
study these chains in solution structurally and dynamically at atomic resolution
and to model how these chains respond to changes in conditions, such as
pH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study contributes to addressing a difficult
question in biophysics: how do protein structure and dynamics govern biological
function? This question impacts many areas of basic science research, including
protein engineering, molecular modeling and biological informatics. Training
goals include learning protein dynamics measurements and protein structure
determination using nuclear magnetic resonance, and developing computational
skills in molecular modeling, molecular dynamics simulations and structure-based
calculations. This research is tightly integrated with the mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students in molecular biophysics and biochemistry.