* 0906617
*  Magnetic Properties from First-Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Juan Peralta, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 178,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education involving the
magnetic properties of materials. Magnetism at the molecular scale is of
fundamental importance in the development of future technologies. The goal of
the proposed research will be to develop first-principles computational methods
to predict magnetic properties of large molecules, with a focus on magnetic
exchange couplings and magnetic anisotropy energy. This work should not only
enhance our understanding of magnetic phenomena, but also transform the way that
magnetic parameters are extracted from first-principles models such as density
functional theory approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed method allows,
in analogy to response properties, to express magnetic parameters as a second
derivative of the total electronic energy of a reference state with respect to a
parameter that probes local or global rotations of the magnetization density. In
combination with analytic perturbation theory, magnetic parameters can be
evaluated in straightforward fashion, which will provide a unique tool that can
be employed to explore the magnetic properties of new materials in a fast and
reliable way. The methodology will first be developed for finite systems and
local atomic Gaussian-type orbitals with single-molecule magnets and atomic
clusters in mind. The research activities proposed will greatly enhance the
capabilities of the scientific community to predict magnetic properties from
first-principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will benefit the Advanced
Materials Research initiative at Central Michigan University, and provide
concrete examples of forefront research that can be integrated with the
educational programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The PI will
actively work to involve women and minorities in science and encourage them to
pursue a scientific career. Students working on this project will gain valuable
skills in computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education involving the magnetic properties of materials. Magnetism at the
molecular scale is of fundamental importance in the development of future
technologies. Examples can be found in devices that exploit the spin degree of
freedom of the electron in molecular spintronics, or in the magnetic properties
of single-molecule magnets that can be tuned through chemical synthesis.
Designing new materials with desired magnetic properties will require that we
have a firm understanding of the basic physical and chemical mechanisms that
lead to microscopic magnetism. As one approach to improving our understanding of
these mechanisms, computer simulations can play a key role in predicting new
phenomena and maximizing the information obtained from experiment. There is an
increasing need of developing methodology with predictive capabilities that can
provide a quantitative description of magnetic properties, and the research
supported under this grant will provide methods to meet these needs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will also benefit the Advanced Materials Research
initiative at Central Michigan University, and provide concrete examples of
forefront research that can be integrated with the educational programs at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. The PI will actively work to involve women
and minorities in science and encourage them to pursue a scientific career.
Students working on this project will gain valuable skills in computational
science.