* 0906105
* Algebraic invariants of structured ring spectra, arithmetic, and geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Blumberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 146,595.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal describes several major
research thrusts related to algebraic invariants of structured ring spectra. In
algebraic K-theory, the PI describes an approach to resolving the central
conjectures of Waldhausen and Rognes that underpin a program to describe the
K-theory of the sphere spectrum via a chromatic filtration, relating arithmetic
and manifold geometry. In topological Hochschild homology, the proposal
describes an approach to realize a vision of Hesselholt to build an ``additive''
motivic spectral sequence in which the deRham-Witt complex and TR-theory play
the respective roles of Milnor K-theory and algebraic K-theory. In string
topology, the proposal describes an project which utilizes some of the
technology developed to study algebraic K-theory to describe algebraic
invariants of ``brane'' categories; this is related to the burgeoning
connections between string topology and symplectic topology. In orientation
theory, the proposal describes a series of projects associated to the
relationship between units of ring spectra, orientations, and transfers,
particularly in the equivariant setting.&lt;br/&gt;These latter projects have
potential applications to mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic
topology began as the study of algebraic invariants of geometric objects which
are preserved under certain smooth deformations. Gradually, it was realized that
these algebraic invariants (called cohomology theories) could themselves be
represented by geometric objects, known as spectra. A central triumph of modern
homotopy theory has been the construction of categories of ring spectra
(representing objects for multiplicative cohomology&lt;br/&gt;theories) which
are suitable for performing constructions directly analogous to those of
classical algebra. This move has turned out to be incredibly fruitful, both by
providing invariants which shed new light on old questions as well as by raising
new questions which have unexpected connections to other areas of mathematics
and physics. The project funded by this grant carries out this program in the
setting of a rich invariant called algebraic K-theory, studying foundational
properties of this theory from the perspective of homotopy theory and applying
the results to a broad range of questions in manifold geometry, algebraic
geometry, and string topology.