* 0906661
* New Developments in Estimation, Selection and Applications for Mixed Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Feifang Hu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 116,497.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated data are seen in diverse
fields of sciences and humanities, ranging from computational biology and
geology to health and social studies. However, modern correlated data frequently
present additional complications such as high-dimensionality, nonlinearity and
nongaussianity, for which more complex models are needed. Often times, these
models require a large number of parameters, and the number of the parameters
can increase with the sample size and can even be greater than the sample size.
These pose significant challenges on both theoretical and computational fronts,
as it is difficult to directly apply traditional likelihood techniques. This
proposal aims to develop innovative statistical procedures and efficient
computing algorithms for analyzing correlated data with complicated features
using mixed models. The investigator focuses on three classes of mixed models:
linear mixed models, nonlinear mixed models and generalized mixed models, and
extends the concept of partial consistency and the nonconcave penalized least
squares method to address several challenging issues in mixed model estimation
and selection. In particular, the investigator 1) explores the concept of
partial consistency in linear mixed models and develops a simple yet robust two-
step estimation method; 2) develops penalized least squares methods to select
fixed effects as well as the covariance and precision matrices of random
effects; 3) formulates the nonlinear mixed model estimation and testing problems
as model selection problems and develops a group selection method for nonlinear
mixed models; 4) extends the proposed penalized least squares method to ultra-
high dimensional variable selection; and 5) generalizes the proposed two-step
estimation method and penalized least squares method to generalized linear mixed
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research findings of this proposal will
greatly broaden the applications of mixed models, especially in jointly modeling
different types of data. For example, one can jointly model clinical and
genomics data in a unified way where genomics data such as gene expressions are
treated as random effects and explain the heterogeneity among groups while
clinical data such as age, gender and blood pressure are treated as fixed
effects and are of primary interest. Such a joint modeling approach allows one
to account for the correlation among genes and to study genes or genetic
pathways in a system way rather than traditional gene-by-gene way. Moreover, the
research findings of this proposal will also shred light on analyzing high-
dimensional and massive data. For example, by extending the concept of partial
consistency to mixed models, one will have better understandings as how to
explore the unique structure of high-dimensional data in order to extract
valuable information to produce consistent, efficient and robust estimates for
some parameters. In addition, the proposed methodologies will be introduced to
researchers in other areas through interdisciplinary collaboration work, and
will also be integrated into the investigator's educational activities by
developing graduate and undergraduate curriculums and by training graduate
students. Open source R and Matlab codes implementing the proposed methodologies
will be made available to general public.