* 0906038
* Non-variational Plateau problems in geometry and general relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Tobias Colding, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 127,671.00

The projects in this proposal aim to advance existing and to create
new&lt;br/&gt;approaches to attack existence problems of prescribed curvature
type that&lt;br/&gt;are of interest in geometry and mathematical physics. The
P.I. proposes to&lt;br/&gt;refine techniques from his previous work to address
existence, regularity,&lt;br/&gt;and global properties of apparent and
generalized apparent horizons in&lt;br/&gt;general relativity. In particular,
the P.I. plans to investigate these&lt;br/&gt;quasi-local notions of the event
horizon in light of certain lower order&lt;br/&gt;features, much akin to those
of minimal and constant mean curvature&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, for their relation to
positive mass type theorems, and in&lt;br/&gt;particular to the space time
Penrose conjecture. In a separate project, the&lt;br/&gt;P.I. plans to study the
extent to which these techniques can be adapted to&lt;br/&gt;include an
existence theory for a wide range of embedded hypersurfaces
of&lt;br/&gt;prescribed curvature. A second, independent direction in the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research is a potentially open-ended collaboration with N.
Kapouleas on&lt;br/&gt;gluing problems for constant mean curvature
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects in this proposal are inspired and
driven by allowing&lt;br/&gt;analytical, geometric, and physical intuition to
guide one another in the&lt;br/&gt;spirit of R. Schoen and S.-T. Yau. The
special surfaces whose existence and&lt;br/&gt;properties will be investigated
here are relevant in a wide variety of&lt;br/&gt;geometric and physical
contexts, in particular in mathematical relativity -&lt;br/&gt;Einstein's theory
of gravitation. A major objective of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research is to
exploit a parallel between well-known properties of soap&lt;br/&gt;films on the
one hand and the geometry of black hole boundaries on the&lt;br/&gt;other hand.
Through this connection, powerful techniques from analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;geometry have entered the picture and are now at hand to further
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the geometry of black holes. &lt;br/&gt;