* 0906427
* Theoretical Studies of Quantum Systems with Strong Interations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Pavel Wiegmann, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Physics Division. It supports theoretical research
and education focused on geometrical non-equilibrium phenomena in coherent
quantum liquids, especially in Fractional Quantum&lt;br/&gt;Hall edge states;
non-Abelian interference phenomena in quantum impurities, and geometrical
analysis of singularities and singular patterns arising in Hamiltonian driven
non-equilibrium processes such as Laplacian Growth and diffusion limited
aggregation models.&lt;br/&gt;The research topics are unified by the goal to
develop a theory of non-equilibrium and interference processes with underlying
spatial conformal symmetry. This project is concerned with geometric analyses of
singularities arising in non-equilibrium processes using advances achieved under
prior NSF support. &lt;br/&gt;Many important systems out of equilibrium show
conformal symmetries and therefore integrable structures similar to conformal
invariance of critical phenomena. However non-equilibrium processes are
different. Conformal invariance inevitably leads to singular patterns occurring
at small scales. In its turn singularities give rise to fractal non-equilibrium
patterns visible at large scales. The origin, statistics, and regularization of
singularities and fractal geometry of stochastic patterns of driven processes
comprise one theme of the research. Another theme is non-linear quantum
hydrodynamics of Fractional Quantum Hall edge states. The emphasis is given to a
topological manifestation of a fractional charge excitation as an edge soliton.
The last theme of the research is non-Abelian interference phenomena as realized
in controlled artificially fabricated quantum nanodevices exhibiting over-
screened multichannel Kondo regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will integrate
education and research through training and mentoring graduate and undergraduate
research students, and making novel contributions to the Research Experiences
for Undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Physics Division. It supports theoretical condensed matter
physics research and education at an interface with mathematical physics and
mathematics. The research is focused on advancing our understanding of complex
non-equilibrium processes. An important aspect of the PI?s work involves growth
processes that display snowflake-like fingers that penetrate from one phase into
another, as happens in the growth of alloys and semiconductor structures. The PI
seeks a fundamental understanding of how these fingering patterns emerge in the
growth process. Capitalizing on subtle connections between seemingly disparate
areas of research, the PI will also study new states of matter that emerge at
the edges of a droplet of electrons in a high magnetic field. The PI will also
pursue an approach to observing unusual new states of matter, topological
states, in special tiny structures of atoms called quantum dots. These states
were theoretically predicted to exist in electronic liquids confined to two
dimensions and in high magnetic field; the PI?s proposal provides a new arena in
which to study these possible new states of matter that may enable us to exploit
quantum mechanical states to perform computation. Quantum computing is believed
to provide an opportunity for a vast improvement in computer performance, at
least on some important problems, cryptography being one example.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will integrate education and research through
training and mentoring graduate and undergraduate research students, and making
novel contributions to the Research Experiences for Undergraduates. The results
of the proposed research will enhance knowledge and understanding of complex
condensed matter systems that are far from being in an equilibrium
state.&lt;br/&gt;