* 0906908
* Heterogeneity, Anisotropy, and Fluctuations in Dense Granular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 05/31/2012
* USD 365,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are ubiquitous: from
pharmaceutical powders to breakfast cereals to coal to avalanches, they appear
in all aspects of life. These materials can flow or act like a solid, properties
that are exploited in countless practical applications. Understanding these
materials is extremely important, but such understanding is substantially
lacking. This award supports a project that focuses on "jamming" one of the most
intriguing and poorly understood properties of these materials: how do they
transition between solid-like to fluid-like behavior. Implicated in this process
are two disparate phenomena: forces are carried on structures known as force
chains, and in response to applied forces, particles move very non-uniformly. A
key premise of this work is that these processes are intimately connected. Novel
experiments will allow a complete characterization of granular systems and the
opportunity to probe these two features and their interconnection. This work
will test novel theoretical approaches that may provide a rigorous basis for
predicting granular behavior, as well as the behavior of other disordered
systems. Outreach/educational components will be integrated into all aspects of
this project. These include outreach to area elementary and secondary schools,
and training/research opportunities for high school students, undergraduate and
graduate students and for post-docs. The PI also works with an international
consortium of granular industrial users to help transfer knowledge to practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Jamming
occurs for dense disordered systems: granular materials, the subject of this
project, as well as colloids, foams, glasses, etc. This award supports an
experimental project that will probe two key aspects of jamming: 1) force
anisotropy, and 2) possible connections between force anisotropy, as epitomized
by force chains, and spatial dynamical heterogeneity. Although isotropic jamming
has been well studied, the case of anisotropic stresses is not understood. This
case is particularly important because shear induces flow in dense granular
materials. This project will also test emerging statistical theories that could
provide a fundamental basis for understanding non-conservative systems such as
granular materials. Experiments will involve several novel techniques including
2D and 3D photoelastic methods combined with biaxial, shear, and triaxial
devices. Outreach/education will be integrated into all aspects of this project,
including: outreach to local schools, and training/research opportunities for
high school, undergraduate and graduate students and for post-docs. The PI also
works with an international consortium of granular industrial users to help
transfer knowledge to practical applications.