* 0906222
* Strings, Branes and the Search for Unification
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ergin Sezgin, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Sher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,050,000.00

The three researchers on this proposal propose a program investigating
fundamental aspects of string theory and M-theory and their implications for
particle phenomenology and cosmology. One aspect of this project deals with the
construction and implications for phenomenology of flux backgrounds for
heterotic strings, which they denote by torsional heterotic geometries. The
heterotic string is a natural setting to construct models of particle
phenomenology. However, the role played by background H-flux has not been
unraveled yet, even though it may profoundly influence the 4d low-energy
effective action. In this project the PIs employ a strategy to obtain the first
large class of torsional heterotic geometries by explicitly constructing their
metric. The number of torsional heterotic geometries turns out to be of the same
order of magnitude as the number of type II flux backgrounds. The explicit
examples display an N=2,1,0, supersymmetry in 4d. Flux changes the 4d
phenomenology and the PIs are investigating the implications of this new
strategy. They propose strategies to obtain chiral matter and novel ways to
break the E8 gauge symmetry to the standard model gauge group. These backgrounds
stand a much better chance of admitting tractable world-sheet descriptions
compared to the type II counterparts. The precise implications of torsional
geometries for algebraic geometry such as the calculation of the exact moduli
space of torsional geometries, the resolution of singularities, the construction
of vector bundles and ultimately three-generation models with stabilized moduli
is proposed. Evidence of string theory from cosmology will be explored in terms
of a brane inflation model. String theory models make predictions for
gravitational radiation and lead to strong non-Gaussianities in the cosmic
microwave background. Several aspects of the duality between M-theory
compactifications to 4d space-time and its boundary conformal field theories
(CFT) will also be explored. The research also includes a systematic
construction and possible string/M-theory embedding of new supergravities in
diverse dimensions, exploration of infinite dimensional symmetries, and their
implications for integrability in string theory in nontrivial backgrounds.
Finally, the important question of the uniqueness of string theory as a
candidate for a quantum theory of gravity will be addressed in the context of 3d
quantum gravity and its dual CFT. The broader impacts of the project are related
to the importance of testing string theory as theory that can describe
experiments. The PIs are looking for ways to understand the experimental tests
for Cosmology and particle physics. In the LHC era and with new satellites
becoming available, it is vital to work out the connections between physics at
the Planck scale and TeV scale physics, while advancing our knowledge in string
cosmology. The final goal of this project is to unravel the imprints of high-
energy physics onto our 4d world. At the same time the program is expected to
have a profound impact on different areas of mathematics. Two of the PIs have
just written an important book on string theory and M theory with John Schwartz,
one of the founders of superstring theory. All three PIs are involved in
disseminating information about string theory by giving talks at workshops and
conferences as well as organizing workshops. They are also involved in
collaborations with mathematicians to understand the topology and geometry of
string theory.