* 0906957
* Magnetic Transition Metal Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Eric Fullerton, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 480,000.00

0906957&lt;br/&gt;Fullerton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Nanomagnetism
is one of the most active areas in science with a wide range of fundamental
scientific problems as well as emerging technologies. Many magnetic devices are
still in their infancy and a thorough understanding of the underlying materials
and electronic properties and their effect on device performance will be
essential for future technologies. The proposal explores important underlying
structural, magnetic, and transport properties of new class of magnetic
nanowires. This research will address fundamental issues of nanowire synthesis
and magnetism at the nanoscale and train undergraduate and graduate students in
important areas of nanoscience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposal explores underlying structural, magnetic, and transport
properties of transition-metal oxide and core-shell metal/oxide nanowires (NWs).
The NWs will be grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) resulting in single-
crystal NWs of various phases and core-shell structures. The research will
initially focus on understanding the growth and structural properties of NWs of
transition metals and their oxides, and the formation of various core-shell
structures. This will include a survey the CVD NW growth of the magnetic
transition metals (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni) and their oxides with particular focus
on understanding and controlling the phase formation, nucleation, and
morphology. The research will include full structural and magnetic
characterization of the NWs using advance electron and x-ray characterization
techniques. The latter part of the proposal will focus on integrating these NWs
into spin-transport devices to elucidate magnetic properties of composite
materials at the nanoscale and to determine their potential for novel device
applications. This research will address fundamental issues of a new class of
metal-oxide composite NWs, determine their impact on future technologies, and
train undergraduate and graduate students in materials synthesis, exploiting
national user facilities for materials characterization, and the application of
new materials to nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;