* 0906922
* Bulk Heterostructure Solar Cells: Electronic Structure and Interface Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rudiger Schlaf, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 408,959.00

Technical: The main focus of this research project is on the determination of
the electronic structure of three-dimensional heterostructure excitonic solar
cells based on blends and thin films of nanoparticles, polymers, dyes and small
molecular materials. Such solar cells promise low production costs, while
offering low weight and mechanical flexibility. The electronic structure of
materials interfaces in the solar cells is crucial for exciton dissociation,
recombination prevention, and charge transfer. In order to further increase
efficiency and open circuit voltage, it is essential to understand the
electronic structure of these interfaces. The main analytical techniques
employed in this project include photoemission and inverse photoemission
spectroscopies, which allow the direct measurement of charge injection barriers
at molecular heterointerfaces. The enabling preparative technique for these
experiments is in-vacuum electrospray deposition, which has been established in
recent years through previous efforts in the PI's group. This unique combination
of photoemission spectroscopy, inverse photoemission spectroscopy, and
electrospray deposition in the same experimental system allows the
characterization of occupied and unoccupied states at macro-molecular interfaces
at the same time. Additionally, feasibility of spray-based fabrication of solar
cell structures using the electrospray deposition at atmospheric pressure is
investigated in this project. The electrostatics offers ways for controlling the
microscopic morphology of deposited films.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. The research project aims to improve the understanding
of heterojunction solar cells based on organic materials and nanoparticles and
at the same time seeks a new method for solar cell fabrication. On the
educational side, graduate and undergraduate students are trained while
participating in the cutting-edge scientific research of a strategically
important area. The PI especially focuses on recruiting minority and female
students for this research project and has an established record of involving
undergraduate students, including those from the underrepresented groups, in
research.