* 0906070
* Atomic-Scale Understanding of Phase-Change Phenomena in Amorphous Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Sabyasachi Sen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;We live in the Information Age where
storage of large amount of information in a small space is of paramount
importance. Glassy materials consisting primarily of Ge, Sb, As and Te
(chalcogenides) have recently received significant attention due to their
extraordinary technological importance in rewritable optical data storage
applications in the forms of compact disk (CD), digital versatile disk (DVD) and
Blu-ray disk and in electronic memory applications. These chalcogenides have
been aptly termed phase-change materials as they show rapid and repeatable
switching between crystalline and glassy phases under suitable conditions that
forms the basis of writing, reading and storage of data. However, the details of
the structure-property relationships in phase-change chalcogenides are not well
understood at the atomic level and they often remain controversial and
conjectural, especially in the technologically relevant multi-component systems.
This lack of knowledge regarding the connection between the microscopic and the
macroscopic results in extensive trial and error tests in composition and
processing related optimization in this fast-paced industry. We hope to address
the fundamental issues associated with the atomic-scale understanding of the key
properties of phase-change chalcogenides based on systematic structural and
dynamical studies using state-of-the-art experimental and simulation techniques.
Such studies will allow the development of physically more accurate models of
structure-property relationships and will better guide future technological
development of these materials with improved functionality. Scientifically, the
proposed work impacts materials science, solid-state chemistry and solid-state
physics. The materials studied have actual or potential applications in a wide
range of technologies including optical memory devices, telecommunication,
remote-sensing and photovoltaics. The interdisciplinary nature of our research
transfers knowledge between fields and provides a unique intellectual
environment. This project will continue to foster ongoing collaborations with
scientists in industry, universities and Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) and
to enrich the graduate education and training experience for participating
students through scientific dialogue and interactions between the collaborating
scientists and students. Students in this research program will learn to
investigate problems in the realm of ?basic science? that underlies industrial
applications. This program will coordinate with the underrepresented minority-
serving and K-12 outreach programs at UC Davis to attract and recruit
underrepresented graduate students and to increase the awareness of students in
the science and technology of phase-change
chalcogenides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;Chalcogenides
that primarily belong to the Ge-Sb/As-Te system constitute an important class of
materials known as the ?phase-change? materials that display thermally or
electrically induced rapid and reversible transformation between crystalline and
amorphous phases under suitable conditions. These chalcogenides have recently
received remarkable attention due to their extraordinary technological
importance in rewritable optical data storage and non-volatile electronic memory
applications. From the point of view of direct atomic-scale understanding of the
phase-change phenomena, a number of fundamental questions remain unresolved in
these systems: What are the structural similarities and differences between the
amorphous and crystalline phases and how do they affect the relevant physical
properties such as density, optical absorption and electrical conductivity? What
are the possible effects of pressure and temperature on the structure of the
amorphous phase, i.e. do these external variables select a particular structure
from a ?landscape? of possible structures? What are the nature, timescales and
length scales of the atomic/molecular dynamics in the glassy and supercooled
liquid state and how are they related to entropy generation, macroscopic
relaxation and transport processes and crystallization kinetics? Some of these
issues are understood only at the macroscopic level within the framework of
phenomenological models. The primary focus of the work proposed here is to
address these questions at the microscopic/atomic level using a uniquely
powerful combination of neutron/X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, inelastic
neutron scattering, 125Te NMR spectroscopy and Reverse Monte Carlo modeling.
Specifically, phase-change chalcogenides in Ge-Sb-Te and Ge-As-Te systems will
be investigated. Models linking the atomic-scale structure and dynamics with
macroscopic physical and thermodynamic properties will be formulated and tested.
Such studies will allow the development of physically more accurate models of
structure-property relationships and although they are in the realm of basic
science, they should have long-term significance in guiding future technological
development of phase-change materials with improved functionality. This work
includes significant training of graduate students in state-of-the-art
spectroscopic, diffraction and simulation techniques. The equipment and
expertise at UC Davis and ANL will provide students with a variety of modern
research tools and a supportive structure for learning to use them.&lt;br/&gt;