* 0906587
* Collaborative Research:  Synthesis and Rheology of Strategically-Designed Long-Chain-Branched Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Understanding remains incomplete
regarding the relaxation of complex branching structures in entangled polymer
melts with multiple branch points, such as H- or comb-branched polymers, or for
polymers with branches of differing lengths, such as asymmetric stars and
asymmetric H polymers, or for hyperbranched polymers (i.e., with branch-on-
branch topology). To address these issues, which are important both
scientifically and for applications to commercial polymer manufacture, we are
performing a combination of the following tasks: 1. Synthesis of high-quality
model branched polymers with branches of the same or different length that are
carefully designed to test physical theories. 2. Careful characterization of the
molecular weight and branching properties of these polymers. 3. Measurement of
the linear rheological properties over a wide frequency range. 4. Comparison of
the measured viscoelastic properties with predictions derived from the various
alternative proposed theories. We plan to accomplish these tasks through a
collaborative framework, involving a collaborator, Jimmy Mays, who will use a
novel route to synthesize 1) asymmetric H polymers; 2) asymmetric star-on-star
polymers, based on a core star polymer, each branch of which terminates in two
unequal length branches; and 3) combs with tetrafunctional branch points. These
polymers will be carefully characterized by gel permeation chromatography and
TGIC, and studied through rheological measurements, including careful long-time
creep rheometry with the help of instrumentations and methods available in the
laboratory of Prof. John Dealy, a collaborator at McGill University. Existing
computational models for predicting the measured rheology will be employed in
collaboration with Chinmay Das in the McLeish group at Leeds University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To form
advanced plastic fibers or thin plastic sheets used for packaging, molten
plastic is pulled or stretched at extremely high speeds. The performance of this
process depends on how the polymer molecules in the plastic are entangled with
each other, and how they escape those entanglements. Polymers that branch into
multiple long strands are exceptionally useful for industry, since they serve as
netting that strengthens the plastic so that it does not rip or bursting when
blown into shape. Larson?s team has found that changes to as few one branch in a
million branch points can significantly impact the properties of the melt
relevant to its strength as a melt. The reason for this is that branched
polymers entangle extremely well with other branched polymers. To escape these
entanglements, they must reconfigure by reeling branches towards the branch
point, like Houdini dislocating his shoulder to escape a straight jacket.
Therefore, the entanglements are long-lived and make the plastic easier to
shape. Larson?s team is chemically synthesizing special branched polymers that
are exceptionally useful in determining how branched polymers manage to perform
their ?Houdini? acts and how to optimize this for advanced performance. Their
measurements of the rates at which polymers escape entanglements is providing
knowledge that is of great interest to collaborators at Dow Chemical Company and
other plastics manufacturing companies. The research has been highly
interdisciplinary and international with collaborators at the University of
Tennessee, McGill University, the University of Leeds, and Dow Chemical Company.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;