* 0906034
* A Frequency Comb for Near Infrared Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Bally, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 08/31/2013
* USD 658,481.00

Great progress has been made in recent years in detecting massive planets
orbiting other stars. These exciting discoveries are an important step toward
understanding the evolution of other solar systems and whether or not they may
harbor life. Tantalizing as these discoveries are, however, they are not
conclusive. Astronomers have yet to find a planet in another solar system that
could support life as we know it. To do so would require finding smaller solid
(not gaseous) earth-like planets orbiting a star within the "habitable zone"
where the distance of the planet from the star is such that the surface
temperature of the planet can sustain liquid water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are at least four ways to detect a planet orbiting a star. By far the most
successful means to date has been to very carefully monitor the velocity of the
star. If the velocity tends to vary regularly about its average value, then it
is possible that we are measuring the reflex velocity of the star as a planet
moves around it in its orbit. This is a very exacting measurement to make and it
relies on extremely accurate velocity measurements made with a spectrograph. Dr.
Steve Osterman of the University Colorado is designing a very stable and
accurate calibration mechanism to improve the radial velocity measurements for
spectra taken not in visible light, but in the infrared. Infrared light is very
useful in the study of cooler and smaller stars which are more numerous than hot
stars. Finding planets around these stars will give us a much clearer picture
than we currently have of how planets are actually formed and evolve. Dr.
Osterman's wavelength calibration scheme uses a very rapidly pulsed laser to
imprint a regularly spaced calibration "comb" of lines of precisely known
wavelengths onto the spectrum of the star. This new technique is expected to
improve the velocity determination from the current standard enough to detect
earth-like planets in the habitable zone. Funding for this work is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.