* 0906679
* Size-Selecting Semiconductor Templates for Nano-Scale Spatial Control of Self-Assembled Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jennifer Gray, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 270,220.00

Technical. This project addresses research toward greater understanding and
implementing ar-rangement of materials at shrinking dimensions, and the ability
to successfully integrate new ma-terials with better properties or materials
that would provide new functionalities. The project aims for advanced processing
methods that can organize materials at nano-scale dimensions with precise
placement having the necessary quality and reliability, for example, to realize
concepts for new types of device structures involving single electron tunneling
effects (transistors, mem-ory, quantum cellular automata), quantum computing
architectures, and integration of III-V ma-terials with group IV substrates for
high-speed channels or optical devices. Self-assembly meth-ods alone can arrange
structures at these length scales, but cannot place structures at specific lo-
cations. The approach is to combine self assembly with a top-down patterning
method to direct growth. The project seeks to create topographic templates made
up of uniform and size-selecting features through a 'strain-engineering'
mechanism. These templates will then be used to nucleate high quality,
crystalline nanostructures at specified locations on substrates by self-assembly
methods that would occur on the templates. This is expected to provide a route
to creating new structures with an arbitrary lateral arrangement and the
potential for combining lattice mis-matched materials with silicon that would
not be achievable through thin film growth with high quality. Strained SixGe1-x
layers will be grown on silicon substrates that have been locally modi-fied at
specific sites using a focused ion beam, resulting in pyramidal pit formation at
each site with a characteristic size, dependent on strain. The pit edges will be
used to provide four closely spaced nucleation sites. Studies will be done on
how the template formation is influenced by various patterning parameters and by
kinetics during heteroepitaxial growth using ultra high vac-uum sputtering.
Studies will also be done to determine how these templates can be used to influ-
ence the growth of dissimilar materials under different kinetic conditions. The
growth of lattice-mismatched semiconductors (Ge on Si) as well as other
materials such as silicides will be ex-plored. Characterization studies will be
done to understand the effects on resulting morphology, crystal/interface
structure, composition, and uniformity?items which will influence electrical
properties and the potential usefulness for device applications. These studies
will also include the effect of very small surface discontinuities, defects, or
impurities on nucleation processes in technologically important material
systems. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research
issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic materials science having
technological relevance. In addition to graduate student participation,
undergraduates will also be directly involved and gain hands-on experience using
advanced research tools. Increasing undergraduate research participation at
early stages in their education will be a primary focus, with particular
encouragement given to women and minori-ties. This undergraduate research will
be leveraged to help promote these activities to local high schools, by
demonstrating examples of practical hands-on research they will have the
opportu-nity to participate in as engineering students. Connections will be made
to industry by providing additional examples to students. Many aspects of this
research will also be incorporated into new nanotechnology and electromagnetic
properties courses and used as supplemental research pro-jects associated with
other courses to integrate research and education more effectively.