* 0906572
* Tailoring Assemblies of Surface-Anchored Polymers by "Grafting from" Free Radical Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2014
* USD 487,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The principal goal of this project is to gain a detailed
understanding of surface-initiated free radical polymerization, as well as its
extension to controlled radical polymerization, and apply this knowledge towards
preparing substrates with tailored and spatially-modulated distributions of
polymeric grafts. There are four main objectives of this work: First, free
radical polymerization will be used to establish the relationship between the
initiator density, polymer grafting density, molecular weight, and
polydispersity index. Substrates with independently varied orthogonal gradients
in polymer grafting density and molecular weight will be fabricated comprising
polymers grown from substrate-bound initiators. The amount of activated vs. non-
activated initiator sites and polymer grafting density and molecular weight of
the grafts will be quantified by means of surface-sensitive analytical
techniques. Second, azo-based initiator system will be employed to monitor the
characteristics of polymer brushes grown via reverse atom transfer radical
polymerization. While this transformation has been studied in bulk, it has never
been performed in ?grafting from? polymerizations. Expected differences in
polydispersity index and polymerization kinetics will be expedited through use
of polymer grafting density/molecular weight orthogonal gradients at varying
temperatures and transition metal salt concentrations. Third, the ability to UV-
activate the azo-initiators will be exploited to form substrate-bound
micrometer-sized macromolecular gradients. By utilizing microfluidic reactors
microscale polymer patterning will be accomplished by locally intermixing two
monomer streams along the microfluidic channel and by employing UV irradiation
through photomasks. Fourth, as a seed project, microwave-induced free radical
polymerization will be utilized to provide local substrate heating in order to
de-couple the kinetics of propagation from the initiation step, which heretofore
has not been possible, by concurrently cooling the monomer solution and heating
the substrate locally by microwave.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The relationship between surface initiator density and
grafted polymer density, which has never been investigated in a systematic way
before, is of critical importance when considering the breadth and depth of
applications of polymer brushes. While advanced materials have high value,
economics limit their use, strictly confining them to those areas where they are
absolutely necessary. To this end it is advantageous, from both cost and
performance standpoint, to fabricate thin chemically and structurally tailored
coatings that can be applied to various surfaces. By doing so, one can attain
full control over the interface between the original substrate and its
surroundings with just a few nm of engineered coating material. Applications of
these polymeric structures range from preparing chemically and structurally
tailored films preventing fouling of ships to controlling biomaterial interfaces
in vivo, as well as countless other technological applications, including (but
not limited to), lubrication, anti-flocculation, particle assembly, protein
adsorption, cell signaling, and nanoscale molecular motion. Our outreach and
education efforts, which complement the scientific aspect of the work, include:
i) training graduate students, ii) outreach activities in an elementary school
in Ararat, VA, and iii) attracting local K-12 teachers and students to take part
in our interdisciplinary research endeavors through the Kenan Fellows and the
Science House programs at NC State University, and iv) organizing national and
international scientific meetings for undergraduate and graduate students at NC
State University.

