* 0906631
* Adaptive Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Yves Atchade, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 99,556.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of&lt;br/&gt;2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a flexible computational technique
that&lt;br/&gt;has proven very useful to many scientific disciplines and is the
backbone&lt;br/&gt;of current implementations of Bayesian inference. Recent
research&lt;br/&gt;developments suggest that the use of adaptive methods can
make Monte Carlo&lt;br/&gt;algorithms considerably more effective. This research
proposal has two&lt;br/&gt;major components. The first part will contribute to
the development of a&lt;br/&gt;limit theory for adaptive MCMC algorithms. More
Specifically, the PI will&lt;br/&gt;develop a resolvent-based martingale
approximation technique to investigate&lt;br/&gt;the central limit theorem and
the asymptotic variance estimation for&lt;br/&gt;various adaptive MCMC
algorithms. The second part of this research activity&lt;br/&gt;will develop a
new MCMC algorithm for the Bayesian analysis of statistical&lt;br/&gt;models
with intractable normalizing constants, a topic that currently
poses&lt;br/&gt;major computational challenges. This part of the research is
driven by the&lt;br/&gt;protein design problem in computational biology but the
same problem also&lt;br/&gt;frequently occurs in many other statistical models
including Markov random&lt;br/&gt;fields, Markov point
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Markov Chain Monte Carlo is a well-
established Monte Carlo technique for&lt;br/&gt;sampling probability
distributions. The method is used widely to solve&lt;br/&gt;substantive problems
in many areas of applications. It is especially useful&lt;br/&gt;in situations
with high-dimensional data, which is increasingly common in&lt;br/&gt;science
and engineering research as well as applications. Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;research
developments from this project can have a significant impact
on&lt;br/&gt;methods for doing statistical inference in these areas. Through
its&lt;br/&gt;theoretical component, this research project will advance the
general&lt;br/&gt;understanding and strengthen the use of adaptive Monte Carlo
methods in&lt;br/&gt;practice. In the course of developing the asymptotic
theory, the PI will&lt;br/&gt;develop original extensions to some well-
established probabilistic tools.&lt;br/&gt;The research is also proposing a new
algorithm to tackle one of the most&lt;br/&gt;challenging current problem in
Monte Carlo simulation; sampling from the&lt;br/&gt;posterior distribution of
statistical models with intractable normalizing&lt;br/&gt;constants.