* 0906892
* An Experimental Study of the Work Hardening Behavior of Metallic Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Joost Vlassak, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 09/30/2012
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop experiments and models to elucidate the mechanical behavior of materials
in small, constrained volumes with a particular emphasis on how a material work-
hardens and on the dislocation processes that take place in the vicinity of a
free surface or a hard passivating layer. Many micro-electronic and micro-
mechanical devices consist of dissimilar materials put together in complex
architectures. Components of these devices are often subjected to very high
stresses ? stresses so high, that they can often not be supported by the same
material in bulk form. Insight in the mechanical behavior of materials at these
small length scales and accurate models to describe this behavior are essential
to the design and fabrication of reliable devices. This objective will be
achieved through a combination of micro-mechanical experiments and discrete
dislocation simulations. The experiments will focus on measuring the stress-
strain behavior of polycrystalline freestanding thin films under a range of
passivation conditions. Recovery mechanisms will be investigated using creep and
relaxation experiments. The dislocation substructure that develops in the
vicinity of a free surface or a passivating layer will be investigated using
grazing incidence X-ray scattering at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation
Laboratory and by means transmission electron microscopy at Harvard. The stress-
strain behavior of polycrystalline films will be modeled using discrete
dislocation simulations that will incorporate appropriate recovery mechanisms to
model the hardening behavior of the films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will lead to a better understanding of
the deformation behavior of thin films and coatings, making it possible to
design and fabricate more reliable devices at the micro- and nano-scales.
Industries that stand to gain the most are the MEMS and semiconductor
industries. The nascent field of low-cost, large-area, flexible electronics will
also benefit from a fundamental understanding of the mechanical behavior of the
thin metallic films they use as electrical interconnects. Results of the
investigation will be published in archival journals and will be posted on the
archival web site www.iMechanica.org hosted by the Harvard School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences. iMechanica serves as a discussion forum for young
scientists with a goal of enhancing communication among researchers and of
making mechanics and materials more accessible to a wider public. The project
will also contribute to both graduate and undergraduate education. The award
will support one graduate student and will provide research opportunities to
several undergraduate students. The Principal Investigator has long engaged
undergraduate students of diverse background in his research projects and this
award will ensure that this practice continues. Research under this award will
contribute to the development of a graduate course on thin-film mechanics. The
project has an international component through collaboration with the Technical
University of Delft in the Netherlands. They will contribute expertise in
discrete dislocation modeling and bring this capability to Harvard University.