* 0906695
* Patterned Conjugated Polymeric Materials: Synthesis, Processing and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* Kenneth Carter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2016
* USD 806,799.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The fundamental objective of this research is to gain a detailed understanding
of patterned conjugated materials in terms of their synthesis and
characterization and application to advanced organic electronic devices. There
can be no question that organic electronic materials themselves are of great
interest with whole industries being created around such materials: technical
applications in mind include, but are not limited to, OLED/PLED displays,
organic transistors, low-cost devices, and organic materials for energy
conversion. The studies outlined in this proposal will answer questions about
new patterned conjugated semiconductor polymer layers. This project entails the
detailed study of the chemical attachment of semiconducting layers to various
substrates and their use to make operating devices. The long-term impact of the
proposed research should be new insight into a new class of materials and the
potential of easily fabricated devices with resolution unmatched by any
currently known methods. The project research goals and outcomes: are; (1) the
synthesis and characterization of patterned grafted brush layers of
semiconducting polymers.; (2) an understanding of the morphology of grafted
semiconducting brush layers as a function of molecular structure and molecular
weight; (3) the development of a toolbox for the fabrication of active device
structures on a variety of substrates; and (4) development of new device test
structures that will allow the probing of electrical and optical properties of
patterned semiconducting polymer layers. Our goals will be accomplished by the
execution of three coupled subprojects: (1) we will exploit our skills in
monomer and polymer synthesis to create and study new semiconducting polymers
and generate surfaces modified by grafted semiconducting polymer layers or
brushes.; (2) advanced patterning techniques will be developed allowing the
unprecedented precise placement of these semiconducting layers for optimization
of performance; and (3) we will combine our expertise in synthesis and
processing to fabricate and test organic electronic devices. NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:

Organic electronic materials themselves are of great interest with whole
industries being created around such materials: technical applications in mind
include, but are not limited to, advanced display devices, lost cost/ low power
computing, and new materials for solar energy generation. The fundamental
objective of this research is to gain a detailed understanding of a new class of
polymeric organic electronic materials ? specifically how they are made and how
can they be used to make better and less expensive devices potentially impacting
industry, the economy, and our energy infrastructure. If successful, a new
generation of materials and devices will be enabled and new opportunities for US
companies and scientist to exploit these new technologies will be created. Our
materials design and synthesis will add to the portfolio of exciting polymer
research at the University of Massachusetts, and help facilitate research
interactions between the University of Massachusetts and the microelectronics
industry (equipment suppliers, materials suppliers, and end-users of
nanolithography). Education of students and training them to help maintain US
competitiveness in new areas of nanotechnology is another major impact of the
study. These students will be trained in new techniques and learn not only
traditional chemical synthesis and advanced characterization techniques, but
also how these materials are integrated into actual industrial process
development. The PI will generate new curricula and modify existing courses with
information generated by this project. Funding will allow the PI to explore
educational opportunities for local underrepresented minority children
(Springfield, MA area) and part of the research developed in this proposal will
be used to engage the minds and imaginations of young (8-14) children through
weekend workshops. Finally, a network of New England Underrepresented
Polymer/Material Scientists and Engineers will be formed. It is the intention
that the network will be used by the PI and others to bring together students
and professionals to find common goals in education and development.