* 0906466
* Likelihood Inference in Models with a High-Dimensional Nuisance Parameter
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas Severini, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 178,974.00

Likelihood methods, such as maximum likelihood estimation and likelihood ratio
tests, play an important role in statistical theory and methodology. There is a
large body of work showing that, under relatively weak conditions, likelihood-
based methods of inference are optimal in large samples. Such results are based
on asymptotic theory in which the dimension of the parameter remains fixed as
the sample size increases indefinitely. However, the conclusions based on such a
large-sample theory may not be valid for models in which the dimension of the
parameter is large relative to the sample size. Thus, for many models used in
practice, standard methods of likelihood-based inference may not perform well.
The goal of this research is to study and develop likelihood-based methods of
inference in models in which the dimension of the nuisance parameter is large
relative to the sample size. The research will focus on three broad areas: the
development of higher-order asymptotic approximations to the distribution of the
likelihood-based statistics in models with stratum nuisance parameters, the
development of a small-dispersion asymptotic theory for models with stratum
nuisance parameters, and the development of methods of inference in models with
an unknown function. The research will consider the theoretical properties of
likelihood-based methods of inference as well as the development of new
statistical methodology based on those results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical
methods are used in a wide range of fields. In particular, likelihood-based
methods have been used in in applications ranging from the reliability of
computer software to the analysis of genetic data. Much of current statistical
theory is restricted to relatively simple models, in which the available data is
large relative to the number of unknown parameters in the model. However, in
complex models, it may be necessary to estimate a large number of parameters
based on relatively little data. This research will develop statistical theory
and methodology for this type of model and these results will lead to improved
statistical methods that will be useful in many areas of application. The
research will also further our understanding of the properties of statistical
models and, hence, will be useful in the training of researchers in statistics
and related fields.