* 0906056
* Monte Carlo and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods for Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Art Owen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2014
* USD 659,759.00

This project has two major components. The first is an investigation of
visualization and analysis methods for data sets in high dimensions, with a
focus on categorical variables whose number of unique levels is comparable to
the total sample size. Examples of such variables include search query strings,
ISBNs, song titles, author names, URLs, genotypes, environments, and customer ID
numbers. The visualization methods are designed to show broad trends and to
highlight anomalies. The inferential methods are of the sample reuse type: the
bootstrap and cross-validation. New methods are necessary here because the data
sets have complicated interlocking patterns that invalidate any IID sampling
assumptions. The second component is better statistical inference by improving
on their numerical methods. This includes calibration of empirical likelihood
methods to get better coverage and to extend confidence regions for the mean
beyond the convex hull of the data points. It also includes the embedding of
quasi-Monte Carlo sampling methods into Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms to
combine the accuracy of the former and the wide applicability of the
latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploratory data analysis of categorical
variables is useful to see broad patterns including small groups of customers
that have similar tastes for a small list of songs or books or movies. It is
also useful to identify anomalies that may indicate abusive behavior, including
cyber-attack, and what is commonly called spam in the online context. One of the
original motivations for the sample reuse methods is in crop science. In some of
those problems, a large number of plant varieties (genotypes) are grown under
many different environmental conditions. A statistical model is used to
determine which varieties to use in each environment. Earlier statistical
methods were based on assumptions that don't fit this setting and they often did
not select the best model. New methods from this project may therefore be used
to select better models which then result in increased production of food and
fiber. The empirical likelihood work is basic research aimed at removing
unnecessary mathematical assumptions from statistical models in order to widen
their applicability. The Monte Carlo sampling component of the project is basic
research on a computational technique used extensively in physics as well
Bayesian statistical inference.&lt;br/&gt;