* 0906026
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Firas Khatib, Khatib                  Firas          D
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 10/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Automating human
intuition to improve protein structure prediction" for Firas Khatib. The host
institution for this research is the University of Washington, and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. David Baker.

This project uses the combined power of humans and computers to build accurate
models of disease-related proteins. Determining the correct structure of a
protein helps researchers successfully target them with drugs. Experimental
methods for solving proteins are time consuming and expensive, making a
computational solution to the protein-folding problem necessary. Even with the
current supercomputing and distributed computing power available, new algorithms
are needed to solve one of the main computational bottlenecks, conformational
sampling. Because a protein chain can have so many different possible
conformations, efficient exploration of the search space is crucial. A new
approach to this problem is the use of human puzzle-solving intuition and
pattern recognition skills combined with computers running Rosetta, the
prediction algorithm developed in David Baker's research group. Foldit is an
interactive Rosetta-based program allowing users around the world to directly
manipulate protein structure models on their home computers in real-time. The
ultimate goal of Foldit is to use the results from the computer program to
improve structure prediction algorithms by capitalizing on natural human 3D
problem-solving skills. The project determines what aspect of the structure
prediction problem game-playing humans can improve and implement these new
techniques into Rosetta's automated protocol. The successful automation of human
intuition would be a remarkable achievement in computational science.

Training objectives include development of programming and computational skills
as well as teaching and mentoring abilities. Foldit users are able to share
their solutions with others around the world, taking advantage of the strengths
that different people have, in order to improve results globally. Presentations
on Foldit are being given to children and parents at the local science and
educational museum and at local high schools in the hope that Foldit could be
used in chemistry courses around the world, creating the next generation of
protein folders, and then in turn new structure prediction algorithms could be
developed based on these new experts' protein-folding skills. This gives
worldwide participants an immediate and relevant application for protein-folding
knowledge, hopefully reinforcing the motivation to understand the underlying
science. In addition, because anyone in the world can contribute to Foldit, this
research establishes a global collaborative network. The algorithms and methods
developed will be published, and the Rosetta software source code will be freely
and openly available to the scientific community.