* 0906425
* Role of Chain Architecture on the Properties of Linear and Star Chain Thin Film Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Peter Green, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2013
* USD 527,440.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;While during the last decade significant progress
has been made toward understanding and controlling the structure and properties
of polymers at the nanoscale, major challenges and opportunities, both
scientific and technological, remain. Research has largely been devoted to the
properties of linear-chain polymer systems; the influence of polymer chain
architecture on the properties of thin films has largely remained unexplored.
The goal of this proposal is to understand the effect of chain architecture on
the miscibility, dynamics, glass transition and aging phenomena in thin film
linear/star molecule and star/star molecule mixtures. There are several reasons
for studying star polymers. Star molecules suffer a smaller loss in entropy than
linear chains upon adsorption at interfaces. In additional to their interfacial
properties, the dynamics of star shaped molecules, specifically the longest
relaxation time, ?ä, and the viscosity, ?Ø, are slow; ?ä and ?Ø scale
exponentially with the degree of polymerization, N, of the chain arm length.
Perhaps the most fascinating aspect of star shaped molecules is that for low
functionalities, f, and for sufficiently large N, they exhibit properties
similar to linear chains. However, for very large f, they exhibit behavior akin
to colloids. Guided by theoretical predictions, an experimental program, which
exploits tools that include neutrons, electrons, X-rays, dielectric
spectroscopy, ellipsometry and mechanical instruments, has been designed to
develop an understanding of the influence of confinement and interfacial
interactions on miscibility, microstructure, structural instabilities, aging
phenomena and dynamics in star shaped molecule based systems (linear/star
molecule and star/star molecule mixtures). The properties of these systems
promise to be truly fascinating and present intriguing possibilities for new
science and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;Diverse technologies, from coatings to functional materials for
organic electronic devices and sensors, rely on the properties and performance
of polymer thin films. Research on thin polymer films has primarily been devoted
to linear chain polymers; little is understood about the properties of chains of
different architectures, such as star shaped polymers. Star shaped molecules, by
virtue of their architecture offer a number of potential, and unique, advantages
over linear chain systems for certain applications. For example, they show
promise for adhesive applications, and potentially for certain battery and
sensor applications, as it is possible to take advantage of the multi-arm
architecture for attachment of molecules/nanoparticles of varying
functionalities. The goal of this proposal is to develop an understanding of the
role of chain architecture on properties (miscibility, aging phenomena, glass
transition and dynamics) of linear chain/star shaped molecule and of star/star
molecule mixtures. This is an interdisciplinary program, involving polymer
physics, chemistry, interfacial science, thermodynamics and transport processes.
It will include an ethnically diverse group, including under represented
minorities, of undergraduates, PhD students and high school students. The
program also includes an international collaborator in the area of materials
synthesis. Outreach activities of the principal investigator include public
lectures at technical meetings, retired groups and participation on various
National Research Council studies and boards and technical society committees.
&lt;br/&gt;