* 0906660
* Model selection and efficient learning  for high dimensional clustered data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Annie Qu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 210,144.00

This research project is aimed at developing statistical theory and practical
methodology for complex high-dimensional clustered data where the number of
variables is larger than the sample size. This problem is especially important
and relevant in microarray data where there are thousands of genes involved. The
focus of this research will be to show how to efficiently and accurately extract
information from a large quantity of often noisy information consisting of high-
dimensional data, so as to identify and select significant variables of
scientific interest. The PI and her collaborators will develop estimation
procedures, statistical inference functions, model selection and classification
procedures by incorporating correlation into the models. The specific goals for
this research plan are: (1) To propose flexible estimation procedures for the
link function and the marginal variance function when their forms are unknown in
the generalized linear models; (2) To develop semiparametric classification for
time-course gene expression data; (3) To propose model selection criteria for
choosing informative correlation structures; (4) To develop efficient and
consistent model selection procedures for generalized additive models where the
likelihood is unspecified; (5) To develop a sufficient dimension reduction
method for correlated data and retain the full regression information without
imposing parametric models.

The research project will help to tackle fundamental questions in statistical
science and will stimulate interest from a large group of scientists in the
fields of longitudinal and cluster data analysis. It will also enhance the
development of, and makes connections between, theory and method in statistics,
biostatistics and computer science. This research will have significant impact
and many applications in biomedical studies, genome research, econometrics,
environmental studies, oceanography, social science and public health where
correlated data often arise. The PI will integrate the proposed research areas
substantially into educational activities through the development of new
university courses, and through presenting short courses at major statistical
meetings. The research will advance undergraduate and graduate students'
learning and training for handling high-dimensional correlated data.