* 0906994
* Determination of Creep Mechanisms and Modeling Low Temperature(&amp;lt;0.25Tm) Creep of Two-Phase Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sreeramamurthy Ankem, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-phase alloys in general and
&amp;#945;-&amp;#946; titanium alloys in particular are technologically
important. The attractive properties of titanium alloys include high strength to
weight ratio, excellent corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. For these
reasons, they are used in a number of high technology areas. In many of these
applications, components are subjected to constant loads over extended periods
of time at low temperatures (&lt;0.25Tm). Recently, many unexpected results have
been reported which are of great importance in designing and in selecting
titanium alloys for various applications. For example, it has been shown that
twinning, which has traditionally been known to be a very fast deformation
mechanism, can occur very slowly. Further, due to twinning, the single-phase
&amp;#945; and &amp;#946; titanium alloys can creep (i.e. plastically deform) at
low temperatures. It was also found that the deformation mechanisms of the two-
phase &amp;#945;-&amp;#946; titanium alloys can be quite different than those of
the single phase alloys due to interactions between phases. The exact reasons
for this behavior are not known. The aim of this investigation is to
systematically study the low temperature creep of &amp;#945;-&amp;#946; titanium
alloys as a function of volume fraction and morphology of &amp;#945; and
&amp;#946; phases; using three different Ti-V alloys as the model systems.
Crystallographic modeling as well as three-dimensional anisotropic finite
element modeling will be used to determine the interactions between phases.
Scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy will be used
to determine the deformation mechanisms. Based on these results, optimal
microstructures for improved low temperature creep resistance will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
a number of applications, loads are applied on structural members at low
temperatures such as room temperature. At times, loads are applied on these
structures over extended periods of time, which can result in time-dependent
deformation, i.e. creep. This investigation focuses on determining optimal
chemistry and microstructures of two-phase structural materials such as titanium
alloys for low temperature creep resistance. The results will be widely
publicized through participation in various technical conferences and
publication in reputed journals. While this study of low temperature creep
deformation is based on two-phase titanium alloys, the results are expected to
contribute to the wide field of composite materials in general. During this
investigation, graduate students will be trained in advanced modeling and
experimental techniques. These graduate students will then go on to take up
technical positions in industry, government, or education. In addition to
participation in various national and international conferences, this project
also promotes outreach to the community and diversity through such activities as
the Materials Advantage Student Chapter. The Principal Investigator is the
founding faculty advisor for the University of Maryland, College Park Materials
Advantage Student Chapter. This chapter actively participates in open-houses at
the University to educate the public on materials science. Further, this chapter
encourages both undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the
various national professional society meetings.