* 0906148
* Quantum K-theory and other topics in enumerative geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Anders Buch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 156,516.00

Schubert calculus is the study of the (singular) cohomology ring of a
homogeneous space X, with an emphasis on multiplication of Schubert classes.
Such products can be interpreted as the number of points in an intersection in
general Schubert varieties, and therefore provide an essential tool in
enumerative algebraic geometry. While this ring contains information about the
components of an intersection of Schubert varieties, the K-theory ring also
provides information about how these components intersect. The equivariant
cohomology ring refines the ring structure by taking a group action into
account. And the quantum cohomology ring encodes the Gromov-Witten invariants,
which give the number of curves of fixed degree that meet general Schubert
varieties. All these rings can be combined to one single equivariant quantum
K-theory ring (to rule them all). Until recently, not much has been known about
the structure of this ring, since the Gromov-Witten invariants used to define it
have been hard to compute. The investigator will attempt to overcome this
problem and uncover the ring structure in as many cases as possible. He will
also seek answers to some important open questions concerning the orbit closures
of quiver representations. These objects from representation theory generalize
many interesting degeneracy loci, including Schubert varieties and determinantal
varieties, and their classes generalize important polynomials from geometry and
combinatorics, including Schur, Schubert, and Grothendieck polynomials. Studies
of orbit closures for relatively simple quivers have in the past resulted in
many beautiful formulas, constructions, and positivity results. The proposer
hopes to generalize these results to more general
quivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will attack problems in the broad
area of enumerative geometry, especially problems concerning quantum rings and
quiver cycles. Enumerative geometry aims to provide the tools required to count
the number of geometric objects of given type that satisfy specified conditions.
A typical example is the fact that exactly two lines (possibly with complex
coordinates) meet 4 randomly chosen fixed lines in 3-space. Enumerative problems
are often approached by constructing a moduli space, which has one point for
each geometric object of the given type, and then translating the specified
conditions into polynomial equations on the moduli space. This transforms the
problem into one of counting the solutions to such equations. Quiver cycles can
be understood as a way to organize equations that arise in many important
situations, and knowledge about geometric invariants of quiver cycles adds to
their utility for counting solutions. Ideas from string theory in physics led to
the definition of the quantum cohomology ring of a homogeneous space, which
provides an efficient tool for counting the number of curves of given degree
that meet fixed subvarieties in the space, at least when this number is finite.
When the number of solution curves is infinite, the set of these curves form a
space called a Gromov-Witten variety, and geometric invariants of this space can
tell us much about the problem. For example, if the Gromov-Witten variety has
non-zero Euler characteristic, then solution curves do exist. Quantum K-theory
is a generalization of quantum cohomology that encodes the Euler characteristic
of Gromov-Witten varieties. The investigator plans to study these topics with a
combination of geometric and combinatorial methods.