* 0906690
* Commutation Relations for SLE in Multiply Connected Domains and the Coupling Technique
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Dapeng Zhan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2009
* USD 156,447.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at studying the
geometric properties of Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE) introduced by Oded
Schramm. SLE describes conformal invariant random fractal curves in plane
domains, which are the scaling limits of many interesting two dimensional
statistical lattice models at critical temperature, e.g., percolation, Ising
model, Gaussian free field. The relationship between SLE and Conformal Field
Theory (CFT) has been established and well understood.&lt;br/&gt;The study of
SLE itself helps people to gain better understanding of those lattice models and
CFT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project extensively uses the so-called coupling
technique, which has been successful in proving the reversibility conjecture for
chordal SLE and Duplantier?s duality conjecture about the boundary of SLE. The
technique enables one to construct a global coupling of two SLE curves if they
commute with each other. The PI plans to use the coupling technique to study SLE
defined in multiply connected domains, which are important because many lattice
models are naturally defined there. The properties of these lattice models
indicate that any reasonablely defined SLE must satisfy commutation relation,
and so the coupling technique could be applied to construct a global commutation
coupling. The project focuses on SLE defined in doubly connected domains with a
few marked boundary points. These SLE naturally relate with various lattice
models in these domains, and they could be used to prove the reversibility of
radial SLE.