* 0906491
* Dynamical Localization in High Temperature Crystals as Measured by Inelastic Neutron Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Albert Sievers, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2014
* USD 407,500.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** An important scientific idea is that of energy or
the equivalence of heat and work; a concept central to the industrial
revolution. At present solar radiation can be converted to many forms of energy
by means of technology; but, to make energy produced this way an economical
contribution to our national energy supply requires understanding the long-term
stability of materials, especially those at high temperatures. Preliminary
neutron scattering experiments on a crystal of salt at high temperatures by the
Cornell-Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory collaboration have identified
unexpected energy localization or hot spots in the crystal. These findings
indicate a high temperature complexity for such a simple ionic lattice and point
to the need for new understanding about the way energy is distributed and
transported amongst atoms in real materials. This individual investigator
program will make use of sophisticated measurement tools located at a variety of
national facilities to examine and characterize in a systematic manner the hot
spot behavior in high temperature crystals. The knowledge about such intrinsic
material defects may be expected to ultimately impact the science of high
temperature materials. Both graduate and undergraduate students will develop
expertise in research methods and a variety of experimental techniques
appropriate to this new interdisciplinary field.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** A long standing question in condensed-matter sciences
and nonlinear dynamics is whether or not intrinsic localized vibrational modes
(ILMs), which rely on nonlinearity and lattice discreteness and which have been
explored in detail in macroscopic 1-D lattices, can appear in a 3-D atomic
lattice in thermal equilibrium. Preliminary experiments using inelastic neutron
scattering from crystalline solids by the Cornell-Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory collaboration have identified dynamical localization with well-
defined discrete energies as a new, necessary component of high temperature
lattice dynamics. Since high temperature materials now appear to be a natural
habitat for dynamical localization and since such excitations are localized hot
spots in the material they represent intrinsic material defects that may be
expected to influence high temperature diffusion and ultimately the strength of
materials. This individual investigator award supports a project to measure,
with inelastic neutron scattering, the vibrational localization that appears in
crystals at high temperatures. A goal of the project is to understand the
properties and ramifications of ILMs in a variety of high temperature crystals.
The experimental program will involve a postdoc, a graduate and undergraduate
students, and will employ a suite of scattering measurement techniques located
at national facilities, ranging from spallation source neutron scattering to
reactor source thermal neutron scattering, to expand the knowledge about such
excitations in dielectric crystals.