* 0906290
* Higher Grothendieck-Witt groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Marco Schlichting, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 179,825.00

The aim of this project is to deepen our understanding of the algebraic analogue
of real topological K-theory: the theory of higher Grothendieck-Witt
groups.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to establish several fundamental results with
special emphasis on eliminating restrictions on singularities and
characteristics which permeate the literature. Specifically, we will study
conjectures of Karoubi and Williams - the first, relating the integral homology
groups of infinite orthogonal, symplectic and general linear groups, and the
second relating homotopy fixed points of K-theory to hermitian K-theory. We will
also study homotopy and devissage properties of higher Grothendieck-Witt groups
when "2 is not invertible" which are essential in the calculation of hermitian
K-groups of rings of integers in number fields. Finally, we will study higher
Grothendieck-Witt groups in relation with certain invariants defined via
A^1-homotopy theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, cohomology theories
attach to a geometric object such as the surface of the earth (whose topological
properties don't change under small&lt;br/&gt;deformations) certain algebraic
objects such as a set of numbers (which are rather rigid in nature). The study
of the attached algebraic objects yields information about the original
geometric object. The success of cohomology theories in topology lead
algebraists to define cohomology theories in an algebraic context. These
algebraic cohomology theories allow us to use our intuition from 3 space and our
experience with working with real numbers to study systems polynomial equations
in higher dimensions and in number systems (used e.g. in cryptography) where 1+1
could be 0. The theory investigated in this project, the theory of higher
Grothendieck-Witt groups, is one such algebraic cohomology theory. Compared to
its companion theories - algebraic K-theory, Witt-groups and L-groups - this
theory is rather underdeveloped. For instance, virtually nothing is known in
relation with number systems in which&lt;br/&gt;1+1 = 0. This project aims to
close the gap in knowledge between the &lt;br/&gt;1+theory of&lt;br/&gt;higher
Grothendieck-Witt groups and these companion theories.