* 0906992
* RUI: Investigation of Surface Loss Processes in Nano-scale Luminescent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Anthony Diaz, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 145,463.00

Technical. This project, at a predominately undergraduate institution, involves
the study of electron-hole (e-h) pair transport and trapping processes in nano-
scale (50-500 nm) solid-state luminescent materials under vacuum ultraviolet
(VUV) excitation. The approach is to conduct a systematic spectroscopic
investigation of materials of controlled particle size, and evaluation of this
data in the context of accepted models. The analysis and modeling of the data is
expected to provide an assessment of the mobility of e-h pairs in a given host,
as well as the degree to which absorbed energy is lost at the particle surface.
These measurements are also able to distinguish bulk energy loss effects from
those involving migration to the surface. Such differentiation is important to
the development of efficient nanoscale optical materials that have an
intrinsically high surface area. Initial research focus will be on the well
characterized and technologically important materials, Y2O3 and YBO3. The goal
is to obtain greater fundamental understanding of how surface energy losses are
related to the structure and composition of nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area
of electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance.
Developing a detailed understanding of electron transport processes in solids is
important to a wide variety of fields within materials science, including the
study of scintillators, two-photon phosphors, dye-sensitized solar cells and
transparent conductors. It is the objective of the principal investigator to
sustain a rigorous research program with undergraduate students at Central
Washington University comprising the bulk of the investigative team. This will
provide students with deeper and broader training, expose them to interesting
research topics early in their academic careers, and serve as excellent
preparation for graduate school or future professional endeavors.