* 0906898
* Exploiting the Low Dimensional Physics of Incompressible Particles to Tailor the Stability and Morphology of Finite Phases Through Designed Surface Energies
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Stephen Z. Cheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 04/30/2014
* USD 598,664.00

This award by the Polymer program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Akron is to study the structure-functional relationships of
hybride materials prepared from incompressible nanoparticles and homopolymers -
both crystallizable and homopolymers. Study of 2-D phase transitions on flat and
curved surfaces, and use of the 2-D phase transitions associated with these
novel homopolymer-nanoparticle hybrides to control the stability, morphology and
transitional pathways of micelles are parts of this project. Using lamellar
crystals of specifically designed and synthesized particles-crystallizable homo-
and copolymers grown in dilute solution, the proposed research will create a
flat substrate with particles closely tethered to the surface using these
?sandwiched? single crystals. With near monodispersed molecular weight, the
tethered particle will possess a uniform and controllable volume fraction on the
surface. Monitoring the lamellar crystal thickness changes at different
crystallization temperatures will enable a quantitative investigation of
theoretically and technologically important 2-D phase transitions. Lamellar
single crystals of hybride linear diblock copolymers, where the two immiscible,
non-crystallizable ends will be located at opposite basal surfaces of the single
crystal, will be grown. The newly developed method to create the tethered
particle substrates using particle-crystallizable polymers would provide
precisely controlled systems that will give significant insight into low
dimensional phase transitions which will be an important contribution to the
previously developed theories. In addition, combining knowledge from both
particle and polymer physics would enable the development of materials with
accurately controlled particle interfacial volume fractions, block molecular
weights, block chemistries, and molecular
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to enhance the
knowledge base in developing additional understanding of soft materials physics
in general and their behavior in crystals, on surfaces and on micelles. The
proposed research would be exposing graduate and undergraduate student to topics
in advanced soft materials while promoting an interdisciplinary approach to
research. Recruiting and training of gifted and underrepresented high school
students through "Upward Bound Math/Science" and "Summer Honors Institute for
Gifted High School Students" programs are also planned as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;