* 0906568
* Quantile regression with mismeasured or missing covariates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ying Wei, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 130,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantile regression (Koenker
and Bassett, 1978) has emerged as an important statistical methodology, and has
been used in a wide range of applications including economics, biology, ecology
and finance. Very often a data set is not perfectly obtained. Some variables may
be measured with error, while others may contain missing observations. Ignoring
measurement errors or missing observations could lead to substantial bias in
estimation. For this reason, how to handle measurement errors and missing data
has generated a large number of literatures. Unfortunately, most of the existing
methods rely on a parametric likelihood form, and hence cannot be applied to
quantile regression directly. This proposal targets at developing methods and
theories for obtaining unbiased quantile estimates even in the presence of
measurement errors and/or missing observations. The specific proposed research
activities under this project include the following four aspects. (1) Develop
estimation methods for linear quantile models allowing the existence of
measurement errors, and investigate the asymptotic properties for the resulting
estimator. (2) Extend the estimation method for linear quantile model to
semiparametric models, which brings more flexibility and hence facilities a
wider range of applications. (3) Develop related inference and model adequacy
assessment tools. (4) Extend the proposed methods in 1 - 3 to address missing
data problems in conditional quantile models, including estimation, inference
and model assessment. The statistical methods to be employed for this proposal
cover quantile regression, methods and theories for measurement errors and
missing data problems, nonparametric and semi-parametric modeling, goodness-of-
fit tests, bootstrapping methods and robust statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will lead to more accurate inference and more comprehensive
qualifications in various research applications in epidemiology, HIV research,
genetics, cancer research and environmental science, as measurement errors and
missing data commonly exist in those applications. The methodologies to be
developed by the investigators are of general interest to statistical research.
The proposed research will be widely disseminated through publications,
presentations in domestic and international conferences, and collaborations with
clinical and public health researchers.