* 0906773
* Robust Multivariate Statistics: Beyond Ellipticity and Affine Equivariance
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* David Tyler, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2013
* USD 222,207.00

The concepts of affine equivariance and elliptically symmetric distributions
have played a central role in the development of robust multivariate statistical
methods over the past 30 years. Statistical methods which are robust over the
class of elliptical distributions are more widely applicable than methods based
solely on the multivariate normal distribution. The class of elliptical
distributions, though, represents only a small class of multivariate models.
Important cases which do not fall within this class are mixture models and
independent components models. Affine equivariance is a useful property since
methods possessing it behave equally well over different covariance structures.
However, there are many cases where interest lies in certain type of covariance
structures, e.g. factor analysis models. The investigator's research goals are
thus two-fold. First, the investigator is to further develop and study
"invariant coordinate selection." This is a new multivariate method, recently
introduced by the investigator, which is well suited for exploring non-
elliptical models. In particular, it can be used to uncover Fisher's linear
discriminant subspace for mixture models when the group identifications are
unknown, and can be use to uncover the independent components in independent
components models. Second, the investigator is to study the properties of
certain non-affine equivariant methods, such as orthogonal equivariant
M-estimates. The primary goal here is to achieve a better understanding of the
type of covariance structures for which such methods may or may not be
advantageous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to analyze multivariate data arises
in many diverse disciplines, such as computer science, psychology, meteorology,
sociology, biology, econometrics and engineering. The primary interest in such
data typically is not with an understanding of each variable separately, but
rather with the interrelationships among the variables or with unmeasurable
"latent" variables. Many common methods employed in these areas are based upon
the multivariate normal model, which are now well known to perform poorly if the
normal model does not hold. In particular, only a few errors in the data or a
slight deviation in the model can highly influence the interpretation of an
experiment or a data set, sometimes with disastrous consequences. This is
particularly problematic with high dimensional data, i.e. data consisting of
many variables, since bad data points or deviations from the model can be
difficult to detect whenever they are associated not with just one variable but
with a number of the variables. Thus, multivariate methods which are not greatly
affected by such problems are crucial to a proper analysis of such data. The
investigator anticipates that the intended research will have an important
impact not only on steering the direction of research within robust statistics,
but also on the methodology used within the many disciplines that routinely deal
with multivariate data.