* 0906780
* Disorder and Dynamics in Solids and Superfluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Paul Goldbart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2013
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on nonequilibrium statistical physics spanning from classical to
quantum systems. The research will focus on three areas: the structure and
dynamics of random solids, non-equilibrium states and avalanching in superfluid
helium flowing through nanopore arrays, and the structure and dynamics of
ordering in laser-driven atomic systems housed in photonic cavities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Random solids are materials created via the permanent
chemical bonding of randomly selected constituents, and are well exemplified by
vulcanized rubber. This bonding creates a new state of matter, which acquires a
nonzero shear modulus and spatial localization of its constituents - but with no
long-range crystallinity. The PI's past work of has led to a fairly refined
understanding of the static equilibrium structure and elasticity of simple
random solids. The PI will develop an understanding of dynamics in simple random
solids and their parent liquids, and when the materials exhibit long- or short-
range liquid crystallinity, how this ordering interacts with the structure of
the random solid. To accomplish these goals powerful statistical-mechanical
tools will be applied that properly and instructively account for the deeply
random chemical-level architecture that such materials possess.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by beautiful experiments due to the Berkeley
group, the PI plans to address the nature of helium superflow through arrays of
thousands of nanoscale ?Josephson pores? connecting two reservoirs. The PI?s
recent work argues that the qualitative nature of the flow depends crucially on
a ?hidden? competition between superfluid "elasticity" and disorder, which
arises from pore-to-pore variability. This work suggests that collective system-
spanning "ruptures" in the superflow can occur at weak, but not at strong,
disorder, these regimes being separated by a non-equilibrium phase transition
that has antecedents in several condensed-matter and geophysical settings. The
PI plans to construct a detailed theory of helium superflow through nanopore
arrays that incorporates the effects of fluctuations and experiment geometry,
and builds a statistical characterization of the flow dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser-driven atomic gases, trapped in high-finesse optical
cavities are expected to undergo fascinating nonequilibrium quantum phase
transitions to states of strong, spontaneous organization among the atoms, which
self-consistently populate either the even or the odd anti-nodes of certain
modes of the cavity radiation. For suitably designed cavities, these transitions
are expected to be accompanied by strong fluctuations in the atomic
organization, which will imprint themselves on the spatial and temporal
correlations of the light leaking from the cavity. The PI aims to apply a wide
array of condensed matter techniques in developing a thorough picture of the
ordering, its steady-state fluctuations, and the rich kinetics via which this
nonequilibrium steady state is achieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a theoretical research and education
program across hard and soft condensed matter physics with the study of systems
and materials that are out of equilibrium and in which randomness plays an
important role. The PI will conduct research in three areas. In the first the PI
will study the properties of random solids ? materials made of a network of long
chain-like molecules in which the chains are linked to each other at random
places. In the second area the PI will study the flow of superfluid helium, a
liquid at low temperature with remarkable properties such as the ability to flow
without dissipation, through an array of nanoscale pores. In the third area the
PI will study the nonequilbrium phases of atomic gases in an optical cavity and
transitions among them that arise when a laser is applied. These three areas of
research advance the field of statistical physics which seeks to discover
universal principles that characterize systems that are far from equilibrium and
link seemingly unrelated systems. From a physical point of view, living things
provide perhaps the most familiar example of systems that are far from
equilibrium. This is fundamental research that will advance our understanding of
systems and materials that are far from equilibrium.