* 0906832
* Collaborative Proposal: Physics of Ferromagnetic Nanorings in an External Azimuthal Field
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Katherine Aidala, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Ferromagnetic
nanorings exhibit unique magnetic states as the dimensions approach the scale of
a single magnetic domain. The closed-flux ?vortex? state exists in appropriately
sized disks and rings, in which the circular field lines are entirely contained
within the structure. The chirality of this vortex has been proposed as the
storage bit in a novel memory device, but control over the chirality has proven
challenging with uniform external fields. This collaborative project between
Mount Holyoke College and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, directly
explores the switching of the vortex state by passing a current through the tip
of an atomic force microscope. This current will produce an azimuthal magnetic
field that controls the vortex chirality. Simulations predict that azimuthally
applied fields result in interesting states beyond the vortex, generating stable
360 degree domain walls, and effects of asymmetry on the magnetic states will be
examined. This work will involve the undergraduate women at Mount Holyoke
College, as well as post-docs and graduate students, fostering frequent
interaction between the two institutions. Furthermore, curricular material on
magnetism will be developed and included in established programs with K12
teachers and the nearby Springfield Technical Community
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). Nanoscale magnets exhibit unique magnetic states that can be used as
novel data storage devices. Computer hard drives presently store information in
binary bits of ?1? and ?0? that are encoded in what are effectively little bar
magnets with either the north or south pole pointing up. Magnetic nanorings
offer a unique state that has no poles, but instead could store the ?1? and ?0?
as clockwise or counterclockwise magnetic fields in what is called the ?vortex?
state. This collaborative project between Mount Holyoke College (MHC) and the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst (UMass), explores the physics of magnetic
nanorings. The fabrication facilities and expertise at UMass will be used to
make the nanorings. The atomic force microscope at MHC is capable of precisely
positioning a tiny wire at the center of a nanoring. Passing a current through
the wire creates a magnetic field that allows control over the direction of the
circular magnetization, a feat that is difficult to accomplish with traditional
techniques. This work will involve the undergraduate women at Mount Holyoke
College, as well as post-docs and graduate students, fostering frequent
interaction between the two institutions. Furthermore, curricular material on
magnetism will be developed and included in established programs with K12
teachers and the nearby Springfield Technical Community College.