* 0906341
* Studies in Measurement Error Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* YANYUAN MA, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 165,046.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The principal investigator (P.I.) will study three topics in measurement error
models, develop relevant methodologies and analyze their corresponding
properties and performances.

The first topic concerns functional models in the situation when the main model
contains unspecified error, hence is a semiparametric model by itself. The P.I.
will study the structure and interaction of the two nonparametric components,
the unknown error distribution and the unknown latent variable distribution, and
propose an operation to best treat each of them. The general approach is
geometry based. The resulting estimating procedure possesses robustness to model
misspecification in both components, and allows to achieve optimal estimation
efficiency. The asymptotic consistency and normality will be demonstrated both
theoretically and in numerical examples. The second topic concerns the model
goodness-of-fit test in measurement error models. The P.I. will propose a
pseudo-score type methodology. She will demonstrate that the new testing
procedure is feasible in accommodating the computational issues specific in such
models, and has the desired consistency and power property. In addition, the
optimal power property associated with the usual profiling estimation procedure
can be equivalently achieved via projection. She will also study the relation
between the Wald test and the pseudo-score test and demonstrate their
equivalence in a wider range than previously known in literature. The third
topic concerns the small sample performance in measurement error models.
Existing literature has indicated that the first order asymptotics in
measurement error models often require very large sample size to show its
relevancy. The P.I. will tackle this problem using a saddle point approximation
technique, hence achieving a higher order approximation than the classical first
order theory. Because the functional measurement error model is semiparametric,
yet existing saddle point approximation theory is developed and heavily relies
on parametric model assumption, the P.I. will develop and study new methodology
in this area.

The series of projects in this proposal will resolve some of the most
fundamental issues in their most general form in measurement error models. Since
errors in measurements widely present in almost all scientific fields, including
health and medicine, environment and atmospheric science, finance and economics,
material and chemical sciences, the new methodologies will generate wide
interest and have important application in these fields. They will also provoke
further studies and development in related semiparametric problems and computing
methods in statistical sciences itself.