* 0906400
* Travel Support for the Directions in Statistical Computing (DSC) 2009 Meeting; Copenhagen, Denmark; Summer 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Luke-jon Tierney, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,000.00

DSC 2009, an international workshop on Directions in
Statistical&lt;br/&gt;Computing, will be held July 13--14, 2009 at the
University of&lt;br/&gt;Copenhagen, Denmark. This is the sixth in a series of
meetings;&lt;br/&gt;previous meeting were held in Vienna, Austria (1999, 2001,
and 2003),&lt;br/&gt;Seattle, WA (2005), and Auckland, New Zealand (2007). The
workshop&lt;br/&gt;will focus on, but is not limited to, open source
statistical&lt;br/&gt;computing and aims to provide a platform for exchanging
ideas about&lt;br/&gt;developments in statistical computing. UseR! 2009 will be
held July&lt;br/&gt;8--10 in Rennes, France, and is the fifth in a series of
conferences&lt;br/&gt;the use and development statistical methods and software
related to&lt;br/&gt;the R system. This proposal is for funding exclusively to
provide&lt;br/&gt;support to assist with travel expenses for junior
investigators from&lt;br/&gt;US institutions to attend this meeting. Work of
young researchers is&lt;br/&gt;often among the most novel, yet often these
researchers lack the&lt;br/&gt;travel funds necessary to attend such a
conference because they have&lt;br/&gt;not yet established themselves
sufficiently to attract external travel&lt;br/&gt;and other funding for their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistics is playing an increasingly important role
in&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research, and statistical computing is essential
as&lt;br/&gt;the means for making new methodology available to researchers
and&lt;br/&gt;allowing the best statistical practices to be applied
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;Scholarly conferences on statistical computing are an
essential&lt;br/&gt;framework for the exchange of ideas and for encouraging
the&lt;br/&gt;exploration of new directions in the design of statistical
software.&lt;br/&gt;International conferences are particularly valuable as they
allow the&lt;br/&gt;exchange of ideas among researchers from around the world
who would&lt;br/&gt;not ordinarily come into direct contact. The benefit to
young&lt;br/&gt;researchers of a first exposure to the international
research&lt;br/&gt;community is particularly important. International meetings
also&lt;br/&gt;provide an opportunity to meet with outstanding international
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and encourage them to consider opportunities for
further&lt;br/&gt;study in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;