* 0906041
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Philip Johnson, Johnson Philip L
* Fellowship
* Julie Dickerson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Inference of
microbial population parameters from metagenomic data" for Philip Johnson. The
host institution for this research is Emory University and the sponsoring
scientist is Rustom Antia.

Despite a growing awareness of the ecological importance of non-pathogenic
microbes, the forces affecting the evolution of natural microbial populations
remain largely unknown. Recent technological advances in DNA sequencing have
enabled metagenomic projects that sample and sequence DNA from natural
environments to yield, in essence, a genome-wide population sample from the
dominant species in the sample. This research develops a method for estimating
the rate of exchange of genetic material among microbes (i.e. the recombination
rate) from such data. In contrast to previous models, this new method
incorporates empirical evidence that microbial recombination rates are
negatively correlated with sequence divergence. Two parallel approaches are
being taken: 1) a modified version of the standard coalescent process in which
coalescent events are more likely between lineages that have recombined and 2) a
two-stage procedure analogous to constructing an ancestral selection graph in
which a large ancestral recombination graph is constructed, mutations are
applied and then recombination events are accepted or rejected depending on
sequence divergence.

Training goals include improving statistical and mathematical modeling
expertise, specifically coalescent theory, importance sampling, and graph
theory, while furthering interactions with experimental biologists. The
inspiration for the proposed methods came from two metagenomic projects that
sample microbial communities with serious environmental consequences: activated
sludge in wastewater treatment plants and biofilms that grow in abandoned mines
producing highly acidic runoff. Studying the evolution of these two populations
will guide the design of engineering strategies to manage them. Outreach
includes involvement of undergraduate students with data analysis, and the
results of this research will be broadly disseminated through publication in
peer-reviewed journals.