* 0906433
* Effect of the Nanoparticle Surface Termination on the Nanoparticle-Smectic Liquid Crystal Interaction:  Order/Disorder Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,001.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposal investigates how the surface termination of a nanoparticle affects the
interaction between the liquid crystal and the nanoparticles. The systematic
study of this system (liquid crystal/nanoparticle surface-
termination/nanoparticle) is important for improved applications and biological
applications. This system is interesting because the molecular spacing for the
liquid crystals (3-4 nm) is comparable to the nanoparticles used. The
nanoparticles can induce phase changes on the liquid crystals, depending on
their surface or functionalization groups, and disorder the liquid crystal. The
proposal will study the system as a function of 1. temperature; 2. liquid
crystal film thickness; 3. particle concentration, both with and without and
external magnetic field. These results will be compared with a phenomenological
model that the P. I. has developed for the smectic-A phase ? nanoparticle ?
surface coating system. The research has benefited from international
collaborative work in the study of the heat capacitance of the system of
nanoparticles/surface termination/liquid crystals as a function of temperature.
The information obtained both from the heat capacitance and the x-ray study done
in the present work will provide information on the disordering of the liquid
crystal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals
are important both for device and biological application. Liquid crystals are in
TV?s, clocks and many other applications. They are also the phases of the walls
of every living creature cell. The interaction of nanoparticles with liquid
crystals is important to study since the molecular size of the liquid crystals
is comparable to the nanoparticles. Inorganic nanoparticles are coated with an
organic at their surface to improve their interaction with the organic liquid
crystals and to identify specific cell walls in biological applications. This
study investigates how the combination of the nanoparticle and their surface
coating orders or disorders the liquid crystal, and can tell if the combination
will be a disadvantage to applications or dangerous to living cells. Students
working on this project will get an understanding of what has to be done to
obtain better devices, and also what precautions have to be taking when using
nanoparticles to interact with living creatures. The presentations done in
professional and other meetings will inform the general public of these facts.
Presentations to undergraduates and pre-college students will teach how liquid
crystals appears in many aspects of their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;