* 0906212
* Workshop:  Roadmap for Additive Manufacturing (RAM):   Identifying the Future of Freeform Processing; Arlington, Virginia; March 30-31, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2009
* David Rosen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 46,840.00

The primary objective of this workshop award is to define and focus research
activity in the area of additive manufacturing to accelerate its commercial
acceptance, to increase the impact and significance of research, and to
articulate a roadmap for research for the next 10-12 years. The roadmap workshop
will be held in Arlington, Virginia at the National Science Foundation in March
or April, 2009. About fifty leading experts will convene to identify major areas
for societal and market penetration as well as areas of fruitful research.
Specific research questions deal with appropriate targets for additive
manufacturing; technical, operating and analysis advances; affordability
milestones; the role of nanotechnology; consideration of energy, power
generation and waste heat recovery; bioengineering, medical device, and
healthcare; and sustainability. The agenda for the meeting will include four
keynote presentations and seven breakouts for simultaneous assessment. A final
report based on the results of the workshop will be prepared and broadly
distributed to maximize the impact of the effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major
outcomes of the study will be creation and increased awareness of high-impact
research topics in manufacturing; an estimated time-line for technical progress
in processes, machines, and materials; a research agenda and partnership
opportunities among funding agencies, academics, and industrialists; and
synergism of novel concepts for transformational activities in the application
and extension of freeform technologies. Increased awareness in the research
community of high-impact research areas will increase interest in manufacturing
research in general and freeform manufacturing specifically. Technological
developments including new industries and applications of technology are
anticipated. An understanding should emerge of the potential for additive
manufacturing to impact critical areas of energy, sustainability, industrial
competitiveness, and national security.