* 0906601
* Theoretical Studies in Far-From-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Christopher Jarzynski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2013
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a theoretical
research and education program in the field of nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics with a focus on soft condensed matter. Recent theoretical advances in
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, combined with parallel experimental and
computational progress, have shifted the field from its traditional focus on
near-equilibrium systems to a wider consideration of systems far from thermal
equilibrium. Fluctuation theorems and nonequilibrium work relations have
revealed that such systems satisfy strong and unexpected laws, while the study
of thermal ratchets and related models provide a microscopic understanding of
how thermal fluctuations can be converted into directed motion without violating
the second law of thermodynamics. These advances not only provide a new set of
tools to apply to problems of both technological and fundamental importance, but
also suggest new directions of research. The research will emphasize three
topics related to systems that are driven away from thermal equilibrium by the
time-dependent variation of external parameters. In particular, the research
will: develop theoretical tools for analyzing currents generated in stochastic
pumps; design and implement a novel Monte Carlo scheme for the efficient
sampling of complex systems using nonequilibrium simulations to generate trial
moves; and, explore basic issues of irreversibility and dissipation in
microscopic systems. By investigating and extending these results, the PI will
further elucidate the meaning and the role of the second law of thermodynamics,
in the context of microscopic systems away from thermal equilibrium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the very general mathematical formulation of
the issues the PI plans to investigate, this research will have impact across a
broad range of scientific disciplines. For example, apart from the context of
artificial molecular machinery, stochastic pumps can be used to model enzymes
involved in transmembrane transport, or chemical reaction networks; and the
numerical difficulties of sampling complex systems arise in problems ranging
from protein folding to spin glasses to the Traveling Salesman Problem. The PI
will continue to engage in activities that promote the progress of science,
particularly thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. These include lecture
courses at institutions both in the United States and abroad; service
activities; launching a community-driven web site devoted to methods for free
energy calculations; and developing educational resources. Finally, the research
supported under this award will directly contribute to the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, who will sharpen their analytical and
computational skills, and broaden their knowledge of statistical mechanics,
while tackling intellectually challenging problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
theoretical research and education program in the field of nonequilibrium
statistical mechanics with a focus on soft condensed matter. Nonequilibrium
systems and processes are ubiquitous and encompass a wide range of phenomena
from materials growth to chemical systems that exhibit interesting spatial
patterns to the processes that sustain life. The research area of nonequilibrium
thermodynamics studies time-dependent change of large, complex systems with many
degrees of freedom. Most traditional research in this field has focused on
systems near equilibrium where the system is almost a steady-state system. In
contrast, the research supported under this award will develop models for
systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium. This theoretical research will have
application to a broad range of experimental applications in soft-matter
physics, including applications to natural and artificial nanoscale motors and
machines. With increasing capability for synthesizing rotaxanes, catenanes,
molecular switches, and other prospective components of future nanoscale
machines, there is a need for a general theoretical framework for the external
control of such systems. The PI will continue to engage in activities that
promote the progress of science, particularly thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics. These include lecture courses at institutions both in the United
States and abroad; service activities; launching a community-driven web site
devoted to methods for free energy calculations; and developing educational
resources. Finally, the research supported under this award will directly
contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate students, who will
sharpen their analytical and computational skills, and broaden their knowledge
of statistical mechanics, while tackling intellectually challenging problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;