* 0906062
* Quantum Dots as an Experimental Basis for Studying Well-defined Many-Body Hamiltonians and Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* David Goldhaber-Gordon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2013
* USD 635,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Modern technology relies on the ability
to understand the electronic properties of materials. Toward this end,
physicists develop theories in which individual components, such as a site where
electrons are bound, interact with each other. Fully testing the predictions of
a theory can be difficult, because material parameters are not individually
tunable. This award supports a project that follows an alternative approach.
Well-understood semiconductor materials and advanced patterning techniques are
used to build nanoscale sites or ?quantum dots? that trap electrons. The great
advantage to this approach is that parameters of the theory, such as the ability
for the trapped electron in the dot to interact with the reservoir of electrons
in the material, can be controlled electronically. The project uses this control
to drive a drastic change in the electrons? behavior. Usually, one thinks of
electrons acting independently, as they do when flowing through a copper wire.
In contrast, the quantum dot structure can be tuned so that the electrons behave
as a collective entity. This change is analogous to the transition from water to
ice, except that it is not caused by temperature but by quantum fluctuations.
The effect of quantum fluctuations is much less understood than their classical
counterpart, temperature fluctuations. The goal of this project is to observe
this quantum phase transition and quantitatively test current theories that seek
to explain these phenomena. This project will train students and post-docs in
advanced physical theories, semiconductor processing skills, and precision
measurement techniques that will prepare them for cutting-edge careers in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;A crucial challenge in the field of correlated electron
physics is to find an experimental system that corresponds to an interacting
many-body Hamiltonian and allows fine control over the parameters of the
Hamiltonian. This award supports a project that will meet the challenge by using
well-understood AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructures and advanced patterning techniques
to fabricate gated nano-structures. In these structures, small droplets of
electrons called quantum dots are isolated from the remaining electron
reservoirs. The two Hamiltonians of interest are the two-channel Kondo and the
two-impurity Kondo Hamiltonians. In the two-channel Kondo system two independent
reservoirs of delocalized electrons compete to screen an electron spin bound to
the localized site (a quantum dot). In the two-impurity Kondo Hamiltonian an
electron reservoir and a spin on a localized site compete to screen another spin
on a second localized site. The advantage of using gated quantum dots is that
parameters such as inter-dot interactions and dot-reservoir tunneling rates can
be precisely measured and electrostatically tuned. This project will utilize
this control to drive a quantum phase transition between a Fermi liquid and a
non-Fermi liquid state. The goal is to tune to the very sensitive quantum
critical point and quantitatively test theoretical predictions of how the
highly-correlated non-Fermi liquid state evolves into the more conventional
Fermi liquid state under the influence of relevant perturbations such as
magnetic field and exchange coupling. This project will provide valuable
training to students and post-docs in advanced many-body theories, semiconductor
processing skills, and precision measurement techniques that will prepare them
for cutting-edge careers in academia or industry.