* 0906734
* Bayesian Mixture Models: Unified Theoretical Frameworks and MCMC Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Subharup Guha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different kinds of Bayesian mixture
models, such as finite mixtures, finite and infinite hidden Markov models,
Dirichlet process models and analysis of densities models, and their methods of
inference have traditionally been developed from isolated perspectives. There
have been few attempts to view these models from a common standpoint. For the
massive data sets increasingly encountered in real world studies, the
inferential techniques for these models often necessitate heavy computational
burdens that preclude fully Bayesian solutions. The proposed research will (i)
achieve a unification by formulating general classes of mixture models whose
special cases are many common mixture models, (ii) explore from a common
standpoint important theoretical properties of generalized mixture models, such
as posterior consistency, and discover asymptotics that form the basis of
broadly applicable and cost-effective inferential strategies, (iii) develop
efficient Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques for fitting generalized mixture
models to large datasets, (iv) develop user-friendly statistical software that
implement these methods with the goal of disseminating them to researchers, and
(v) apply the proposed methods to analyze publicly available, high-throughput
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) data on various kinds of
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian mixture models are ubiquitous in
statistical applications because of their ability to capture real-world
complexities through relatively simple constructions. These models have found
application in such diverse areas as computer science, epidemiology, economics,
finance, forestry, genetics, and marketing. The range of applications of this
rapidly developing area has exploded in the last decade. Through its theoretical
and methodological components, this research will establish key characteristics
shared by disparate classes of mixture models. It will enable the utilization of
mixture models in applications where it is currently difficult, if not
impossible, to fit the models due to sheer volume of data. The investigator will
ensure effective dissemination of the research through open-access software
developments, publication in leading journals, application of the proposed
methods to the analysis of microarray-based cancer data, and presentation of the
results in statistical and subject-matter conferences.