* 0906753
* RUI: Ultrafast Optical Studies of Nanoscale Thermal Transport and Coherent Acoustic Phonon Propagation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Brian Daly, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 214,233.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSRTACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental solid-
state physics research at an undergraduate institution. The project seeks to
answer fundamental questions that are of relevance to the semiconductor and
nanotechnology fields. Ultrafast lasers (which produce light pulses less than a
millionth of a millionth of a second in duration) will be used as a tool to
investigate heat and ultrasound in thin film materials. The thermal studies will
focus on new materials that have a number of potential technological
applications: amorphous carbon nitride and polymer-nanotube composites. The
ultrasound studies will focus on studying the feasibility of using very high
frequency (1000 times higher frequency than medical ultrasound) ultrasound to
study nanostructures beneath the surface of silicon wafers. Computer simulations
of the experimental work will also play a major role in the project.
Undergraduate students will participate in the research projects, gaining
training and hands-on experience in frontier scientific research. Through the
research experience, the students will be well equipped to pursue a graduate
education or to start a career in the semiconductor/nanotechnology
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports experimental condensed matter physics research at an undergraduate
institution. The project seeks to answer fundamental physics questions
concerning materials and phenomena that are of technological relevance.
Ultrafast optics will be used as a tool to elucidate nanoscale thermal transport
in thin film materials and to probe coherent acoustic phonons (picosecond
ultrasonics) in crystalline wafers. The thermal transport studies will focus on
amorphous carbon nitride CN_x and polymer-nanotube composites. The acoustic
phonon studies will focus on studying the effects of propagation through
millimeter thick wafers on the spectral and temporal profile of the phonon
pulses. This latter work should facilitate a novel phonon imaging scheme. Finite
element simulations of the experimental work will also play a major role in the
project. Undergraduate students will participate in the project, gaining
training and hands-on experience in frontier scientific research. Through the
research experience, the students will be well equipped to pursue a graduate
education or to start a career in the semiconductor/nanotechnology industries.