* 0906939
* Scanning Probe Microscopy of Nano-Electronic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stuart Tessmer, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 373,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT This project applies cryogenic scanning probe methods to
resolve the quantum structure of nanoelectronic systems in semiconductors and
metals. With regard to the semiconductor work, this project will apply
subsurface charge accumulation, a specialized technique capable of resolving
individual electrons in subsurface systems. The technique will be applied to
probe the electron addition spectra of nanofabricated pairs of donor atoms in
silicon. These objects can be considered as donor molecules, analogous to
hydrogenic molecules in free space. The goal is to perform fundamental tests of
the quantum mechanics of these minuscule semiconductor systems. With regard to
metallic systems, this project will apply scanning tunneling microscopy to
measure the local density of state of cerium-telluride, a layered crystal that
contains cerium atoms that exhibit Kondo behavior. Hence this study will
directly probe a Kondo lattice system. Scanning probe microscopy research has
proven to be an outstanding training ground for young physicists. Moreover, an
educational Nanoscience show will be performed and iteratively improved, in
conjunction with the Michigan State University Science Theatre. NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT As integrated circuits continue to rapidly scale down in size,
understanding the nature of electrons in semiconductors and metals trapped by
and interacting with individual impurity atoms has become increasingly
essential. Advanced microscopic techniques have played and will likely continue
to play a key role in developing nanoelectronic devices. This research applies
two such techniques: Subsurface Charge Accumulation imaging, and low-temperature
Scanning Tunneling Microscopy. Two projects will be conducted. One project will
probe and test a true atomic-scale device, composed of only two impurity atoms
carefully positioned in silicon. The second project will resolve the properties
of conducting electrons in cerium-telluride. In this metal the presence of the
magnetic cerium atoms is expected to give surprising properties to the
conducting charge. This research will provide a challenging training ground for
graduate and undergraduate students, as they master advanced microscopy and
sample fabrication techniques. Moreover, an educational Nanoscience show will be
performed in conjunction with the Michigan State University Science Theatre.
This show will literally bring a hands-on introduction to nanotechnology for
students in grades 4-12.