* 0906822
* Radiative and ultrafast non-radiative electronic relaxation in individual and assembled noble metallic nanoparticles of different  shapes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 08/31/2015
* USD 470,532.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

From previous studies of the El-Sayed group and other researchers in the
plasmonic nanoparticle field, it is clear that the surface plasmon fields of
gold and silver nanoparticles offer many new and exciting directions. A large
volume of the studies in the field, especially those by the Schatz and Van Duyne
groups, have shown how these fields depend on the nanoparticle size and shape.
It is further known that the field between nanoparticles can be much stronger
than the fields of individual nanoparticles. The dependence of the overlapping
fields of pairs of gold or silver nanoparticles on their shape, size,
orientation, and separation has not been given the same attention. The electron
beam lithography facilities located within the Georgia Institute of Technology
Microelectronics Research Center will be utilized to further these studies.
Nanoprisms, nanorods, nanocubes, nanorings, and additional nanoparticle shapes
will be fabricated by top down methods and studied as a function of their size,
orientation, and interparticle separation. Using DDA methods, which have been
previously well established in the El-Sayed group, extinction, absorption, and
scattering yields as well as the surface field intensities will be calculated
for all such configurations. Also, the correlation between the plasmonic field
strength calculated for different configurations and the various spectroscopic
properties of nanoparticle pairs (absorption and scattering) will also be
studied. Plasmonic field effects associated with enhanced spectroscopic
properties of nearby electronic systems (molecule and semiconductors) such as
the absorption, fluorescence, non-radiative relaxation of hot electrons, and
surface enhanced Raman scattering will also be investigated. From the observed
dependence of the surface plasmon resonance on interparticle separation,
nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes will be studied for nanoruler
applications of different distance ranges for biological and macromolecular
intersite separations. The observed quantitative SERS or fluorescence quenching
and enhancement could also be used for sensing and diagnostic applications.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Nanostructures consisting of plasmonic nanoparticle
pairs have interesting optical properties because of the very strong near-field
coupling between the nanoparticles. These properties have already begun to
impact a number of fields such as field-enhanced spectroscopy and plasmon
resonance sensing for enhanced sensor applications, nanostructured optical
probes for improved imaging devices, and nanophotonic waveguides and devices for
applications in energy transport. Fundamental studies of the plasmon resonance
coupling in metal nanoparticle assemblies will help characterize and optimize
plasmonic nanostructures for potential applications. An important contribution
during the proposed support period will be in maintaining the current cross-
disciplinary relationships that have been established during the previous
support period through partnerships with the Microelectronics Research Center
(MiRC) at Georgia Tech. As a member of the National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network (NNIN) the MiRC has been instrumental in catalyzing
inter-disciplinary partnerships. Through collaboration with the MiRC and use of
state-of-the-art equipment located therein, a versatile network of researchers
has been developed that integrates scientific fundamentals and engineering
optimization, which have led to several inter-discipline publications and
conference presentations. There will be an educational impact of the proposed
research on training of graduate and undergraduate students as well as
postdoctoral researchers in the broad range of areas of nanotechnology including
nanofabrication, colloidal chemistry, optical spectroscopy, and electrodynamics.
In addition, the El-Sayed group has always attracted and accepted intelligent
NNIN and REU summer undergraduate students to who contribute to this research
while receiving exceptional experience in a research laboratory environment. The
partnerships that have been established will improve upon the impressive
tradition of education and training that Georgia Tech has provided to students
to prepare them for careers in the field of nanotechnology, in both academia and
industry.