* 0906873
* Molecular-Level Investigations of the Conductive Properties of Designed Test Platforms of Porphyrins and Pthalocyanines using Current-Sensing AFM
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jayne Garno, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 312,762.00

0906873&lt;br/&gt;Garno&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."
&lt;br/&gt;Technical. This project addresses methods for creating nanostructures
of porphyrins and phthalocyanines relevant to molecular electronics
considerations. Measurement of molecular conductance with reproducibility is a
recognized challenge along with the need to establish methods for reproducibly
depositing molecules onto a surface with desired orientation and coverage.
Scanning probe lithography (SPL) will be applied to enable CP (conductive
probe)-AFM measurements of designed planar arrays of nanostructures. The test
platforms planned will incorporate an insulating matrix layer of n-alkanethiol
SAMs (self-assembled monolayers) surrounding nanopatterns as a calibration
reference, for standardizing measurements. Experimental results will be used for
deriving predictive models of electron transport in designed free-base and
metal-coordinated porphyrin and phthalocyanine assemblies. Greater understanding
of how self-organization and surface assembly influence electrical properties is
an anticipated outcome. New SPL methods will be pioneered to control the
assembly of porphyrins and pthalocyanines. It is expected that by arranging and
orienting porphyrins and phthalocyanines on well defined surfaces, local
measurements of charge transport can be enabled for different molecular
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research
issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having
technological relevance. Additionally, project activities emphasize creating and
fostering opportunities for underrepresented minorities and women in
interdisciplinary training and research. Planned activities include minority
student recruitment, sponsoring research experiences for undergraduates, K-12
outreach through the LSU ChemDemo and annual Super Science Saturday programs,
hosting instrument workshops, sponsoring guest researchers and networking with
HBCU programs. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed work enables
students to interact with scientists of different areas to broaden the scope of
their training as well as to enhance their educational experience. Curriculum
developments are expected to bring the concepts of surface science and molecular
imaging into undergraduate courses.