* 0906489
* Nonlinear Spin Waves in Magnetic Films: New Concepts and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 346,375.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** &lt;br/&gt;Chaos and solitons are two important
branches of nonlinear science that have attracted interest over a wide range of
disciplines, including mathematics, physics, biology, and engineering. Chaos is
the idea that outcomes are highly sensitive to initial conditions: a butterfly
flaps its wings in New York and there is a storm in Tokyo. Solitons are
localized waves like tsunamis, and frequently occur in weakly nonlinear systems.
Usually one believes that chaos and solitons are opposed to each other ? a
soliton can be strongly perturbed and yet persists, for example, making it
difficult to stop, say, a tsunami. This project will seek connections between
chaos and solitons. Specifically, the project will take advantage of spin waves
(a travelling disturbance in the magnetic order) in magnetic film systems to
explore these connections. On the applied side, the project will develop a new
secure communication scheme that exploits the solitons in feedback rings. This
is a joint program between one experimental group and one theoretical group in
two universities. Through the training of students in both experimental and
theoretical nonlinear dynamical methods, the project will help young scientists
cross the divide between ?theory land? and physical reality, leading to both
better experiments and better theories. The education portion also includes the
incorporation of nonlinear dynamics and chaos into undergraduate and graduate
curricula and reaching out to students in disadvantaged high schools in
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project
will take advantage of spin waves in magnetic film systems to explore a possible
crossover between solitons and chaos. The project will explore ?chaotic carrier
solitons? ? solitons with chaotic carrier waves. A magneto-dynamic probe will be
used to study the evolution of a pulse of chaotic spin waves and the formation
of an envelope soliton from such a pulse. The project will also explore ?chaotic
solitons? ? solitons that have coherent carrier waves but exhibit chaotic
behaviors in time. The work will include the study of chaotic soliton excitation
through modulational instability and chaotic solitons in magnetic film feedback
rings. On the applied side, the project will develop a new secure communication
scheme that exploits the soliton-associated Fermi-Pasta-Ulam recurrence in
feedback rings. For all the projects, theoretical modeling will inspire,
support, and interpret experimental work. The education portion focuses on the
incorporation of nonlinear dynamics and chaos into undergraduate and graduate
curricula both through core courses and through the design of new electives, as
well as training of undergraduate and graduate researchers and reaching out to
students in disadvantaged high schools.