* 0906281
* Topology of 3-manifolds and symplectic 4-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stefano Vidussi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 112,955.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of research of
the present proposal is low dimensional topology. The problems discussed in this
proposal find origin in the study of the connections between three-dimensional
topology and symplectic topology of certain families of four-manifolds. The
study of symplectic manifolds has become a core component of four dimensional
topology, that might lead to a better understanding, and possibly a
classification scheme, for four-manifolds. This research has origin in the
attempt to determine which four-manifolds admitting a free circle action can be
endowed with a symplectic form. In collaboration with Stefan Friedl we have
solved this problem for the product case, and in the case where the canonical
class of the symplectic structure is trivial. In both cases the result shows
that the orbit space admits a fibration over the circle. The proof relates
Seiberg-Witten theory in dimension four with various tools of three-manifold
topology, as the study of twisted Alexander polynomials and their role in
detecting fibrations. Refinement of these techniques will hopefully allow us to
completely solve the problem. Other problems that will be the focus of this
research concern the relation between twisted Alexander polynomials and
topological properties of three-manifolds, as well as the investigation of other
classes of four-manifolds that are closely connected with three-manifolds, as
four-manifolds that fiber over the circle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low dimensional
topology is an area of mathematics where the use of rigorous techniques sheds
light, but is also enriched, by our "visual" perception and intuition of objects
living in our three- (and four-) dimensional world. The prototype of this type
of study, knot theory, originated more than a hundred year ago from the need to
understand atoms. While the original models have proved too naive, the study of
knots finds now more sophisticated applications in natural sciences and physics.
Similarly, the study of symplectic manifolds finds in origin in physics, and its
connections with theoretical physics has enriched both fields. My research aims
at better understanding the connection between symplectic four-manifolds and the
three-dimensional topology, and its results will hopefully motivate further
research in these fields also by other scholars. Besides the intellectual merit
in better understanding their connection, these subjects lend themselves very
naturally for training purposes of students at both undergraduate and graduate
level. Far-reaching courses on these subjected can be given with prerequisites
limited to standard lower-division courses. This has an impact in the training
future mathematicians and teachers of mathematics, as well as in providing an
understanding of cutting edge research in mathematics for students interested in
a career in applied science and technology.