* 0906655
* Theoretical studies of Novel Order in Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Agterberg, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 240,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education that is motivated by experiments on unconventional superconducting
materials. Superconductivity in close proximity to checkerboard charge density
wave order and spin density wave order has been discovered in the underdoped
cuprates; an unusual pair density wave superconductivity has been found in
organic superconductors, in a cerium-cobalt-indium heavy fermion material, and
also in a lanthanum cuprate material; superconductivity has been found at oxide
interfaces; unexplained and puzzling physics has appeared in some Kondo lattice
materials, all materials without parity symmetry. Unconventional
superconductivity has been discovered in close proximity to a variety of quantum
phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the appearance of
novel order in such materials. The PI aims to develop a new theoretical
framework for pair density wave superconductors and their interplay with charge
density wave and spin density wave order. The PI will further examine the
appearance of new phases arising from fluctuations in pair density wave
superconductors. He will examine the role of interactions in broken inversion
materials applied to both bulk materials and to oxide interfaces. Theories
describing the interplay between high-field quantum critical points and
superconductivity with applications to specific heavy fermion materials will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides educational experiences
for graduate and undergraduate students and contributes to the PI?s
participation in the Research Experiences for Teachers program at the University
of Wisconsin ? Milwaukee and his public presentations on condensed matter
physics. The PI aims to broaden participation through involving underrepresented
groups in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education that is
motivated by experiments on specific materials that exhibit unusual
superconducting states. Superconductivity is a cooperative electronic state of
matter with remarkable properties. Among them is the ability to carry electric
current without dissipation. The PI aims to develop a theoretical framework for
classes of materials that show unusual superconducting states, often when
superconductivity competes with magnetism or some other way electrons can
spontaneously organize themselves in an ordered way. A deeper understanding of
superconductivity may lead to the discovery of new superconducting materials
that may be practical for dissipationless electric power transmission or novel
electronic device applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
educational experiences for graduate and undergraduate students and contributes
to the PI?s participation in the Research Experiences for Teachers program at
the University of Wisconsin ? Milwaukee and his public presentations on
condensed matter physics. The PI aims to broaden participation through involving
underrepresented groups in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;