* 0906494
* Experiments Using Long Coherence Times in Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Norval Fortson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,577,519.00

Project experiments will utilize the interaction of laser light with atoms to
explore the most fundamental issues in elementary particle and nuclear physics.
One experiment will search with unprecedented sensitivity for a tiny separation
between the centers of plus and minus charge of the mercury atom. The existence
of such an 'electric dipole' would violate time-reversal and matter/anti-matter
symmetries and would help explain the preponderance of matter over anti-matter
in the Universe. Another experiment will measure the recoil of Ytterbium atoms
when they absorb light, and thereby test the validity of basic quantum
electrodynamics to better than a part per billion. Also, an experiment with a
single barium atomic ion will probe the nature of the nuclear force by measuring
the shape of an atomic nucleus more precisely than ever before.

These experiments open up avenues to the wider community and also to practical
applications. The notions of time reversal and anti-matter appeal to the general
public. The mercury experiment that addresses these issues requires developing
ultra-sensitive magnetometry that could be used in medicine. People are excited
when they see a single trapped barium ion with the naked eye, or in a
photograph, and then find out that this ion can be an accurate clock for
navigation. Within physics these experiments touch a broad community: atomic,
nuclear, high energy, and astrophysics. They attract many graduate and
undergraduate students for the chance to work locally on small-scale experiments
and explore fundamental issues normally studied only by large groups at high
energy accelerators. These students gain experience in exquisite technology with
atoms, lasers and electronics, and in turn help make advances in this technology
that they take with them to their future careers.