* 0906085
* Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ralf Spatzier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 307,176.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0906085&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ralf Spatzier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed lies
between dynamical systems and&lt;br/&gt;geometry. Its principal goal is the
investigation of the&lt;br/&gt;dynamical and geometric structures of "higher
rank" systems in&lt;br/&gt;these areas. These systems also appear naturally in
seemingly&lt;br/&gt;quite separate areas such as number theory. The investigator
will&lt;br/&gt;study rigidity properties of actions of higher rank abelian
and&lt;br/&gt;semi-simple Lie groups and their lattices with the ultimate
goal&lt;br/&gt;of classifying such systems under suitable geometric or
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses. In particular, he will study higher rank
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;abelian actions on tori and Cartan actions of rank 2.
These&lt;br/&gt;special cases, important in their own right, will serve
as&lt;br/&gt;testing ground for more general conjectures. Also,
additional&lt;br/&gt;tools for classification are available in these cases.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator will also study actions by semi-simple groups
and&lt;br/&gt;their lattices preserving affine and other geometric
structures.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, he will analyze Riemannian manifolds
(especially&lt;br/&gt;higher rank ones) and their geodesic flows. Geometric,
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;and group theoretic tools will be used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems and ergodic theory investigate
the evolution of&lt;br/&gt;a physical or mathematical system over time (e.g.
turbulence in a&lt;br/&gt;fluid flow). New ideas and concepts such as chaos and
fractals&lt;br/&gt;have changed our perception of the world fundamentally.
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and ergodic theory provide the mathematical tools and
analysis&lt;br/&gt;for these investigations. Dynamical systems have had a
major&lt;br/&gt;impact on the sciences and engineering. Symbolic dynamics
for&lt;br/&gt;instance has been instrumental in developing efficient and
safe&lt;br/&gt;codes for computer science. Tools and ideas from smooth
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;are used as far afield as cell biology and meteorology.
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;is one of the oldest fields in mathematics, and generally
studies&lt;br/&gt;curves, surfaces and their higher dimensional analogues,
their&lt;br/&gt;shapes, shortest paths, and maps between such
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Differential geometry had its roots in cartography, and is
now&lt;br/&gt;studied for its close ties with physics and other sciences
and&lt;br/&gt;applied areas (computer vision e.g.) as well as
internal&lt;br/&gt;aesthetic reasons. Geometry and dynamics are closely related
as&lt;br/&gt;some important dynamical systems originate from geometry,
and&lt;br/&gt;geometry also provides tools to study dynamical systems. One
main&lt;br/&gt;goal of this project studies when two dynamical systems
commute,&lt;br/&gt;i.e. when one system is unaffected by the changes brought on
by&lt;br/&gt;the other. Important examples of such systems arise
from&lt;br/&gt;geometry.&lt;br/&gt;