* 0906916
* New Intermetallic Strengthened Cobalt Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Tresa Pollock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 02/28/2010
* USD 390,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of the existence of a stable
L12 phase field in the ternary Co-Al-W system suggests a path for development of
a new class of high temperature alloys. This research program will establish a
fundamental understanding of solidification, phase equilibria and high
temperature mechanical properties of single crystals of ternary Co-Al-W and
higher order systems. This will be accomplished by: (1) selection of a series of
Co-Al-W based alloys with the objectives of expanding the two phase &amp;#947; -
&amp;#947;' field, increasing solvus temperatures and/or modifying precipitate
fault energies; (2) growth of single crystals; (3) characterization of
solidification segregation and the propensity of these materials for
solidification instabilities; (4) characterization of microstructure and
precipitate morphology; (5) measurement of high temperature strength and creep
resistance; (6) transmission electron microscopy studies of deformation
mechanisms. The broader impact of this research is the identification of new
high temperature alloys that have the potential to replace Ni-base alloys and
transform a wide range of aviation, space and energy generation systems through
substantial improvements in performance and energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in the energy efficiency of a wide
spectrum of advanced engineering systems that utilize structural, load-bearing
materials are an essential element of the future economic health and well-being
of society. Higher temperature / lighter weight materials are the path to
improved performance and efficiency in aviation, space, automotive and electric
power generation systems. This program will investigate a new class of high
temperature alloys that are based on cobalt and strengthened with a high volume
fraction of a newly discovered intermetallic phase. To assess the potential of
these new materials, single crystals will be grown and critical high temperature
physical and mechanical properties will be characterized. Graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in this research program, which will be
supplemented with industry resources from GE Energy, Rolls Royce, GE Aviation
and Boeing. This program will also provide technical resources for the ASM
Teacher?s Camp for high school science teachers that has been hosted in the
University of Michigan Department of Materials Science and Engineering yearly
since 2001.