* 0906909
* Quantum Dot Patterning for Tailored Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Roy Clarke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 703,195.00

Technical: This project seeks fundamental understanding of the evolution of
epitaxial quantum dot nanostructures. It is anticipated that the outcome of this
research will provide insights on what controls the shape, strain, and chemical
composition profile in the dot and its vicinity; what factors drive the
evolution of quantum dots under different thermodynamic and kinetic conditions;
and how directed-assembly, by patterning, can alter the properties of these
structures. This study will benefit from new developments demonstrating that
direct x-ray phase retrieval methods can non-destructively probe the 3D
structure, chemical and strain distributions of epitaxial quantum dots. The plan
is to apply Coherent Bragg Rod Analysis (COBRA) mapping techniques to a variety
of quantum dot systems, including self-assembly by Stransky-Krastanov growth and
droplet epitaxy, as well as novel site directed assembly methods. In-depth x-ray
synchrotron studies of patterned dot arrays will be achieved by Focused Ion Beam
patterning as well as nanostructure growth on patterned templates made by
electron-beam lithography. Site directed deposition of quantum dots has the
potential to greatly improve the compositional and geometrical uniformity of
quantum confined materials, compared to self assembled dots?this limitation has
been holding back widespread implementation of quantum dots for applications.
The combination of state-of- the-art materials growth and deposition with
advanced x-ray phase reconstruction techniques is expected to provide the means
to control critical growth parameters, quantitatively measure their effects on
quantum dot structures, and use this information to engineer desirable
properties. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to new understanding and capabilities for semiconductor
quantum dot systems of interest for improving existing semiconductor device
technologies, such as lasers, and detectors, especially for telecommunications
and solar applications. Quantum dot systems may also be an enabling technology
for future areas of application such as quantum computing and single electron
devices. The project offers research opportunities for graduate training,
including experience at national facilities (Advanced Photon Source), and also
for more junior students and under-represented groups to develop their interests
in science and engineering. The PIs are heavily involved in outreach activities,
from junior high through undergraduate research opportunities. They have
integrated hands-on activities which resonate with societal needs; for example,
they have planned new curriculum on alternate energy applications, and are
working with innovative data sharing informatics.&lt;br/&gt;