* 0906817
* Silicate Bioceramic Structure Control on Mesenchymal Stem Cell Proliferation and Differentiation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nita Sahai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0906817 PI: Sahai, Nita ORG: University of Wisconsin

Title: Silicate Bioceramic Structure Control on Mesenchymal Stem Cell
Proliferation and Differentiation

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The chemical composition of bioactive silicate bioceramics
or glasses and the leached Si and Ca concentrations strongly influence the
complex process of osteointegration by affecting the texture of the amorphous
silica and carbonated hydroxyapatite (Ca5(PO4)3OH, HCA) layers formed at the
implant surface, the adsorption of proteins, and human mesenchymal stem cell
(hMSC) attachment, proliferation and differentiation into osteoblasts that
produce new bone. Distinct from ion concentrations, the effect of ion release
rates on cellular activity, and the critical control exerted by silicate
structure and dissolution mechanisms on ion release rates and overall
concentrations, and on resulting surface texture has not been examined
previously. The PIs hypothesize that, for surfaces of similar initial texture,
silicate structure exerts a major control on the dissolution mechanism,
affecting the concentration and rate of ions released, the texture of the
precipitated amorphous silica and HCA layers, the activation of specific genes
and, ultimately, hMSC proliferation and differentiation into osteoblasts. This
hypothesis will be tested by performing batch and flow-through experiments and
determining hMSC proliferation and differentiation on pseudowollastonite (beta-
CaSiO3, psW) and wollastonite (alpha- CaSiO3, Wol). The psW polymorph possesses
strained high-energy silicate ?three-rings? that dissolve rapidly in water
versus the stronger silicate chains in Wol that dissolve slower, while BioglassÂ®
45S5 provides a positive control. Silicate structure and initial surface texture
(roughness and particle size) effects will be examined independently. The
dissolution and precipitation mechanisms and rates will be established by
periodic solution analysis (pH, Si, Ca, P) using Inductively-Coupled Plasma
Optical Emission Spectroscopy and by surface characterization using Scanning
Electron Microscopy with Energy-Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy and High
Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy. Reacted pellets will be used as
substrates for hMSC cultures in standard culture media supplemented with
osteogenic differentiation factors. Proliferation and differentiation into
osteoblasts will be quantified periodically by fluorescence and total DNA
content, osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase analyses (enzymes produced by
osteoblasts), and identification of bone-specific genes (Cbfa-1, osteocalcin,
osteopontin) using real time polymerase chain reaction. Periodic culture medium
sampling will provide information on ion release rates in the presence of cells.
The conceptual approach and experimental design provides a comprehensive group
of ex vivo experiments that are closer to in vivo conditions than typical in
vitro batch experiments in simulated body fluids, while examination of the
effects of each parameter separately.

BROADER IMPACTS: The results of the proposed work could have a significant
impact on the development of third-generation cell-and gene-affecting
bioceramics with improved osteointegration properties, by providing an a priori
basis for designing bioactive materials that control Si, Ca and P levels at
optimized levels for hMSC proliferation, differentiation and osteoblast
activity. The results could thus help to reduce dependence on expensive ad hoc
materials synthesis and in vitro testing, decrease the post-operative recovery
period following orthopaedic implant surgery and increase the life-span of the
implant in the human body. The biomedical implications are especially critical
for an increasingly aging population in the USA, where a significant rise (~80%)
is projected in the demand for hip and knee implant surgeries over the next
three decades. The proposed work also provides an integrated, interdisciplinary
training program including surface-chemistry, crystal structure and cell biology
to graduate and undergraduate students. Results will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed journals and at conferences; incorporated into graduate courses taught
by the PI and co-PI; and used to develop a Museum Exhibit for K-12 students at
University of Wisconsin.



