* 0906691
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A New Model of Fear Conditioning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Russ Carpenter, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Stressful events in life stimulate powerful emotional responses that help shape
future interactions. Often the severity of a stressor depends on an individual's
interpretation of the stressor. This sensitivity varies between individuals
within a population. Stressful conditions also create learning intensive
environments, which are also perceived differently by different individuals. The
intersections between stress and learning are of particular importance for
adaptation to future circumstances, and the interaction between them and how
they vary among individuals is the central focus of this investigation. Recently
we have developed a new model of fear conditioning in Rainbow trout, where a
neutral sound is paired with a stressful event (losing an aggressive interaction
with a larger individual) once a day for several days. After several pairings,
test fish associate the neutral sound with getting beaten up, and exhibit a
stress response when presented with the neutral sound alone. This stress
response includes changes in circulating stress hormones, increased
neurotransmitter activity and even suppression of gene activity in regions of
the brain associated with learning and memory. This stressful association can be
eliminated however, if the test fish learns to escape from the larger fish
through a small escape hole, available only during the interactions. These
experiments were designed to use this new model to determine if a behavioral
conditioned response occurs concurrently with the physiological and neural
responses. Variable stress responses within a population are hallmarks of
environmental and evolutionary adaptation, and identifying links between
divergent stress coping strategies is vital for understanding how stress
influences learning. These results will be presented at international
conferences encompassing disciplines from fisheries to neuroscience, at which
previous presentations have garnered three best talk and poster awards.
Additionally, this work has included 5 undergraduate researchers (including 2
women), and has stimulated a cooperative relationship with the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service.