* 0906962
* Topics in the Geometry of Groups and Complexes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Max Forester, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 154,461.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0906962&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Noel Brady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of this
research agenda is to understand&lt;br/&gt;the large scale geometry of groups
and complexes. Specific&lt;br/&gt;objectives include the analysis of higher
dimensional filling&lt;br/&gt;invariants of groups, higher filling invariants at
infinity&lt;br/&gt;(higher divergence), and investigating the structure
of&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic cones of finitely presented groups. Other
specific&lt;br/&gt;objectives include the use of combinatorial Morse theory
in&lt;br/&gt;understanding virtual fibering in certain classes of groups,
and&lt;br/&gt;in developing an approach to the relator gap problem.
The&lt;br/&gt;principal investigator also intends to compare non-
positive&lt;br/&gt;curvature methods and topological methods (using
stable&lt;br/&gt;commutator length) for proving the existence of surface
subgroups&lt;br/&gt;in various classes of hyperbolic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Groups are used by mathematicians to study
symmetry. A group is&lt;br/&gt;just a collection of symmetries of an object.
Examples include&lt;br/&gt;the geometric symmetries of a wallpaper pattern, or
of a crystal&lt;br/&gt;structure, or of an Escher painting, or the algebraic
symmetries&lt;br/&gt;associated to roots of polynomials. Mathematicians have
studied&lt;br/&gt;groups intensively as abstract algebraic objects since the
19th&lt;br/&gt;century. In the 1980's M. Gromov proposed that we consider
groups&lt;br/&gt;as geometric objects, and began to derive deep
connections&lt;br/&gt;between the geometric and the algebraic properties of
groups. One&lt;br/&gt;theme which emerged from Gromov's work is that the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;properties which have deep algebraic consequences are not
local&lt;br/&gt;properties, but rather coarse or "large scale". For example,
and&lt;br/&gt;infinite ladder and an infinite straight line are not
locally&lt;br/&gt;alike, but are large scale alike, and their symmetry groups
will&lt;br/&gt;have many algebraic similarities. The PI investigates large
scale&lt;br/&gt;versions of isoperimetric problems (area versus perimeter
length&lt;br/&gt;problems) in groups, and also the geometry of coarsely
negatively&lt;br/&gt;curved groups. These investigations help deepen our
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the nature of symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;