* 0906843
* Mimicking the Nuclear Pore Complex with Protein Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 406,873.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0906843 PI: Baker, Lane ORG: Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Mimicking the Nuclear Pore Complex with
Protein Hydrogels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The nuclear pore
complex (NPC) mediates transport of materials between the nucleus and cytoplasm
of eukaryotic organisms. Current research indicates this unique transport
mechanism relies on a protein-based hydrogel, which is both highly selective and
capable of operating against concentration gradients. A well-resolved structural
model of the NPC has been recently determined. This model and related reports
have elucidated many aspects related to the mechanism of transport through the
NPC, however critical features of this selective hydrogel phase are not
understood. The long term goal of the proposal is to understand the fundamental
mechanisms that govern the operation of this protein-hydrogel. The PI would also
like to translate this knowledge to synthetic-based biomaterials capable of
performing selective separations and sensing in ex-vivo platforms. The central
hypothesis of this proposal is that by expressing selected proteins found in the
NPC and rationally mutating the structure of these expressed proteins, a better
picture of the molecular mechanisms of transport through the NPC can be
developed. Further, it is hypothesized that this enhanced understanding will
allow development of model semi-synthetic polypeptide hydrogels that will
display biomimetic transport properties. This hypothesis has been formulated
based on literature reports and preliminary studies, which show proteins from
the NPC can be coerced to form selective hydrogels in ex-vivo environments.
Specifically, the PI will: (1) determine the relative interactions and
properties of proteins located within the nuclear pore complex that are
necessary to reproduce selective transport observed in the nuclear pore complex,
(2) determine the influence of the hydrophilic regions of the protein hydrogel
on transport and the extent to which these regions can be used to synthetically
alter transport properties, and (3) develop a route for generating a semi-
synthetic hydrogel using solid phase peptide synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Biological systems offer remarkable
insight and inspiration for rational materials design. To advance current
capabilities, fundamental advances in how biological mechanisms, such as
nucleocytoplasmic transport, operate must be realized. The themes upon which
this research is based ? biomaterials and bio/analytical chemistry ? can be used
to engage students, especially if the subject matter is approached in an
appropriate manner. To this end, the PI has initiated an educational outreach
program that is integrated with the subject matter of the research program and
involves the participation of graduate students in the group. The outreach
program uses visual learning concepts and information dissemination using video
conferencing in coordination with podcasting technology, forming specific
modules that consist of a podcast, a classroom exercise, a follow-up live video
conference, and a short assessment of the exercise. Initially, they are focusing
on collaboration with two high schools, one of which serves predominantly
underrepresented groups. Both high schools are located hundreds of miles (1300
and 800, respectively) from the PI?s laboratory. This is intended to prove that
the educational program under development can use the internet effectively to
bridge both geographic and demographic divides. To increase the impact of the
program the PI makes initial personal visits to the collaborating schools and
participates in interactive question-and answer sessions throughout the semester
using video conferencing. Along with this collaboration, additional content will
be developed and disseminated in separate podcasts that specifically target
chemistry students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. Work
is also disseminated through peer-reviewed journals. Pedagogical assessment of
the program will be performed in collaboration with Indiana University campus
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;