* 0906985
* New Strategies for Patterning: Implications for Branched Nacromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2014
* USD 502,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore new
strategies in patterning of thin polymer film on sub-100 nm length scales. The
proposed approach takes advantage of branched macromolecules that possess three
characteristic properties: mesoscopic size, well-defined shape, and mechanical
tension in their covalent bonds. These properties become particularly evident in
branched macromolecules tethered to a substrate which enhances steric repulsion
between the densely connected branches. To alleviate the confinement-induced
stress, branched macromolecules may opt to either undergo orthogonal phase
separation leading to intercalation of chemically different molecules or break
the linker leading to molecular cavities in the film. The significant
implications of these phenomena call for fundamental studies to shed light on
the role of the branched architecture in micro-structuring of thin polymer
films. With thin intention in mind, it is proposed to investigate two
complementary systems: (i) branched macromolecules on liquid substrate and (ii)
and branched macromolecules tethered to a solid substrate. One will study
thermodynamics and kinetics of molecular intercalation to understand the
mechanisms and the length scale of the pattern formation. The experimental
studies will guide the design of branched architectures and will be used to
verify the theoretical predictions for molecular conformation and microphase
separation in thin films. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate new materials and physical tools
for controlling microstructure of thin polymer films on molecular length scales,
which carry vital implications for microelectronics, data storage, photonics,
and fuel cells. The outreach plan includes three key areas of activity: (i)
nurturing prospective scientists through comprehensive participation of high-
school students in research, (ii) the development of molecular imaging
techniques for university and high-school classrooms, (iii) broadening
participation of underrepresented groups through collaboration with the suc-SEED
Project. The project will also strengthen collaboration between the chemistry
departments at UNC, Carnegie Mellon University, the University of Athens, and
Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne. The interdisciplinary and
collaborative nature of the proposed research program provides rich
opportunities for preparation of students for the competitive global economy
where researchers must work together across disciplines and geographic
distances, as well as organizational, cultural, and personal
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;