* 0906564
* Macroscopic Electronic and Electrochemical Properties of Networks of Purified SWNTs
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Marcus Lay, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 564,036.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Technical. This project will explore a novel method for deposition of large-
scale ordered arrays of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs). The aim is to
enhance current understanding of the properties of nanomaterials by: 1)
investigating a mild technique for purification of SWNTs, 2) investigating the
electrical applications of SWNT networks, and 3) studying the effect of SWNT
density on electrochemical response. The SWNT deposition method involves
formation of electrically continuous SWNT arrays from aqueous suspensions. A
major advantage is expected since solution deposition processes decouple the
growth process (which occurs at ~800C) from the deposition process (which occurs
at room temperature). This allows purification of the material to remove
residual impurities, as well as the use of heat sensitive substrates, presenting
an increased area of potential applications. Non-Technical. The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic
materials science having technological relevance. A major impediment to the
incorporation of SWNTs into manufacturable electronic devices is the lack of
low-temperature deposition methods for the formation of low-density arrays of
aligned SWNTs. This effort provides a route to incorporation of molecular level
systems into electronic systems that have direct applications in flexible
electronics and optoelectronics. This research will also provide an excel-lent
opportunity to teach the fundamental aspects of nanoscience investigations to a
broad range of the populace. Integration of teaching and research will involve
outreach at the elementary-, high school-, undergraduate- and graduate-level.
The PI receives support for teaching and men-toring performed with the NSF-
funded Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PSLAMP)
program. Further, the PI has recently recruited two African American female
graduate students to this university. Research opportunities are extended to
undergraduate stu-dents at nearby historically black colleges in Atlanta through
the NSF-funded Summer Under-graduate Research Program (SURP) program.
Undergraduate and graduate researchers will work together on this project,
experiencing and building teamwork skills.