* 0906663
* Role of Minor Alloying Elements in the Corrosion of Selected Amorphous Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* John Scully, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2014
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Traditional methods to obtain excellent corrosion resistance in metallic alloys
include addition of metallic and metalloid elements up to the concentrations
necessary to either form passivating films, inhibit active dissolution in pits,
or reach the ?parting limit? associated with dealloying. Structural and chemical
defects have also been affected by controlled alloying additions in
heterogeneous materials. Amorphous metals incorporate many of these strategies:
structural and chemical heterogeneities are minimized, and metastable
supersaturated solid solutions are often formed with large concentrations of
beneficial alloying elements. However, the possible beneficial role(s) of minor
alloying additions on corrosion resistance are rarely explored. Yet, minor
alloying elements offer substantial opportunities to improve the corrosion
resistance of many metallic materials. Indeed, this strategy has provided some
of the greatest gains in alloy corrosion resistance in the last 100 years. This
work will investigate the role of trace beneficial alloying additions in two
solid solution systems: amorphous Fe-Cr-Mo-C alloys containing small
concentrations of B, Y, W and Si as well as in Al-Cu-Mg alloys containing small
amounts of Ni or Pd through systematic additions and nano- as well as micro-
meter scale characterization and modeling. Several testable hypotheses exist;
some of these will be explored in the proposed work. Minor alloying elements can
affect bonding and/or form atomic clusters in the alloy with less noble,
corrosion prone alloying elements to alter their otherwise preferential
oxidation tendency. High melting temperature, noble minor alloying elements lack
surface mobility and these relatively immobile species could block dissolution
sites on the surface of dissolving metals. Minor alloying elements could also
alter the solute diffusion rates in the oxide or alloy, thus operating as agents
that shift alloying element ratios favorably for corrosion resistance.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Corrosion of engineering materials is an issue of international importance that
threatens safety, health, security, needs for clean water and energy
independence. The annual cost in the US exceeds 300 billion dollars per year.
There is also a growing shortage of newly trained corrosion scientists and
engineers connected with the national shortage of engineering graduates. This
project not only supports the fundamental understanding necessary for
development of enhanced alloys for security and energy applications but also
supports human resource development in the area of corrosion science ? a crucial
need identified by the National Academy of Sciences. This project provides the
venue for the multi-disciplinary knowledge-based education of 2 graduate
students in Materials Science and Engineering that will then provide needed
professionals in the corrosion-metallurgy field. The Center for Electrochemical
Science and Engineering at the University of Virginia trains students in the
multi-disciplinary areas of corrosion and materials science/engineering and is a
major supplier of professionals with such knowledge to US industry, government,
and academia. Under-represented gender and ethnic students are a proven prior
and on-going emphasis of this integrated training and research endeavor.
Students disseminate scientific results in broad interest papers and books,
specialty papers, conferences, short courses and lab tours/demos for K-12
students.