* 0906815
* Charged Block Copolymer Assembly of Unique Nanoscale Objects
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Karen Wooley, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2014
* USD 744,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charged block copolymer solution
assembly will be used to construct extraordinary polymer nanostructures. The
understanding of the mechanisms by which such assemblies form, and the
harnessing of those processes to achieve well-defined, reproducible
nanostructured materials, will be sought.&lt;br/&gt;The syntheses of, and
experiments with, block copolymers based on both currently studied and new block
chemistries will help produce this understanding. A fundamental understanding
will be sought of the effects that multivalent, organic counterions complexing
with charged corona chains of block copolymers have on the charged block
conformation as well as the overall morphology formed during polymer self-
assembly. The work will explore a series of multiamines towards this purpose.
Likewise a series of triblock vs. diblock copolymers will be made to explore the
effects of chain architecture and relative composition between blocks, as well
as new hydrophobic core chemistry. The new core chemistry allows for blending
experiments in order to kinetically trap multiple molecule types in the same
assembled nanostructure. The new chemistries will also allow experiments
to&lt;br/&gt;a) be performed in pure water as opposed to THF/H2O mixtures thus
greatly simplifying assembly protocols as well as b) permit the photodegradation
of hydrophobic cores for the production of potentially functional, porous
polymer nanoparticles. In summary, a simple but transformative solution assembly
paradigm for creation of complex polymer nanostructures for potential technology
will be sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed materials science will work towards
two important needs.&lt;br/&gt;First, the technical results will help work
towards making nanotechnology a reality for future technology ranging from
energy to biomedical applications. More complex nanostructures are needed for
future technology, and this work strives to create new methods to produce the
needed nanostructure. Second, by performing the research, graduate students will
be trained in scientifically rigorous, interdisciplinary environments, critical
components for their future successes in the U.S. work force.&lt;br/&gt;At the
undergraduate and graduate levels, collaborative scientific foundations will be
developed during the proposed research by integrating educational expertise in
the multi- and interdisciplinary fields of synthetic polymer chemistry, physical
chemistry, polymer physics and materials science and engineering. Exchange of
knowledge and expertise will be accomplished by a dynamic exchange of personnel
between the University of Delaware and Texas A&amp;M University. In each of the
four years of support, each of the students will engage in collaborative
research by conducting site exchanges for multiple and extended periods of time.
Perhaps one of the greatest possible outcomes of the proposed work is the
translation of knowledge uniformly to the chemists and materials
scientists/engineers involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this proposal are of far reaching importance in terms of scientific
advances, educational outreach, and student development through active
mentorship. This collaborative research proposal constitutes a unique base for
research and educational activities, each at the forefront of the fields of
polymer chemistry, physical chemistry, polymer physics and materials science.
The graduate students supported by this collaborative grant will be trained
additionally through involvement with the development and implementation of
established outreach activities in the Wooley group including K-12 educational
outreach activities (assisting with the teaching of a semester-length course on
hands-on experiments for K-8 teachers, educational visits to and by local pre-
college students in Newark through the Materials Awareness Program or MAP), and
it is expected that each student will spend up to a week per year involved in
K-12 activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;