* 0906608
* FRG: Magnetic and Optical Properties of Fe-Doped Titania Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Technological breakthroughs to support societal
needs, such as solar energy harvesters and improved data storage strategies,
require disruptive advances in new materials with novel functionalities. To that
end, this project employs the tools of nanotechnology to fabricate, characterize
and tailor the response of titanium-iron-oxide-based nanotube arrays with
simultaneous functionality employing electronic charge, magnetic spin and
optical response. Properly engineered, these materials hold promise for
potential application in devices to efficiently absorb and transfer solar energy
and/or to process data with increased speed, precision and accuracy. The
research is carried out by an interdisciplinary team of researchers from science
and engineering and includes the involvement of students, teachers and junior
scientists at all levels of experience. Unique features of the educational
experience of this proposal are the opportunities to introduce students to
research at large scientific facilities such as the National Synchrotron Light
Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory and the fact that the proposal is led
by a majority female PI team, providing diversity models to both students and
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Iron-doped titania nanotubes
are fabricated by electrochemical means and studied using a variety of probes
(structural, magnetic and optical, including synchrotron-based spectroscopies)
to obtain a fundamental understanding of their magnetic, spintronic, optical and
magnetocatalytic properties as functions of composition and structural
attributes. As pure titania is a large-bandgap semiconductor, Fe additions not
only perturb the band structure but also serve as sensitive probes of the
lattice modification by virtue of the large Fe magnetic moment. Further,
nanostructured titania is anticipated to exhibit enhanced functional responses
due to its large surface area. In this manner it is desired to develop novel
multifunctional nanostructures for combined spintronic, optical and
photocatalytic properties, at room temperature, in one material. Eventual device
applications in sensing, catalysis and spintronics to enable advances in
alternative energy and data processing technologies are envisioned. &lt;br/&gt;