* 0906752
* Multivalent Carbohydrate-Protein Binding on Surfaces with Defined Density and Valency that Mimics Cellular Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* David Baker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907652 PI: Baker, David ORG: Tennessee

Title: Multivalent Carbohydrate-Protein Binding on Surfaces with Defined Density
and Valency that Mimics Cellular Membranes

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Carbohydrates of the glycocalyx are the third and least
studied part of the cascade of genomics to proteomics to glycomics that figure
so importantly in living systems. The glycocalyx is a layer of glycoconjugates
that coats both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, forming a chemically rich
landscape that varies among cell types. Distinctive, complex topographies are
generated from a combination of (a) diversity in oligosaccharide structures with
(b) hierarchical organization, providing the basis for highly specific
recognition of cell surfaces by multimeric carbohydrate-binding proteins called
lectins. Specific interaction through cell-surface carbohydrates is essential
for cell adhesion, motility, cell?cell communication and recognition of chemical
components in the environment. The initial aim of the project is to develop a
modular approach for the combinatorial assembly and surface display of
multivalent carbohydrate ligands, with the aim of generating biomimetic ligand
presentations that match the hierarchical patterns recognized by multimeric
lectins. The proposed chemistry will create diverse clusters assembled from
three distinct modules: functionalized carbohydrate ligands joined to
multivalent nodes that, in turn, govern valency through flexible linkers that
control spatial orientation. Final assembly of the glycoclusters will be
performed on nanopatterned surfaces through microfluidic reagent delivery,
allowing for the direct, combinatorial synthesis of glycocluster arrays.
Following array development, this platform will be employed to quantitate the
binding of carbohydrate receptors in order to elucidate multivalent cell-surface
interactions. Initially, the affinities of fluorescent-tagged lectins for
immobilized carbohydrates with defined valency and spacing will be measured,
indicating the optimal architecture for multivalent binding for each particular
receptor. Studies will also employ AFM-based methods to provide quantitative
assessment of surface topography and recognition by proteins. Finally, a FRET-
based assay using fluorescent-tagged carbohydrate receptors will be developed to
detect carbohydrate clustering with high resolution.

BROADER IMPACTS: The project as described will beneficially impact scientific
infrastructure at multiple levels. (1) In the laboratory, graduate, post-
doctoral and undergraduate students will benefit from the interdisciplinary
training in this research, which combines synthetic chemistry, biochemistry,
materials science and nanotechnology, and analytical techniques to address
fundamental scientific questions. (2) To further encourage interdisciplinary
learning among our students, the PIs will work with our colleagues by
contributing lectures for a multidisciplinary graduate-level course that
attracts students from various departments, including Chemistry, Physics,
Materials Science, and Chemical Engineering (see attached letter). (3) The PIs
will disseminate this research to the scientific and lay communities via
presentations and publications in top-notch journals. (4) Finally, the PIs will
integrate the described research with several outreach initiatives aimed at
impacting our local community as described below. The primary activities will
result from an ongoing joint effort with the Office of Academic Outreach and
Communications (OAOC) of UTK?s College of Arts and Sciences. The OAOC operates
outreach programs including Aspiring Scientists Participating In Research and
Education (ASPIRE), which sends UTK researchers out to interact with community
schools, and the Pre-Collegiate Research Scholars Program (PCRSP), in which
local high school students conduct research at UTK. Through efforts facilitated
by the OAOC, the PIs have formed relationships with science teachers at two
local schools: (1) Bearden Middle School (BMS), at which 44% of students are
classified as economically disadvantaged; and (2) Farragut High School (FHS),
which is located in an affluent suburban area and recently launched a science
academy and renovated its laboratories. With support from this grant, the PIs
will extend outreach activities devised in conjunction with science teachers
from BMS and FHS. Current and future activities include: (1) hosting of high
school students to conduct research in their labs as part of the PCRSP; (2)
graduate student researchers will travel to partner schools to assist with and
enhance laboratory courses as part of the ASPIRE program; (3) the PIs will give
presentations at lecture series held at local schools to raise awareness about
the benefits and exciting career opportunities associated with scientific
research.