* 0906300
* Connecting Markov Random Fields with Geostatistical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Debashis Mondal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently derived connections between
the intrinsic autoregressions and the de Wijs process open up the possibility to
further explore and exploit connections between Gaussian Markov random fields
and the continuum models in geostatistics to facilitate the statistical analysis
of spatial data. In the analysis of areal data, Markov random fields often draw
criticism by assuming a dependence structure based on sharing boundaries between
two regions (counties, districts or states) and ignoring actual area
information. In contrast, geostatistical models can incorporate actual area
information by considering integrals over regions, but are faced with
computational challenges for large data. This project develops a wide range of
new methodologies to fit geostatistical models on large data sets by using
Markov random fields. The investigator's work provides new theoretical results
for scaling limits of stationary and intrinsic processes and new insight into
construction of space-time processes. The investigator applies these
methodologies to study the Fairfield-Smith law of fertility on large
agricultural fields, obtain the pycnophylactic map of Seattle population,
investigate the risk of various cancers in the state of Illinois and interpolate
wind vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent decades have seen much
progress and interest in studying spatial variability with applications in image
analysis, agriculture, epidemiology, geology and other areas of environmental
science. Two approaches to these studies have emerged, one based on Markov
random fields, the other on geostatistics. In this project, the investigator
combines the ideas of both Markov random fields and geostatistics to obtain a
range of new methodologies to analyze spatial data. The investigator's
theoretical work connects the mathematics that originated in the studies of gold
mines in South Africa in the nineteen fifties to quantum physics and to recent
theory of spatial statistics. The practical effect of investigator's approach is
enormous. For example, in studies of geographic variations of risk of cancers,
this new methodology overcomes past computational challenges to include detailed
area and population information in statistical models and thus provides new
directions in revealing differences in risk across geographic regions,
indicating areas of high relative risk that may require screening and
intervention and detecting effects of socio-economic conditions and exposure to
environmental hazards.