* 0906498
* Correlated Electron Transport in Mesoscopic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Leonid Glazman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2014
* USD 516,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a theoretical investigation of
the dynamic response and time evolution of quantum low-dimensional and
mesoscopic systems. The research focuses on theory applicable to experiments
with quantum wires, superconducting nano-circuits, and quantum dots. The
motivation comes from the advances in experimental techniques enabling the
dynamic response measurements and from the challenges the evaluation of these
responses present for theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has 3
parts:&lt;br/&gt;1.) The PI will investigate the dynamic response functions of
one-dimensional quantum systems at high momenta. This regime, important for
experiments with quantum wires and spin chains, calls for a development of the
theory of a nonlinear Luttinger liquid. This work may be a step towards building
a universal theory of one-dimensional nonlinear quantum fluids.&lt;br/&gt;2.) A
new dynamic regime of a quantum superconducting circuit, an inductively shunted
Cooper pair box, will be investigated. This includes building a theory of
quantum dynamics of charge fluctuations in a chain of small Josephson
junctions.&lt;br/&gt;3.) The PI will address exciton formation in a
semiconductor quantum dot in contact with a bulk conductor. The information
about Kondo effect encoded in the optical absorption spectra is complementary to
that obtained in dc transport experiments.&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this research,
the PI will use a variety of techniques, including diagrammatic expansions;
Fermi liquid theory; renormalization group theory; the use of exactly solvable
one-dimensional models; bosonization technique; and numerical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides educational experiences for
students and post-doctoral research associates. The work on this project
develops understanding of real materials and proficiency in modern methods of
condensed matter theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
study the electronic properties of special kinds of wires and other structures
which are able to confine electrons to one dimension or even to a localized
region - effectively zero dimensions. Ordinary wires are three dimensional as
far as the electrons they contain are concerned. As electrons are confined to
ever smaller distances along two perpendicular directions, the properties of the
resulting fluid of electrons change dramatically leading to interesting new
phenomena. Motivated by recent experimental advances, the PI will be working in
contact with experiment to develop a theory to understand the time dependent
properties of these low-dimensional electronic fluids. The PI will also study
circuits composed of superconductors which exhibit a cooperative electronic
state at sufficiently low temperatures. Superconductivity is a macroscopic state
that exhibits the property of coherence that is a hallmark of quantum mechanical
states of the world of atoms and molecules. The PI will pursue interesting new
phenomena that emerge when superconducting elements are interconnected. This
work contributes to the intellectual foundations of quantum computing in which
quantum mechanical states are manipulated to carry out logic
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances understanding of novel
systems and materials, such as nano-wires, quantum dots, and carbon nanotubes,
which are potential elements of future electronic technology. This project,
devoted to understanding the fundamental physical properties that underpin these
systems and as such may have a technological impact. This research provides
educational experiences for students and post-doctoral research associates. The
work on this project develops understanding of real materials and proficiency in
modern methods of condensed matter theory.