* 0906025
* FRG: Quantum Tuning of Superconducting, Plasmonic, and Chemical Properties of Metallic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhenyu Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 990,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elegantly fabricated functional
materials with reduced dimensions occupy a central stage of modern materials
research. By uncovering fundamental enabling concepts in growth science and
developing advanced synthesis techniques, materials scientists strive to tailor
novel materials through dimensional control with the ultimate atomic precision.
This scientific enterprise is driven by the realization that, by reducing the
dimensionality of the systems, quantum effects within the systems are tuned to
be more pronounced, potentially resulting in emergent physical properties of
technological significance. This FRG program pioneered in the formulation and
development of an innovative concept, termed "electronic growth", stressing the
vital importance of quantum mechanically confined motion of the itinerant
electrons in defining the overall stability as well as the preferred growth mode
of a variety of metal films and nanostructures on different substrates. The far-
reaching impact of this new concept lies in its enabling role: It provides the
basis on which quantum size effects can be exploited to precisely control the
formation of metallic structures; such structures formed in the quantum regime,
in turn, are bound to serve as appealing platforms for elucidating intriguing
quantum properties. The proposed research emphasis in the new phase will focus
on exploration of new frontiers of quantum growth. The central objectives will
be to gain property tunability of the metal systems tailored in the quantum
regime, developed around three thrusts, each of profound fundamental and
practical importance: (a) Superconductivity in Low Dimensional Electron Systems;
(b) Tuning Plasmonic Properties in the in the Quantum Regime; and (c) Formation
and Catalytic Properties of Quantum Metal Alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at creating an
inter-disciplinary research program focusing on the research area of metallic
nanostructures where the physical properties are dominated by quantum size
effects. The ultimate research goals are to use atomic scale control of
materials synthesis to tune the physical properties in the quantum regime. The
proposal focuses on the integration research and education to train
internationally competitive students and postdocs. This setting is provided
through the unique partnership of this FRG team with the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). Together, UT-Austin, UT-Knoxville, and ORNL provide a closely
collaborative, inter-disciplinary research/educational platform for next
generation of US leaders in materials research. The investigators are also
committed to educational outreach to a broader audience at all levels. This will
be accomplished with multi-prone approaches including (a) offering special topic
courses which enrich the curriculum in Nanoscience and Technology that are also
accessible to broader undergraduate students, (b) enhancing the outreach program
of Summer Academy of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology for State-wide high school
teachers and students in Texas, and (c) targeting high school students who are
participating in the Tennessee Governor's school for the Sciences and
Engineering by offering them research training. Finally, this program is fully
committed to broadening participation of under-represented groups in graduate
research with specific goals of increasing the percentage of graduate students
that are woman or/and of Hispanic background.