* 0906349
* Collaborative Research: Atomistic Mechanisms of Stabilizing Oxide Nanoparticles in Oxide-dispersion Strengthened Structural Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Hanchen Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 497,527.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The survival of materials under conditions
of high temperature and radiation is crucial to their application in nuclear
energy, space, and other applications under extreme conditions. Metal alloys can
be strengthened by the dispersion of small (nanoscale) oxide particles. Yttrium
titanium oxide nanoparticles greatly enhance the thermo-mechanical and
radiation-resistant properties of such oxide-dispersion strengthened (ODS)
alloys. It is scientifically challenging but technologically necessary to
understand the exceptionally-high stability of these nanoparticles under extreme
environments in order to develop advanced structural materials with enhanced
performance. By synergy of experimental efforts and multi-scale computer
simulations, the researchers at RPI and UC Davis will advance the understanding
and control of transformation and structural evolution of such nanoparticles.
This research program will train both graduate and undergraduate students
working in key fields of radiation effects and the development of advanced
structural materials. Special efforts will be made to involve underrepresented
students, particularly woman engineers, into science and engineering through
various programs at RPI and UC Davis. The fundamental understanding will
contribute to the development of a dual-level course of ?radiation effects and
nuclear reactor materials? at RPI. Findings of this project will be disseminated
to a wider audience through national and international conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;Building on a
synergy of experiments and atomistic simulations, the groups at RPI and UC Davis
will target a scientific understanding of the phase stability of dispersed oxide
nanoparticles under high temperature and intense radiation conditions. Y-Ti-O
nanoparticles (e.g., Y2Ti2O7 and Y2TiO5) will be synthesized and exposed to
different irradiation conditions using intense ion beams and to different
temperatures, and the morphology and microstructure will be characterized
thoroughly by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques. Calorimetric
measurements will investigate the thermodynamic stability of Y-Ti-O
nanoparticles as a function of size, irradiation, and temperature. Atomistic
computer simulations, including first principles calculations, classical
molecular dynamics and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, will probe synergistic
effects of radiation and temperature on the structural evolution of oxide
nanoparticles and their defect behavior. This fundamental understanding will
reveal the underlying physics and chemistry that govern phase stability and
defect behavior of Y-Ti-O nanoparticles and establish the basis for developing
predictive models of how nanostructured materials behave under extreme
conditions of intense radiation and high temperature. Based on such fundamental
understanding, new science will evolve to design strategy in materials
processing for strengthening of alloys by oxide nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;