* 0906918
* Collaborative Research: New Tools for Nonlinear Control Systems Analysis and Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Yuan Wang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2013
* USD 115,000.00

In this project, the investigators will take a step forward toward the further
development of new control design tools for complex nonlinear systems arising
from emergent control applications. The focus will be on two classes of complex
nonlinear systems which, despite their importance and relevance to control
applications, have not been extensively studied in the present literature. The
first class of systems to be investigated in the proposal consists of
interconnected nonlinear systems described by coupled retarded functional
differential-difference equations. Advances on this topic call for the
development of new analysis and synthesis tools for this important class of
infinite dimensional systems. Previously introduced design tools in the context
of finite-dimensional systems are not straightforwardly applicable and
extendible. The second class of systems consists of nonlinear and time varying
MIMO (multi-input multi-output) systems. Most of the existing tools are targeted
originally at nonlinear systems which are time-invariant and SISO (single-input
single-output). The aim is to contribute to the further development of advanced
nonlinear control theory for MIMO systems, by introducing a toolkit of nonlinear
feedback designs geared towards solving some challenging problems arising from
the control of underactuated ships and bioreactors.

The research in nonlinear control systems is driven by the fact that few
physical and natural systems in the world are linear and many of them are
strongly and genuinely nonlinear. There has been a phenomenal progress in this
important field over the recent decades, and more exciting advances are expected
in the present and future. In this proposal, the principal investigators will
take a step forward toward the further development of new control design tools
for complex nonlinear systems arising from emergent control applications. The
focus of the proposed research will be on new and important classes of complex
interconnected nonlinear systems with special emphasis on applications in
bioreactors. The applied mathematics nature of the project, combined with the
fact that it involves challenging practical applications, will attract engineers
and mathematicians who are not specifically working in the field, thereby
stimulating new interactions. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will
have a substantial direct impact upon education at both investigators'
institutions by bringing students together from several departments.