* 0906638
* Exploring Macromolecular Architecture and the Control of Nanoenvironment with Polymeric Catalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jean M. J. Frechet, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2011
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The design and synthesis of polymers with controlled architecture and
functionality that can perform catalytic functions or act as transport channels
is undertaken. The overall design of the macromolecules requires that fine
control over both architecture and the placement of functional groups within the
active macromolecules be achieved. For transport channels, dendronized
macromolecules that possess a tubular shape are expected to be most appropriate
in analogy to biological channels that result from the self assembly of several
proteins. For catalysis, globular macromolecules based on a star architecture
enable the incorporation of a catalytic core while the arms of the star may
provide for site isolation in analogy with the site isolated core of catalytic
enzymes. This program exploring new ways to obtain functional macromolecules
with persistent structural features will make use of all the tools of modern
synthetic polymer chemistry while also developing new reactions, methods of
assembly, and methods of characterization. Applications of the macromolecules in
catalytic processes, the sequestration or the transport of materials will also
be explored in proof-of-concept studies.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project is directed towards the design of novel
polymeric materials that can help meet the needs of society in areas as varied
as the manufacturing of novel substances, water purification, or the removal of
pollutants from waste streams. Both the shape and the function of the new
polymeric materials draw some inspiration from natural biological systems, for
example imitating natural enzymes in the way they facilitate chemical
transformations, or mimicking the natural channels that selectively transport
fluids or ions in and out of cells in the human body. The project will train
young scientists at the state of the art in polymer science, a field of immense
impact in our daily lives through new and unique materials as varied as
specialty plastics, electronic and energy materials, or therapeutic and
diagnostics agents.

