* 0906676
* Modeling Non-Equilibrium Microstructure Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kenneth Elder, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2013
* USD 242,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Technical Summary This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to further develop methods of phase field modeling to the atomic
length scale and diffusive time scales and enable the simulation of multi-
component alloys. The understanding of many non-equilibrium processes has been
enhanced by the use of "phase-field" modeling methods. These methods have proven
very successful in modeling many aspects of solidification phenomena and are now
incorporated in commercially available software packages. More recently the PI
and collaborators have introduced a second generation of phase field models that
describe phenomena on atomic length and diffusive time scales. This "phase field
crystal" method naturally incorporates elasticity, plasticity, anisotropy and
multiple crystal orientations in addition to all the physics of traditional
models of solidification and phase segregation. While the phase field crystal
models developed for monatomic and binary alloys can describe many physical
phenomena, including grain growth, epitaxial growth, eutectic solidification,
the yield strength of polycrystalline materials, climb and glide, and grain
boundary melting, there are many important phenomena that are beyond description
by the current models. For example, the binary model cannot describe sublattice
ordering in multi-component alloys. This is a key issue since sublattice
ordering is extremely common and influences structural properties. Another
limitation of current phase field crystal models is that they describe
spherically symmetric particles and thus cannot describe the physics associated
with extra degrees of freedom, such as rotation. A technologically important
example which exploits these freedoms is elastomers; the rotation of elongated
cross-linked polymers allows shear strains at almost zero energy cost. The goal
of this project is to greatly extend the applicability of phase field crystal
modeling to incorporate sublattice ordering and anisotropic particles. The PI
also plans to extend the amplitude expansion of the monatomic phase field
crystal developed by Goldenfeld and collaborators to binary systems. The
amplitude approach incorporates much of the essential elastic and plastic
behavior and is more amenable to analytic and numerical calculations. The
resulting model will be used to examine the influence of the discrete nature of
the crystalline lattice and compositional in homogeneities on morphological
instabilities in strained epitaxial films.

The PI has a contract with Wiley publishing to write a book on phase field
modeling in materials science. Much of the text will be devoted to the phase
field crystal formulations developed in this proposal and in the expired NSF
grant. The text will be written as an instructional guide for engineering and
physics students who wish to learn the fundamentals and technical details of
phase field modeling. The PI will hire and train undergraduate students in
cutting edge computational materials physics. The work will also have an impact
on many areas of research since the methods developed are applicable to a wide
range of phenomena such as the structural properties of multi-component alloys,
the exotic elastic properties of elastomers and the formation of quantum dots in
strained epitaxial growth.

Non-Technical Summary This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education to further develop a potentially powerful method for computer
simulation of materials that was developed by the PI and collaborators. The
research involves the extension of a modeling technique, called phase field
modeling, that is computationally fast but useful on length scales of many
atoms. The extension enables computer simulations to access information on much
shorter length scales, atomic length scales, and longer times. Simulations of
materials processing and related materials phenomena that span many length
scales from single atoms to microns are promising applications of the new
method.

The PI will also write a book on phase field modeling and its application to
modeling materials and materials related phenomena. Undergraduate students will
be involved in research activities directly related to this project.