* 0906953
* Non-Fermi Liquid Behavior, Superconductivity, and Magnetism in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrey Chubukov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
strongly correlated electron systems. The research is focused on three
interrelated areas: 1.) the physics of cuprate superconductors, 2.) the physics
of recently discovered iron-based pnictide superconductors, and 3.) the novel
physics of an itinerant fermionic system near a quantum-critical point. The PI
will explore the idea that the physics of the cuprates is primarily driven by
proximity to an antiferromagnetic quantum critical point, a spin-fluctuation
scenario. At a quantum critical point, collective spin excitations become
gapless, and the interaction with them destroys coherent Fermi liquid
quasiparticles. The same interaction mediates non-BCS d-wave pairing between
incoherent fermions. The PI plans to address (i) whether the interaction with
spin fluctuations gives rise to the pseudogap physics and (ii) whether the
approach can be extended to a truly strong coupling. The PI aims to develop a
fundamental understanding of the pnictide superconductors, including: the origin
of superconductivity which develops despite strong Coulomb repulsion, the
symmetry of the pairing gap, the interplay between superconductivity and
magnetism, the implications of the gap symmetry for the experiments in the
superconducting state, and the feedback from the pairing on electrons. The PI
plans to develop a Fermi liquid theory valid near a quantum critical point. A
conventional Fermi liquid description does not work because the self-energy is
frequency dependent but local. This is a general problem which should lead to
new understanding of the low-energy physics of interacting electrons.

The results of this research may be applicable to a wider class of materials
that include the heavy fermion materials and cobaltates.

The research provides good training for graduate students. The PI will involve
undergraduate students in the research. The research also involves international
collaborations.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to pursue a possible
origin of the unusual properties of high temperature superconducting materials.
At sufficiently low temperatures, these materials exhibit superconductivity - an
electronic state of matter that exhibits no resistance to the flow of
electricity. An unusual and exciting feature of these materials is that the
temperature at which superconductivity first appears can be some 6 times or more
higher than the highest temperature at which superconductivity had been observed
to occur in all previously known materials. If new materials can be discovered
that become superconducting near room temperature, then vast amounts of energy
could be saved by using them in power transition lines and a whole new
technology of superconducting electronics would become more practical. But how
does superconductivity arise in these materials? The PI takes the view that
magnetism plays a crucial role, particularly when near a new kind of phase
transition that occurs at the absolute zero of temperature. Fluctuating wisps of
magnetic order might provide the mechanism that causes electrons to pair up and
transform to the superconducting state. This research project uses advanced
theoretical methods to determine signatures of this mechanism and how they may
appear in experiments on particular superconducting materials. The PI will
advance the theory of this kind of superconductivity and the unusual kind of
metallic state from which it might spring.

The research provides good training for graduate students. The PI will involve
undergraduate students in the research. The research also involves international
collaborations.