* 0906961
* Enhancement of Exciton Dissociation in Organic Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Alphenaar, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 339,048.00

Technical. The project aims for greater understanding of, and the ability to
enhance, the exciton dissociation rate in organic solar cells, and generally, to
accurately determine the fraction of dissociated charge across individual
organic/organic and organic/inorganic interfaces. The long-term goal is, through
more complete understanding of the exciton dissociation process, to develop a
strategy for improving organic solar cell efficiency to levels closer to that
achieved in inorganic materials. Spin filtering materials and heavy metal spin
orbit couplers will be used to induce optical coupling into triplet excitonic
states, thereby expanding the absorption spectrum into the near infrared.
Absorption into the triplet state will give a direct measurement of
singlet/triplet spacing, while dissociation of triplet exciton states will
provide the relative triplet to singlet dissociation rate. Spin-orbit coupling
strengths will be determined as a function of magnetization and spin
orientation. Additionally, incorporation of piezoelectric polymers will be used
to create a built-in electric field, and thereby alter the excitonic spectrum.
This is expected to shift the absorption to the infra-red, or increase the
capture efficiency of the photo-excited carriers. The charge dissociation
process will be measured using a capacitive photocurrent technique that detects
optical absorption combined with physical separation of excited charge. This
provides the ability to distinguish between excitonic and free carrier states,
to determine excitonic binding energies and recombination efficiencies and the
influence of interface materials and conditions on exciton formation and
dissociation. Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues
in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having technological
relevance. There is potential that the research could substantially impact the
development of improved and less expensive solar cells. The increased
understanding of the conditions necessary for efficient exciton dissociation in
organic materials provided by this study may establish a pathway for developing
a low-cost, commercially viable organic solar cell technology. Research
opportunities are being provided for graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students with an emphasis on recruiting women and other under-represented
groups. A new undergraduate course on advance device concepts is being
introduced, and will include the research strategies being proposed here. Local
high school teachers will be introduced to research and trained in experimental
techniques so that they will be able to develop research modules to present to
their students. The idea is to introduce high school students to the excitement
of energy conversion science, and encourage them to pursue careers in science
and engineering.