* 0906464
* Using Circularly Polarized Light to Probe Electronic Excitations in Organic Supramolecular Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2012
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2012
* USD 306,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. It supports theoretical research and education on how oligomer/polymer
films interact with and emit light. The PI aims to investigate fundamental
excitations in organic assemblies by focusing on chiral supramolecular
structures which are amenable to circular dichroism and circularly polarized
luminescence spectroscopies. Compared with their unpolarized counterparts, these
spectroscopies are far more sensitive to extended intermolecular interactions as
well as the structure of the fundamental electronic excitations. Of particular
interest to this study are pi-stacked helical rod aggregates consisting of
functionalized conjugated molecular chromophores which self-assemble in solution
or with the aid of a DNA template. Specific goals include:

1. A detailed understanding of the excitonic signatures in the circularly
polarized luminescence dissymmetry spectrum. The unusual demise of the spectrum
with increasing wavelength observed in helical rod aggregates and chiral polymer
films contains vital information on the anatomy of the emitting species. This
spectrum is unique amongst spectral probes in its high sensitivity to the inner-
sphere distortion field surrounding the core vibronic excitation. The objective
is to understand how the polaron radius, the reorganization energy, and the
coherence length impact the shape and magnitude of the circularly polarized
luminescence dissymmetry spectrum. International collaboration with
experimentalists will enable applications to oligothiophene nanofibers.

2. A rigorous analysis of intermolecular interactions in helical rod N-mers.
Aggregates with a controllable number of chromophores are ideal systems with
which to rigorously evaluate theoretical models for extended intermolecular
interactions and disorder. The circularly polarized luminescence dissymmetry
spectrum and its absorption analog are sensitive probes of long-range
interactions even in strongly disordered systems where excitons are localized to
only a few chromophores. The PI aims to perform a detailed theoretical analysis
of the absorption spectrum to help resolve these issues.

3. An appreciation of the exciton Cotton effect in systems with strong exciton-
phonon coupling. In assemblies with strong exciton-phonon coupling the circular
dichroism spectrum is far more complex than the simple Cotton couplet found for
weak coupling. The PI aims to develop a comprehensive theory for the circular
dichroism response of excitonic polarons to understand how information regarding
intermolecular interactions and the aggregate morphology can be extracted from
the spectral line shape. Applications to the ubiquitous and biologically-
important carotenoid aggregates will be made. The above analyses will be based
on a Holstein Hamiltonian. Excitonic interactions, linear exciton-phonon
coupling, and disorder will be treated on equal footing under the two-particle
approximation, which reduces the basis set to a tractable size without
sacrificing accuracy. The broader impact of the proposed activities will be felt
primarily through an enhanced understanding of a technologically important class
of materials, possibly resulting in novel design strategies for improved organic
light-emitting diodes and solar cells. The commercial impact of soft electronic
devices is expected to dramatically increase over the next several years,
through products like flexible displays, electronic labels and solid-state
lighting. In addition, the proposed activities will enhance research
infrastructure through international collaborations.

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. It supports theoretical research and education on how thin films
composed of a class of long chain molecules, polymers, interact with and emit
light. The research is focused on key issues that impede understanding of the
mechanisms by which these films interact with light, how light is absorbed by
these materials and the nature of the electronic states after absorbing light. A
key feature of the PI?s approach is to account for the interaction of electronic
charge with vibrations of the molecular chains.

Thin films of particular kinds of polymers may be useful as active materials for
organic-based electronic devices such as transistors, light emitting diodes, and
solar cells. This research project contributes to the intellectual foundations
that will enable the use of these materials for lighting, solar energy
conversion, and other electronic devices. The commercial impact of soft
electronic devices is expected to dramatically increase over the next several
years, through products like flexible displays, electronic labels and solid-
state lighting. In addition, the proposed activities will enhance research
infrastructure through international collaborations.