* 0906864
* Statistical methods for space-time processes, time-frequency methodologies, and applications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Craigmile, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

This project considers space-time models and time-frequency methods for the
analysis of space-time data observed continuously (and often sparsely) in space,
but discretely (and regular) in time. This research extends the spatially-
dependent filtering approach used to define space-time processes to include
space-time long memory processes, non-Gaussian processes, and non-linear
processes. Since methods need to be developed for these types of statistical
models that are efficient to use, part of this research focuses on statistical
inference. A secondary study involves spectral and wavelet methods for the
analysis of space-time processes. A spectral analysis is used to explore
features of a statistical process in the frequency domain in terms of a linear
combination of complex exponentials (sinusoids). A wavelet analysis provides a
space/time-scale (approximately a space/time-frequency) decomposition of a
statistical process in terms of averages and changes of averages over different
temporal or spatial scales. Developing methods of spectral- and wavelet-based
exploratory data analysis and inference are of key interest.

There is a growing need in many scientific areas to be able to understand
phenomena that vary jointly across space and in time. Statistical methods are
required in practice because these phenomena are observed in the presence of
uncertainty. For example, Paleooclimatology (the history or "archaeology" of
climate) involves obtaining surrogate measures for climatic variables over space
that are valid over long time scales. Important scientific questions can be
answered by relating data obtained from paleoclimatology to drivers of climate
variability. The use of space-time statistical models and spectral and wavelet-
based space-time analyses can inform how different temporal scales affect the
climate relationships observed, and to understand how these relationships vary
spatially. This research is directly applicable to other scientific areas, and
results will be communicated via peer-reviewed articles in subject-matter as
well as statistical areas. A diverse cross-section of students (statistical and
non-statistical) will be mentored in methods of time series analysis and spatial
statistics (via supervision and teaching).

