* 0906814
* Intermediate-gap Colloidal Doped Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 440,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This research seeks to develop new colloidal diluted magnetic
semiconductor quantum dots and quantum dot heterostructures for fundamental
research and potential application in spin-based electronics or photonics
technologies. Synthetic, analytical, and spectroscopic techniques will be
integrated to optimize new physical phenomena and develop fundamental
structure/function relationships for this emerging class of materials. Specific
research objectives include: (i) development and investigation of new synthetic
routes for preparing high-quality doped inorganic chalcogenide nanostructures
(ii) detailed investigation of syntheses by application of dopant-specific
spectroscopic probes in combination with mass spectrometry and other analytical
techniques (iii) description of doped quantum dot electronic structures by
application of an array of advanced spectroscopic and magneto-spectroscopic
techniques (iv) development and demonstration of new structural motifs for spin
manipulation in semiconductor nanocrystals

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This research will combine innovations in chemical
preparative methodologies with sophisticated optical and magneto-optical
measurements in order to understand and harness the physical properties of new
magnetic semiconductor nanostructures relevant to spin-based information
processing technologies. In addition to yielding new fundamental scientific
insights and new materials, this research will also provide undergraduate and
graduate students with opportunities for advanced interdisciplinary education
and training in technologically important areas in order to prepare them for
future careers in science and engineering. Students will participate in UW's
interdisciplinary Nanotechnology PhD program, will gain valuable exposure to our
national laboratories through user facilities, and will gain valuable experience
with international collaborations involving scientists and engineers interested
in applications of these materials in locations as diverse as Brazil, Germany,
India, the Netherlands, Canada, Spain, the Republic of Korea, and Switzerland.
Emphasis will be placed on integration of research and education at the
undergraduate level through aggressive involvement of undergraduates in the
research, incorporation of experiments and concepts from the research into the
UW undergraduate laboratory curriculum, and collaboration with faculty and
students from undergraduate institutions across the country.