* 0906224
* Collaborative Research:  Characterization of the Microstructure and Charge Transport at Interfaces of Semiconducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Michael Chabinyc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 316,755.00

ARRA STATEMENT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project aims to study the detailed interfacial structure of
semiconducting and dielectric polymers. The influence of interfacial
interactions on the molecular ordering and the electrical properties of rigid-
rod semiconducting polymers is poorly understood. The proposed experiments will
attempt to disaggregate, for the first time, the impact of molecular
organization, dipolar interactions, and roughness on charge transport at
interfaces of semiconducting polymers. The tasks to achieve this goal include:
(1) controlled fabrication of interfaces of semiconducting and dielectric
polymers, (2) characterization of the microstructure at their interface, and (3)
electrical characterization to determine the electronic structure at the
interface. Advanced synchrotron x-ray scattering methods, such as soft x-ray
scattering, will be used to interrogate the structure at polymer-polymer
interfaces. Detailed temperature dependent electrical measurements on thin film
transistors will be used to examine the electronic density of states in the
semiconducting polymer. The successful outcome of this effort will be an
understanding of how molecular interactions at interfaces affect the transport
of carriers in semiconducting polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting polymers are important
materials for low-cost flexible electronics such as displays, distributed
sensors, and solar cells. The detailed understanding of these materials gained
through this research will be important for their future commercialization. The
proposed collaborative research is highly multidisciplinary and will train
students in a combination of materials science, chemistry, and electronics.
Graduate students and the principal investigators will mentor summer high school
and undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities allowing them to
gain exposure to advanced research at large-scale synchrotron research
facilities. The potential of organic electronics technology for society will be
disseminated through demonstrations at local science night programs. This
project will also aid in the development of a new integrated lecture course
sequence on organic electronic materials at UCSB. International collaboration
will be fostered through collaboration with researchers in the U.K.