* 0906805
* Structure and Properties of AlN and InN Surfaces and Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* James Speck, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2013
* USD 452,837.00

Technical: Although nitride semiconductor materials are being used in some
electronic and photonic applications including heterostructure field-effect
transistors and blue light emitters, defects, impurities, and surface issues are
hampering new applications such as the use of increasingly higher aluminum
content AlGaN alloys for ultraviolet light emitting diodes and lasers and the
development of InN-based transistors for terahertz emitters. This project aims
to address these materials science issues through a tightly coupled experimental
and computational effort. High quality AlN, InN, and their alloys are grow
epitaxially and the high quality samples enable detailed characterization of
surfaces, point defects, and impurities using structural, electrical, and
optical techniques. Electron accumulation layers on the surface are investigated
and controlled. The limits of n-type and p-type doping will be pushed. The
experimental effort is directly tied to state-of-the-art first-principles
calculations based on density functional theory; the "band-gap problem" will be
addressed through the use of techniques that have recently successfully been
implemented, such as quasi-particle calculations and hybrid functionals. Deep
(localized) and shallow (extended) levels of defects and impurities are
investigated, as well as surface reconstructions and surface states. Closing the
loop between theoretical and experimental results is expected to provide deep
understanding of fundamental atomic-level mechanisms and phenomena associated
with synthesis and processing of these novel materials. Non-technical: This
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. The wide-band-gap semiconductors that are the
focus of the investigation are recognized as the prime materials for light
emitters throughout the visible and into the ultraviolet, and the transition to
solid-state lighting will have tremendous impact both in the developed as well
as the developing world. Nitrides are also starting to gain ground in the area
of high-frequency devices, with applications in telecommunications and radar.
Another area of high potential impact is for photovoltaics, where the nitride
materials systems can span the range from ultraviolet to infrared. This project
has significant educational value: the graduate students are involved in a tight
collaboration between theory and experiment. In addition, the computational
project will make use of the brand new Allosphere facility at the California
Nanosystems Institute at UCSB. The Allosphere is a 3-story-high spherical space
in which a fully immersive and interactive virtual environment can be
experienced. It will be helpful with the visualization and understanding of wave
functions and bonding environments in the various materials, as well as with the
dissemination of results to a broad audience.