* 0906392
* Exploring and detecting complex multivariate dependencies through sparse graphical models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Balakanapathy Rajaratnam, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 103,764.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The covariance parameter is the
natural parameter of interest when exploring complex relationships between many
variables in parametric models. Current methodology on high dimensional
covariance estimation has focused on regularizing or putting zeros in the
covariance matrix or its inverse using methods based on the lasso. Though very
useful, these methods do not address some of the glaring gaps in the literature.
First it is well known that lasso and similar penalization methods yield sparse
models and estimators - yet a formal undertaking of the spectral properties of
regularized covariance estimators or those of random matrices that arise
naturally in graphical models is not available in the literature. This gap in
the literature will be addressed. Second, an important class of models that have
recently received much attention are the so-called covariance graph models.
These models encode marginal independences in multivariate distributions and
thus can yield more parsimonious representations. A comprehensive framework for
Bayesian inference and model selection for this class of models is not
available. This important class of problems is investigated in this project. One
of the original justifications for the need for covariance regularized
estimation is that the covariance matrix features in the mean estimation
problem, and when constructing confidence intervals for the mean (for instance
in MANOVA), or in regression yet there is relatively very little work in the
area of covariance regularization required for the specific needs of regression.
A generalized framework which investigates the merits of using the covariance
matrix of the explanatory variables for regression purposes is undertaken,
thereby providing insights into obtaining better estimators for regression
coefficients than those suggested by standard methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, the availability of high-throughput data from genomic, finance,
environmental, marketing (among other) applications has created an urgent need
for methodology and tools for analyzing high-dimensional data. Making sense of
all the many complex relationships that are in the data, formulating correct
models and developing inferential procedures is one of the major challenges
facing statisticians today, and also those working in applied fields. This
project proposes to tackle some of the pressing questions that arise when
exploring multivariate dependencies in high dimensions. As a concrete
application, the methodology developed in this project will be used to
understand the interconnectedness of genes in cancer studies and cardiovascular
medicine, while maintaining the statistical rigor and ease of interpretability
of previously developed methods. Hence a project of this nature will have
widespread applications, as understanding relationships between many variables
or players is an endeavor that is common to many scientific disciplines. The
proposed work, though rooted in the principles of statistics, is
interdisciplinary, and involves collaborations with biomedical scientists,
engineers and the environmental scientists.