* 0906943
* Strongly Correlated Fermi Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to study strongly
correlated electron materials and to develop new theoretical and computational
methods with an aim to develop a quantitative and microscopic theoretical
framework to describe these materials. Strong correlations in solids drive a
wealth of new and unusual physical properties, such as complex charge spin and
orbital ordering, unconventional superconductivity, ultrafast nonlinear optical
responses, large thermoelectric coefficients, huge volume collapses, and
numerous metal-to-insulator transitions. The quantitative understanding of such
properties and phenomena has proved to be a major challenge. The PI has been
developing extensions of Dynamical Mean Field Theory. This approach reduces the
complex many-body problem to a self-consistent finite cluster of sites embedded
in a quantum medium. It provides a simpler picture of strongly correlated
electron materials and allows computation of their physical properties in
parameter regimes where standard theoretical methods fail to capture essential
physics. The PI?s approach links low energy simplified pictures of the strong
correlation phenomena to methods that model the microscopic complexity of real
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study complex strongly correlated
materials of current experimental interest and of great fundamental importance.
He will focus on many body problems and electronic structure problems posed by
uranium- and cerium-based heavy Fermion systems, copper oxides and the recently
discovered iron pnictide high temperature superconductors, as well as the
physics of electron gases. This work will stimulate close interactions with
experimentalists and material scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
continue to develop first-principles approaches for carrying out practical
computation of the electronic structure of complex correlated materials as well
as to develop techniques for solving the quantum many body problem in model
Hamiltonians. He will carry out further developments of cluster dynamical mean
field theory including methods for adding long wavelength fluctuations to the
local physics and new slave particle methods to obtain analytic insights at low
energies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training post-doctoral
associates, graduate and undergraduate students in advanced theoretical and
computational condensed matter and materials physics. These individuals will
develop broad skills to analyze and solve complex problems of import to our
modern technological society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to develop a quantitative and predictive theoretical framework for
materials in which the interactions between electrons is very strong. Strong
interactions lead to intriguing new states of electronic matter, new phenomena,
and unusual materials properties. Example materials include high temperature
superconductors which exhibit a cooperative electronic state which exhibits no
resistance to the flow of electricity, and related compounds which have unusual
electronic properties. Also included is a class of rare earth and actinide
compounds which exhibit a variety of unusual superconducting, magnetic, and
metallic states. Calculating the electronic properties of these materials is
lies beyond the most powerful computers that exist today. The PI will pursue an
approach that links simplified models that contain essential physics with the
most powerful methods that can calculate electronic states for real materials in
microscopic detail. His research further develops these methods and applies them
to understand new experiments on these materials in a timely
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training post-doctoral associates,
graduate and undergraduate students in advanced theoretical and computational
condensed matter and materials physics. These individuals will develop broad
skills to analyze and solve complex problems of import to our modern
technological society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;