* 0906627
* Polymer Networks Containing Reversibly Associating Side-Groups
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mitchell Anthamatten, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the design, synthesis, and study of network
polymers containing highly selective, multiple hydrogen-bonding side-groups. The
major research goal is to understand how reversible binding affects the
material?s rate-of-strain and mass transport kinetics. Shape memory polymers
(SMPs) will be developed that 1) are transparent to light at all processing
temperatures, 2) exhibit amorphous or rubbery low-temperature states, and 3)
enable precise tuning of shape recovery temperatures and rates. Preliminary
studies have shown that lightly crosslinked elastomers containing reversibly
associating side-groups exhibit shape-memory effects with a unique temperature-
dependent shape-recovery. Planned research builds on these findings through the
synthesis of well-defined elastomers involving uncrosslinked (linear) polymer
precursors. Living free radical polymerization of poly(acrylates) will be
performed to systematically vary architectural parameters including a) covalent
crosslink density, b) associating side-group content, c) side-group spacer
length, and d) the type and strength of H-bonding side-group. Synthesized
polymers and networks will be studied in solution and in the melt to elucidate
mechanistic details that influence shape memory responses. Research will pave
the way to develop new features including two-stage shape responses, light and
magnetic field triggered responses, and recyclable shape-memory materials.
Research will also examine how reversible hydrogen-bonding affect mass
transport. Diffusion of small molecules through synthesized networks will be
studied using a custom-built permeation apparatus as well as multiphoton
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (MP-FRAP) techniques. The research
plan provides a springboard for the PI to investigate biomedical devices
including intraocular lenses, spinal disk prosthetics, and drug delivery
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principle investigator?s laboratory has recently developed novel shape-memory
elastomers that use strong, reversible hydrogen-bonding groups to modify
mechanical properties. The described study is to systematically vary the
material architecture to fundamentally understand how reversible association
affects time-scales of mechanical deformation and mass transport. The resulting
knowledge will establish clear material design principles to foster new
technologies including shape memory polymers, thermoplastic elastomers, and
self-healing materials. Material responsiveness may also be exploited to
engineer drug delivery devices and soft-tissue prosthetics designed for
minimally invasive surgery. Educational aims are closely tied to research
objectives. Graduate and undergraduate students will acquire research skills
including polymer synthesis, rheology, transport studies, and thermal mechanical
analysis. The research described is synergistic with a new course, ?Engineering
of Soft Matter?, which introduces students to this emerging field. In addition,
the PI will further develop the education outreach program "Green Engineering"
to provide professional development opportunities to high school teachers. This
program strengthens connections between secondary education teachers and the
technical workforce by offering hands-on teaching workshops. There, high school
teachers learn and discuss emerging ?green? technologies including energy
conservation, photovoltaics, and fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;