* 0906457
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of the Microstructure and Charge Transport at Interfaces of Semiconducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Harald Ade, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2012
* USD 317,622.00

ARRA STATEMENT:

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This collaborative project aims to study the detailed
interfacial structure of semiconducting and dielectric polymers. The influence
of interfacial interactions on the molecular ordering and the electrical
properties of rigid-rod semiconducting polymers is poorly understood. The
proposed experiments will attempt to disaggregate, for the first time, the
impact of molecular organization, dipolar interactions, and roughness on charge
transport at interfaces of semiconducting polymers. The tasks to achieve this
goal include: (1) controlled fabrication of interfaces of semiconducting and
dielectric polymers, (2) characterization of the microstructure at their
interface, and (3) electrical characterization to determine the electronic
structure at the interface. Advanced synchrotron x-ray scattering methods, such
as soft x-ray scattering, will be used to interrogate the structure at polymer-
polymer interfaces. Detailed temperature dependent electrical measurements on
thin film transistors will be used to examine the electronic density of states
in the semiconducting polymer. The successful outcome of this effort will be an
understanding of how molecular interactions at interfaces affect the transport
of carriers in semiconducting polymers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Semiconducting polymers are important materials for low-
cost flexible electronics such as displays, distributed sensors, and solar
cells. The detailed understanding of these materials gained through this
research will be important for their future commercialization. The proposed
collaborative research is highly multidisciplinary and will train students in a
combination of materials science, chemistry, and electronics. Graduate students
and the principal investigators will mentor summer high school and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minorities allowing them to gain exposure to
advanced research at large-scale synchrotron research facilities. The potential
of organic electronics technology for society will be disseminated through
demonstrations at local science night programs. This project will also aid in
the development of a new integrated lecture course sequence on organic
electronic materials at UCSB. International collaboration will be fostered
through collaboration with researchers in the U.K.