* 0906060
* CAMERA - A Compact Affordable MEMS based  Rayleigh Adaptive Optics System for 2m class telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Christoph Baranec, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 07/31/2012
* USD 576,782.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telescopes on the ground must observe
objects in deep space through the interference of the earth's atmosphere. As
light passes through the atmosphere it gets spread out by turbulence due to wind
shear and changes in temperature and pressure within the atmospheric layers.
These effects reduce the resolving power of earth-based telescopes. This
difficulty can be overcome to a large extent by relatively new techniques
employing Laser Guide Stars (LGS) and Adaptive Optics (AO) where a bright laser
illuminates a patch of sky near the target object. Rayleigh scattering by small
particles and molecules in the earth's atmosphere ensures that some of the light
from the laser is returned to the telescope. The return signal can then be used
to track the time-dependent distortion of the light. Adaptive Optics uses this
information to rapidly adjust optics in the telescope to restore the image to
(nearly) what would be seen from above the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, AO systems are very complex, expensive, and
require considerable expertise to maintain and operate. Because of these
factors, AO is currently limited to large telescopes. There are many interesting
astronomical programs that would benefit from the higher resolution imaging
capabilities enabled by AO, but only a handful of large telescopes currently
have such systems. Dr. Christoph Baranec, a young postdoctoral scholar at the
California Institute of Technology, has an idea to develop a low-cost AO system
specifically for modest sized telescopes. He will develop the system, make the
design plans available publicly, and will also share the control software used
by the system. This idea has the potential to make high-resolution imaging
through AO available to a much wider community of observatories and astronomers.