* 0906023
* Statistical Aggregation in Massive Data Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Nan Lin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 119,934.00

Enormous amount of data are now being generated in many areas. Direct
applications of existing statistical methods do not satisfy the computational
need for performing on-line analytical processing (OLAP) on such massive data.
Computer scientists have developed a data warehouse environment called data cube
to reduce computational cost by compressing subsets given by some partitioning
variables. Analysis of any subset can then possibly be achieved by aggregating
the compressed data, and the computational cost becomes low because of no need
to access the raw data. For complicated analyses, it is challenging to find
proper compression and aggregation schemes and to study the statistical property
of the aggregated analysis. Similar issues exist in another massive data
environment, data stream. Existing development in these areas either aims to
achieve lossless analysis, which has achieved very limited successes only for
simple calculations, or provide no theoretical evaluation for the analysis from
aggregation. The purpose of this proposed research is to develop statistically
sound compression and aggregation methods for advanced statistical analysis of
data cubes and data streams, use the above compression-then-aggregation strategy
to improve computational efficiency of some statistical analysis, and develop
the associated asymptotic theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive data sets are
common nowadays, and many traditional statistical techniques become inapplicable
due to high computational costs. In this proposal, the investigator will extend
the current data cube techniques to support more complicated OLAP of massive
data sets by studying the statistical properties of the desired analysis. This
interdisciplinary project will result in significant contributions to data
warehousing, OLAP technology, and statistical computing. It will bring great
impacts to important applications in large-scale medical studies, national and
homeland security, stream data mining, high-performance computing, and
information technology. This project's findings will be broadly disseminated to
the academic community and industry through scholarly publications and
conferences. We will also use the new findings as new course materials in
education and training of information analysts and university students.