* 0906251
* 2009 Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Chemistry, Oxford, United Kingdom, August 31 - September 4, 2009.
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Mas Subramanian, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2010
* USD 13,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in solid-state chemistry as a
discipline has undergone tremendous growth in recent years due to the broadly
based recognition of the technological importance and scientific challenges
involved in the discovery and study of new materials, and due to the influx of
scientists from other disciplines who see the opportunities for performing
exciting research in this area. The 2009 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Solid State Chemistry is a flagship annual international meeting. The goal of
the conference is to facilitate collaborations and information exchange across a
broad spectrum of young and senior researchers with interests in solid-state
chemistry areas that address issues such as novel synthesis methods, crystal
chemistry, electronic , magnetic and optical properties of new classes of
materials, computational solid state chemistry, chemistry of materials in
nanoscale, microporous materials and novel inorganic/organic hybrid materials.
Special emphasis will be given to materials for energy conversion and designing
of ?green materials? for sustainable future. The NSF support will go to US based
students, post-doctoral scholars, and early career faculty, as well as senior
session chairs and invited speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the 2009 Gordon Research Conference on
Solid State Chemistry is to bring together researchers from diverse backgrounds
to discuss the latest advances and challenges in the area of solid-state
chemistry with the intent to promote an exchange of ideas and to build strong
relationships among academic, industrial, and government researchers.
Internationally known speakers and poster presentations from students, post-
doctoral scholars, and early career faculty will emphasize recent technical
advances and the discussion of new ideas and future directions emerging within
the solid-state chemistry community. It is well recognized that the field of
solid state chemistry includes a broad cross-section of materials disciplines,
and the intellectual exchange at the annual Gordon Research Conference truly
shapes the future directions of the field. Leading scientists working in various
areas of solid-state chemistry are expected to draw the interest of many
researchers in the field. Current frontiers to be highlighted include
synthesizing, characterizing, and investigating the properties of wide variety
of novel classes of inorganic solid compounds. The area impacts the entire field
of solid-state chemistry and much of materials chemistry research since it spans
all materials types and a wide variety of exploitable properties. As a result,
this conference will draw the interest of those working on diverse classes of
compounds important to advancing new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;