* 0906643
* "IPS: Decision Theoretic Approaches to Measuring and Minimizing Customized Privacy Risk"
* CSE,IIS
* 09/09/2008,08/31/2011
* Guy Lebanon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 371,625.00

The goal of this project is to provide a principled way of quantitatively
characterizing the effect of disclosing private data. Based on statistical
decision theory, the proposed framework incorporates user-defined sensitivity
information and identification model into a personalized risk function. The risk
is intuitive and interpretable as it is based only on a user-specified loss
function and elementary laws of probability and statistics. The proposed
framework leads to a more accurate measure of the consequences of popular
disclosure policies such as k-anonymity as well as efficient search for novel
optimal policies.

Currently, private data is being disclosed according to general policies that do
not necessarily reflect users preferences. The novel framework will let users
obtain a quantitative grasp on the consequences of current data disclosure
policies. Due to the simplicity and interpretability of the risk this will
apply, in particular, to people lacking in technical or scientific education
that otherwise remain uninformed about the use of their private data. Effective
dissemination of the research results to industry and the popular press have the
potential to transform current disclosure policies to become more focused on
serving the needs of the community. The project also aims to enhance graduate
and undergraduate education in the interdisciplinary area of statistical
approaches to privacy preservation. Outreach efforts include mentoring of
minority students in science and technology. The results of this project are
disseminated via the web-page http://www.ecn.purdue.edu/~lebanon/privacyRisk.