* 0906735
* Collaborative Research:  Line-Active Amphiphiles for Nanostructure Stability
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 393,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This research project will advance the fundamental
understanding of how line-active molecules (called linactants in the proposal)
can be used to modify the line tension of nano- and meso-scale features within
molecular monolayers. The ability to control line tension will be critical to
the stabilization of objects created using next generation nanolithographic
methods; in addition, linactants will permit the creation of self-organized 2D
features that are analogous to 3D micelles or microemulsions. The strategy will
be based on molecular aggregation within two- and three-component monomolecular
films prepared by Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) deposition and related self-assembly
methods. Key components include the rational design and synthesis of line-active
molecular species that play a two-dimensional (2D) role analogous to that of
amphiphilic surfactant molecules in three-dimensional (3D) micelles, bilayers,
and microemulsions. In the same manner in which a 3D surfactant possesses
hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions, these linactant molecules will possess two
dissimilar hydrophobic molecular moieties (either distinct tails or blocks
within a single tail); each moiety is designed to interact favorably with one of
the respective components of a phase-separated two-component monolayer film.
Previous work by this collaborative team focused on linactants having one
hydrocarbon tail or block and one fluorinated tail or block. These compounds
successfully reduced the line tension between hydrocarbon- and fluorocarbon-rich
monolayer phases; also observed was distinctive 2D self-assembly of the
linactants into nm-scale clusters that were analogous to micelles. The specific
objectives of this project are (1) to obtain a deeper understanding of the
molecular mechanisms leading to linactant behavior in fluorocarbon/hydrocarbon
mixed monolayer systems, and (2) to generalize the linactant phenomenon beyond
fluorocarbon/hydrocarbon systems by designing and synthesizing linactants for
use in other binary monolayer mixtures, including hydrocarbon/silicone,
saturated/unsaturated hydrocarbons, and cholesterol/lipid.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project involves fundamental scientific research that
will enable advances related to nanotechnology. As devices and materials are
made smaller and smaller, the influence of surfaces and interfaces becomes
increasingly important. In particular, the influence of surface tension leads to
instabilities, such as coagulation or the degradation of nanoscale patterns. For
this reason, the fabrication of nanoscale structures requires the addition of
molecular stabilizers -- molecules that partition at surfaces and reduce the
surface tension. The science behind such stabilizers is reasonably well-
understood for traditional three-dimensional materials, such as colloids and
emulsions or even nanoparticles. However, no such science exists for molecules
that are necessary to stabilize two-dimensional nanostructures (i.e., nanoscale
patterns fabricated on surfaces). The stability of such surface nanopatterns is
required for future applications in molecular electronics, cataysis, biosensors,
and biomaterials. This collaborative research project, which encompasses two
distinct disciplines at two separate universities, will seek to broaden the
participation of both women and minorities in science and education. All
participants will be encouraged to join their local professional societies and
to attend local and national meetings to advance our dissemination efforts.
Also, through their participation in a variety of educational and outreach
programs (e.g., REUs, RET, NUE, GAANN, CU-Discovery Learning Center, Materials
Science from CU K-12 outreach, Colorado High School Honors Institute, Houston
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, UH Latino Outreach, and Welch
Summer Scholars), the researchers will continue to share this project with
students, teachers, and other community members. Furthermore, the integration of
basic discovery and potential technological impact in this project will provide
an ideal platform from which to communicate the excitement of research to the
public.