* 0906641
* Multifunctional Unimolecular Micelles for Targeted Cancer Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Douglas Steeber, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 04/30/2010
* USD 124,999.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee is to study self-assembled drug nanocarriers,
including liposomes, polymer micelles, and vesicles, exhibit poor in vivo
stability, leading to poor targeting and reduced therapeutic effect. This award
will help to develop multifunctional unimolecular micelles with excellent in
vivo stability, passive and active tumor-targeting abilities, desirable particle
size, high drug loading capacity, controlled drug release, and long circulation
time, thereby greatly increasing the efficacy of targeted cancer therapy and
minimizing undesirable side effects. These unique unimolecular micelles are
based on novel biodegradable and/or biocompatible, multi-arm hyperbranched
amphiphilic block copolymers with active tumor-targeting ligands. A
hyperbranched polyester with 64 hydroxyl groups will be used as the initiator
for the polymerization of the amphiphilic block copolymer arms. The relationship
among the molecular structure, micelle property, and drug delivery behavior will
be systematically investigated. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained with various cutting-edge techniques related to biomaterials research.
The resultant knowledge will improve the design of next-generation drug
nanocarriers for targeted cancer theranostics and be integrated into relevant
courses established by the PIs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite continuous and
intensive efforts to discover highly effective cancer drugs, conventional
chemotherapeutic agents still exhibit poor specificity in reaching tumor tissue
and are often restricted by dose-limiting toxicity. Nanoparticulates are
desirable anticancer drug carriers due to their passive and active tumor-
targeting ability, thereby allowing anticancer drugs to be delivered
specifically to the cancer cells and minimizing harmful toxicity to non-
cancerous cells adjacent to the target tissue. However, one major limitation
with self-assembled drug nanocarriers is in vivo instability, which leads to
poor therapeutic effects. This award will help to develop a multifunctional
unimolecular micelle drug delivery system with many desirable characteristics
for targeted cancer therapy, thereby greatly improving the quality of cancer
patient care. The resultant technology will be transferred to interested
companies, further promoting economic growth in the U.S. Educational outreach
activities will be conducted with Milwaukee-area middle/high school students
through the various outreach programs at UW-Milwaukee.