* 0906512
* Orientation Induced Crystallization in Multi-Component Melts Under Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2011
* USD 244,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to investigate several
newly discovered phenomena of orientation-induced crystallization precursor
structures in multi-component polymer melts under flow. The phenomena include
(1) formation of precursor structures at both nanoscopic and macroscopic scales,
which can act as multi-scaled scaffolds to guide the crystallization process,
and (2) the relationships among the flow-induced precursor structures,
rheological behavior, multi-component phase behavior and type of flow field. To
tackle the proposed problems, following research plans have been composed.
First, the chosen multi-component systems, all based on polyolefin will include
polymer blends of model compounds (e.g. high molecular weight crystallizable
species and low molecular weight non-crystallization species), segmental olefin
block copolymers (with only one crystallizable block) and polyolefin
nanocomposites with well dispersed surface-modified carbon nanofibers/nanotubes.
Second, to understand the rheological behavior, experimental data in dynamic and
transient modes will be described by a GEX-based model in order to yield
relaxation mechanisms responsible for the formation of precursor structure.
Third, the development of structure in real time will be following by the use of
combined methods including rheology, in-situ synchrotron small-angle-X-ray
scattering (SAXS), wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) and light scattering
techniques. Finally, to understand the effect of different flow fields, results
from simple shear (containing the rotational element) and extensional flow
(without the rotational element) will be compared.&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The subject of flow-induced crystallization, especially in
multi-component systems such as polymer blends, block copolymers and
nanocomposites, remains to be one of the most important problems in polymer
science and engineering today. With the availability of synchrotron X-ray
scattering and diffraction methods, and the coupling of rheology and light
scattering techniques, many unanswered questions of fundamental importance can
now be suitably addressed. It is known that molecular orientation induced by
flow during polymer processing operations can deeply affect the crystallization
kinetics as well as the final polymer morphology and properties. The knowledge
obtained in the proposed study will significantly enhance our ability to
understand the relationships between structure, phase behavior, process and
property in multi-component systems containing crystalline components. The
information will lead to developments of improved polymer processes and new
polymer products, thus benefiting the polymer industry in specific and the
society in general. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are several.
The immediate benefit is that the proposed activities will produce tight links
between academic and government institutions (i.e., Stony Brook University,
National Synchrotron Light Source). Students and scientists will be trained in
both institutions and receive interdisciplinary research experiences. They will
be exposed to relevant industrial problems and will have a chance to tackle
these problems with direct interactions from industrial scientists. They will
also be involved in the Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory summer
research programs, where they will supervise high school and undergraduate
students as well as industrial scientists to carry out synchrotron X-ray
experiments and related in-laboratory studies.&lt;br/&gt;