* 0906562
* Size- and Composition-Dependent Electronic and Vibrational Properties of Bimetallic Nanoclusters
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Beatriz Roldan Cuenya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoclusters exhibit intriguing electronic
and atomic vibrational phenomena that deviate dramatically from the
corresponding bulk properties. The goal of this study is to combine recently
developed micelle-based nanocluster synthesis methods with advanced nanoscale
physical analysis of both electronic and vibrational properties. Self-assembled
size- and shape-selected bimetallic nanoclusters [57FePt, 57FePd, 57FeCu and
57FeAu] will be synthesized. A synergetic combination of experimental tools
including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning tunneling and transmission
electron microscopy, 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy, and 57Fe nuclear resonant
inelastic X-ray scattering will be used to find correlations between the
nanostructure morphology and electronic structure and its size- and composition-
dependent vibrational properties. In addition, modeling of the vibrational
dynamics of supported clusters will be conducted by molecular dynamics
simulations through an international collaboration (Canada). The intellectual
merit of this work is based on the improvement of the current understanding on:
(i) the formation, the structural and thermal stability of bimetallic alloys in
isolated nanoclusters, (ii) their intrinsic electronic and vibrational
properties, (iii) how these characteristics change due to cluster size-effects,
cluster-support interactions, the presence of ligands on the cluster surface,
and the composition of the nanoalloys, and (iv) whether phonon-induced
structural phase transitions (known in ferromagnetic bulk Invar alloys) persist
and can be tuned in nanoclusters. Since the electron and phonon density of
states are key elements in understanding and predicting important materials
properties, this project will advance the present knowledge of basic physical
phenomena underlying electrical and thermal conductivity, heat capacity,
vibrational entropy, electron-phonon coupling, and 1/f noise in electronic
devices. In addition, insight will be obtained on whether phonon-assisted
surface chemical reactions could play an important role in the comprehension of
the catalytic properties of metal nanoclusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoclusters exhibit intriguing
electronic and atomic vibrational phenomena that deviate dramatically from the
corresponding bulk properties. Metal nanoclusters are used in optics
(nanophotonics), magnetism (recording media), medicine (targeted drug delivery),
and in chemistry (catalytic materials). Many questions remain on the detailed
nature of their electronic and vibrational properties, and a more thorough
physical understanding is needed to advance the science and technology of these
materials. This project will improve the present knowledge on the formation, the
structural and thermal stability of bimetallic alloys in nanoclusters, and the
parameters that can be used to tune their intrinsic physical properties such as
cluster size, support and composition. A deeper insight into important material
properties including electrical and thermal conductivity will be obtained.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained and given the opportunity to
conduct state-of-the-art research, not just at the University of Central
Florida, but also at national and international user facilities, including the
Advanced Photon Source (Chicago) and Spring8 (Japan). K-12 students teamed up
with undergraduates will be in charge of the sample preparation. A website
entitled ?Why?s of Science? will be setup to disseminate science-related
educational activities among primary and middle school students. In order to
stimulate the access of minority (Hispanic) parents to science, the website will
be available in English and Spanish.