* 0906033
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Annie Lindgren, Lindgren Annie R
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "The Cephalopod Cornea
as a Model of Convergent Evolution" for Annie Lindgren. The host institution for
this research is the University of California - Santa Barbara and the sponsoring
scientist is Todd H. Oakley.

One leading edge issue in evolutionary biology is how similar structures arise
in different species. Either they are independently evolved (convergent) or
arise through common ancestry (homologous). The cornea, an eye component, has
evolved at least twice in cephalopods, once in squids and once in octopods. To
determine how the cornea evolved multiple times in cephalopods, this research
uses 1) a phylogenetic approach to resolve relationships among cephalopod
species and to test for the possibility of homology, and 2) next-generation
sequencing techniques to identify the underlying genes involved. In addition,
this research focuses on the development of novel computer programs that will
help integrate the data into the phylogeny, with the end goal of improving our
understanding of cephalopod evolution.

Training goals for this project include expanding skills in phylogenetic theory,
program development of model-based analytical methods, character coding and
molecular evolution. To further collaboration and education, data will be made
available online and students will be involved in various aspects of this
project. This research paradigm integrates invertebrate biology, evolution, and
development to provide a new approach to understanding the molecular basis for
character evolution and generate novel methods and computer programs for
analyzing large data sets useful to a broad group of scientists.