* 0906444
* Electronic and Atomistic Effects in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2014
* USD 515,000.00

Technical abstract This project is a study of the electronic structure,
morphology, stability, and atomistic behavior of selected surface-based
nanoscale systems prepared by deposition, self-assembly, and self-organization.
The systems of interest include films of Ag, Pb, and Bi deposited on surfaces of
Si and Ge that are smooth, stepped, or modulated by nanowire arrays. Electrons
in these systems, confined or modulated by the geometry, can organize into novel
configurations including quantum well states, resonances, and localized states;
their interactions with the atomic lattice can lead to substantial changes in
atomic organization, symmetry, and thermodynamic behavior. These effects and
phenomena are of central importance to "nanoscale science and technology," a
prevailing national research theme. The primary tool used in these
investigations is angle-resolved photoemission, performed at the Synchrotron
Radiation Center in Stoughton, Wisconsin, which is a national user facility
supported by the National Science Foundation. Through cutting-edge research,
this project affords education to students and postdoctoral fellows and extends
services to the community via consultation, collaboration, and sharing of
experience and expertise. The rigorous student training including working at
national facilities contributes directly to the personnel needs of industry,
universities, and national laboratories. Non-technical abstract Metal atoms such
as Ag (silver), Pb (lead), and Bi (bismuth), upon deposition onto electronic
substrate materials such as Si (silicon) and Ge (germanium), can form smooth
films or self-organize into novel configurations including arrays of clusters,
islands, pyramids, and other geometrical shapes of nanoscale dimensions.
Electrons in these systems are forced to adapt to the geometry, and the atomic
lattice structure reacts to the electronic structure modification. Novel and
useful properties often emerge as a result. The underlying scientific principles
of these nanoscale phenomena present intellectual challenges and have important
technological implications in areas such as nanoelectronics, quantum devices,
coatings, catalysts, and solar cell and battery technologies. This project
utilizes synchrotron radiation to perform fundamental studies on this topic. The
work is primarily carried out at the Synchrotron Radiation Center in Stoughton,
Wisconsin, a national user facility supported by the National Science
Foundation. Through cutting-edge research, this project affords education to
students and postdoctoral fellows and extends services to the community via
consultation, collaboration, and sharing of experience and expertise. The
rigorous student training including working at national facilities contributes
directly to the personnel needs of industry, universities, and national
laboratories.