* 0906391
* Noncommutative geometry, microlocal analysis, index theorems and symplectic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Boris Tsygan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 154,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0906391&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Boris Tsygan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to
studying microlocal methods in index&lt;br/&gt;theory and in symplectic
geometry. A part of the project deals&lt;br/&gt;with noncommutative differential
calculus which is one of the&lt;br/&gt;central tools in the above. By
noncommutative differential&lt;br/&gt;calculus we mean the study of algebraic
structures arising from&lt;br/&gt;the standard differential calculus on
manifolds, defined in terms&lt;br/&gt;in such a way that is valid of the algebra
of functions on a&lt;br/&gt;manifold and in such a way that is valid if this
algebra is&lt;br/&gt;replaced by any algebra, commutative or not. This leads to
the&lt;br/&gt;study of algebraic structures on Hochschild chain and
cochain&lt;br/&gt;complexes of an algebra; those complexes play the role
of&lt;br/&gt;differential forms and multivector fields, a development of
works&lt;br/&gt;of Dolgushev-Tamarkin-Tsygan, Kontsevich-Soibelman,
Costello,&lt;br/&gt;Lurie and other authors. The techniques of
noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;calculus will be applied to obtain new index theorems
and&lt;br/&gt;theorems about the determinant of the cohomology of
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;systems, generalizing recent results of Beilinson. Also,
the&lt;br/&gt;project will study a new object on a symplectic manifold that
we&lt;br/&gt;call an oscillatory module. These objects are modules
over&lt;br/&gt;deformed algebras of functions on a manifold, but with
extra&lt;br/&gt;structures that make their category much closer to the
Fukaya&lt;br/&gt;category. This extra structure is largely motivated by
microlocal&lt;br/&gt;methods in partial differential equations, in particular
the WKB&lt;br/&gt;method. This is a part of a series of works that try
to&lt;br/&gt;understand mirror symmetry microlocally (Bressler-
Soibelman,&lt;br/&gt;Kapustin-Witten, Nadler-Zaslow, Gukov-Witten,
Tamarkin).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three related parts in the project:
noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;calculus, index theory, and oscillatory modules.
Noncommutative&lt;br/&gt;calculus is a theory that describes parts of the
standard&lt;br/&gt;differential calculus in such a way that it can be applied
in&lt;br/&gt;situations more general than that of an ordinary space,
in&lt;br/&gt;particular when, for coordinates on our imaginary "space",
the&lt;br/&gt;equation xy=yx is no longer required. Index theory is a part
of&lt;br/&gt;the theory of differential equations that expresses the number
of&lt;br/&gt;solutions of an equation in terms of the topology of
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying space. Oscillatory modules are objects on
geometric&lt;br/&gt;spaces that describe the motion of quantum particles on
these&lt;br/&gt;spaces (in other words, they treat the space in question as
the&lt;br/&gt;phase space of a quantum mechanical system). These objects
are&lt;br/&gt;intended to be applied to study other invariants of these
spaces,&lt;br/&gt;also physically motivated and much more complicated; they
are&lt;br/&gt;called A-branes and describe the motion of a quantum string
on&lt;br/&gt;our space. They are called A-branes and are subject of
much&lt;br/&gt;current research in mathematical physics and geometry. Let
us&lt;br/&gt;finish by explaining why noncommutative calculus is natural
for&lt;br/&gt;applications both in differential equations and in
quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics. Indeed,if x and y are basic operations
with&lt;br/&gt;functions, for example multiplication by some function
and&lt;br/&gt;differentiation, then xy differs from yx, in the sense that,
if&lt;br/&gt;you apply them in different orders, you get
different&lt;br/&gt;results. Similarly, in quantum mechanics, if x is the
position of&lt;br/&gt;a particle and y is its momentum, then xy differs from yx;
this&lt;br/&gt;is a mathematical expression of the Heisenberg
uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;principle.&lt;br/&gt;