* 0906420
* Statistical Methods and Theory in Some High-Dimensional Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 221,627.00

The research project will focus on developing practical methods, efficient
algorithms and solid theory for the selection of important features, estimation
of unknown parameters and prediction of responses with high-dimensional data,
especially in the case where the number of features is much larger than the
number of samples. It will further develop recently proposed methodologies and
algorithms for feature selection in linear regression, extend them to more
general high-dimensional statistical models, investigate their consistency and
optimality properties in selection and estimation. The methodologies developed
in the project will be directly relevant to many applications. The project will
specifically investigate applications in two important areas. The first one is
signal processing, including efficient sampling, representation, transmission
and recovery of data objects. The second one is communications networks,
including detection and estimation of significant patterns in volume and changes
in data streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional data is an
area of intense current interest in statistical research and practice due to the
rapid development of information technologies and their applications to modern
scientific experiments. Important fields with an abundance of high-dimensional
data include bioinformatics, signal processing, neural imaging, communications
networks and more. In many suchscientific and engineering applications, the size
of the problem is measured by the number of features: genetic components in
bioinformatics, brain regions or voxels in neural imaging, or computers and
routers in theInternet. A main challenge in high-dimensional data is that the
size of the problem is often much larger than the size of the data to be used.
The project is motivated and will be directly applicable to signal processing
and monitoring communications networks. Due to mathematical and statistical
commonalities of problems involving high-dimensional data, the project will also
be directly applicable to bioinformatics, neural imaging and many more
disciplines where modern information technologies prosper. Furthermore, the
project will have significant educational impact.