* 0906475
* Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bertrand Halperin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education focused
on systems where conduction electrons are strongly confined in one or more
directions. The research effort is motivated by experiment and encompasses a
variety of intriguing phenomena. Apart from advancing understanding, a
consequence of the research is to advance theoretical techniques

Nanoscale semiconductor devices, known as double quantum dots, can be used to
trap a pair of conduction electrons, and to manipulate their spins by applying
electric potentials to adjacent gates in a prescribed sequence. The electron
spins interact with nuclear spins in the host material, and can be used to
manipulate the polarization of those spins. Recent experiments have produced
some quite surprising results, which will be one focus of this research. The PI
seeks to advance understanding of the non-equilibrium dynamics of this coupled
system, a major challenge which could have practical as well as fundamental
consequences. Two-dimensional electron systems, such as field effect
transistors, exhibit very rich behavior in strong magnetic fields at low
temperatures, including a remarkable set of phenomena known as the quantum Hall
effects. When a system is in a quantized Hall state, it can carry electric
currents along the sample edges, with almost no energy loss. However, if there
is a sufficiently narrow constriction in the sample, electrons can tunnel from
one edge to another, leading to electrical resistance. Two or more constrictions
can lead to resistance that oscillates rapidly as a function of magnetic field
strength or of voltages applied to insulated gates on the sample. Such
oscillations can originate from quantum mechanical interference effects, from
electron-electron interaction effects (?Coulomb blockade?) or a combination of
the two. The PI aims to sort out the importance of these effects in existing and
future devices. Analysis of these experiments should tell us about the nature of
edge states in real samples as well as the fundamental physics of quantum Hall
systems. Research will also focus on oscillations that have been seen as a
function of source-drain voltage, and on the current-voltage characteristics of
individual constrictions. Another set of projects will focus on the state of
apparently zero electrical resistance induced by applied microwave radiation,
which has been seen in two-dimensional electron systems at intermediate values
of the magnetic field. A recent experiment using circularly polarized radiation
found the microwave effect to be completely independent of the sign of the
circular polarization, in contrast to all theoretical predictions. The project
will try to understand this, as well as other puzzling observations. The project
will also explore designs for testing a prediction that nonuniformity in the
electron density can give rise, in the zero-resistance state, to time-dependent
oscillations in the local electrostatic potential. Finally, the PI aims to
analyze experiments in which an electron tunnels, with controlled momentum, into
a very thin ?quantum wire? or into the edge of a two-dimensional electron system
in a quantum Hall state. The experiments should give important insights into the
physics of these systems, including collective effects due to electron-electron
interactions.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMARY This award supports theoretical research and education that
encompasses a variety of phenomena in condensed matter and statistical physics.
This research is focused on phenomena that arise in systems where conduction
electrons are strongly confined in one or more dimensions. The PI aims to
explain puzzling results from existing experiments that involve structures of
atoms the size of very large molecules so that the ?nanostructures? lie between
being a material and an electronic device, and experiments involving electronic
states of matter that arise when electrons are confined to a plane within a
semiconductor structure and exposed to a very high magnetic field perpendicular
to the plane, quantum Hall states. All these experiments probe fundamentally
interesting phenomena in which the wave-like nature of electrons plays a crucial
role. Phenomena like these appear and their understanding becomes increasingly
important as the size of electronic circuit elements shrink to ever smaller
dimensions at the pace of Moore?s law. Apart from the important role of
advancing fundamental knowledge of the world around us, this research
contributes to the intellectual foundations of new technologies that help to
preserve the rapid advance of electronics technologies.

