* 0906534
* Following Refractory Elements from Circumstellar Ejecta to the Interstellar Medium: A Combined Laboratory and Observational Study
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award Drs. Lucy Ziurys and
DeWayne Halfen (University of Arizona) will continue their investigation of the
chemistry of the refractory elements through the ongoing joint
laboratory/observational program. The laboratory investigations will focus on
new metal oxide, carbide, nitride, and cyanide species such as KO, AlO+, HMgNC,
and MgC. The Ziurys group has already recorded spectra of numerous oxides,
carbides, and cyanide species, and this new work will be an extension of well-
understood techniques. In addition, the laboratory studies will be expanded to
include possible new phosphorus-bearing species. A new phosphorus source has
been developed in the Ziurys group for this purpose, which has already been
successfully employed. Molecules of interest include C3P, PCO, PNH+, NiP, and
FeP. The latter two species are likely precursors to schreibersite, [Fe,Ni]3P,
the proposed solid-state carrier of circumstellar phosphorus. The proposed
observations will entail searching for these possible new species in
circumstellar and, in certain cases (i.e., for PNH+), interstellar gas via their
pure rotational spectra. Measurements of both ions and neutrals are essential in
identifying the major carriers of the refractory elements in dense material, and
will aid in establishing chemical formation mechanisms. These studies will also
help draw the connection between gas-phase molecules and dust grains, and allow
for a more quantitative evaluation of elemental depletions. The target source
list will include asymptotic giant branch and supergiant envelopes (both oxygen-
and carbon-rich), planetary nebulae, and select molecular
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is highly interdisciplinary and will
involve the interplay of observational and experimental methods. The bulk of the
research will be carried out by graduate and undergraduate students, the
majority of which are female, who will receive a very unique education with
diverse skills, enabling them to better contribute as scientists to society. Dr.
Ziurys is actively involved in the development of interdisciplinary courses and
a website for basic molecular spectroscopy. The development of highly sensitive
gas-phase laboratory spectrometers is also relevant to defense and homeland
security, particularly in the terahertz frequency regime.