* 0906569
* Mathematical Methods for Approximately Exact Statistical Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Kolassa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 122,630.00

This proposed research applies a variety of mathematical techniques, including
multivariate complex analysis and combinatorics, to open questions concerning
inference from small samples. This inference includes standard frequentist
techniques including the calculation of p-values and confidence intervals. The
following aims are undertaken: 1. The approximation of DiCiccio and Martin
(1993), conditional p-values using an approximate equivalence relation between a
Bayesian credible region and a frequentist critical region, are improved, by
determining an optimal or near-optimal set of initial conditions for the partial
differential equation that is involved in the approximation. 2. Exact-
enumeration techniques are applied to conditional inference in Cox regression.
3. An asymptotic approximation are constructed for the conditional distribution
of a likelihood ratio statistic, under the regularity conditions far weaker then
generally present in the existent
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentalists routinely ask how well their
data fits a hypothesis about the mechanism generating their data; the truth or
falsehood of this hypothesis routinely is of importance to society as a whole.
For example, in a medical clinical trial, one might investigate how closely data
conform to a hypothesis that a new drug is equivalent at treating a particular
disease to a standard drug, and in an engineering study, one might investigate
how closely the data conform to a hypothesis that a part designed in a new way
lasts no longer than a part designed in a conventional way. Disproving such a
hypothesis often leads to adopting an alternative hypothesis that a new drug or
part design actually represents an improvement. Disproving such a hypothesis
involves a probabilistic proof by contradiction, in which investigators
calculate the probability of observing data representing evidence at least as
strong against the initial hypothesis, and reject this hypothesis if this
probability is small. For example, investigators interested in a new design for
a low-emission vehicle might compare a new battery design to an old design, in
an experiment in which batteries of both types are installed in vehicles and
tested under a variety of conditions. In situations like this, the method for
quantifying evidence against the hypothesis of equal reliability of both
batteries is well established. This research helps to attach probabilities to
the various possible outcomes of the experiment under various assumptions about
the relative reliabilities of the batteries, accounting for variation in
experimental conditions and for various non-battery reasons for vehicle failure.
Similar questions arise in medicine, finance, the social sciences, and many
other fields of interest.