* 0906027
* Scanning Microwave Microscopy Study of Complex Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Zhi-Xun Shen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this NSF program is to study
the local electromagnetic properties of strongly interacting electron systems
using scanning microwave impedance microscopy. These materials have inherent
tendency towards inhomogentiy, making local study highly informative and
necessary. Near-field microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) is a novel technique
to address this problem. The local dielectric response to electromagnetic waves
represents the collective behavior of the electronic system and measures the
two-particle correlation functions, complementary to the information obtained by
tools sensitive to single particle behavior such as STM. A novel cryogenic
variable-temperature (2-300K) MIM equipped with a 9T magnet has been developed
and will be used for this study. The combined strength of high resolution
microwave imaging (currently at 100 nm, with a plan to further improve) and
low-T/high-B environment will enable the visualization of many interesting
physical processes, such as metal-insulator transition, phase changing process,
regional superconductivity, and multiferroics. Because of the relative ease of
operation, the experience of nanoscale electrical imaging is also of pedagogical
importance to the undergraduate, graduate students and postdoc in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this NSF program is to study the local electromagnetic properties of
strongly interacting electron systems using scanning microwave impedance
microscopy. These materials have great technological potential but are not well
understood largely due to inherent tendency towards inhomogentiy, making local
study highly informative and necessary. A novel cryogenic variable-temperature
(2-300K) near-field microwave impedance microscope equipped with a 9Tesla magnet
has been developed and will be used for this study. The combined strength of
high resolution microwave imaging and low-T/high-B environment will enable
insights not possible to obtain by other means. This tool will be very useful
for other fields and for education. Because of the relative ease of operation,
the experience of nanoscale electrical imaging is also of pedagogical importance
to the undergraduate, graduate students and postdoc in the project.