* 0906379
* Enabling Transformational Science and Engineering Through Integrated Collaborative Visualization and Data Analysis for the National User Community
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Clyne, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 7,000,000.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Enabling Transformational Science and
Engineering through Integrated Collaborative Visualization and Data Analysis for
the National User Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visualization is one of the
most important and commonly used methods of analyzing and interpreting digital
assets. For many types of computational research, it is the only viable means of
extracting information and developing understanding from data. However, non-
visual data analysis techniques, statistical analysis, data mining, data
reduction, etc. also play integral roles in many areas of knowledge discovery.
This award will, for the first time, provide a comprehensive suite of large-
scale visualization and data analysis (VDA) services to the open science
community. By leveraging existing tools and techniques, integrating state-of-
the-art research products, and providing exceptional user support, we will
deploy a national, general-purpose visualization and data analysis discovery
environment. The deliverables include:&lt;br/&gt;o a remote visualization
resource of extreme capability (Longhorn):&lt;br/&gt;o 256 nodes (2048 processor
cores, 24 Tflops peak) with 512 GPUs, 12 terabytes of aggregate memory, 200
terabytes of local system storage&lt;br/&gt;o tightly integrated with Ranger
(the TeraGrid's inaugural Track2 system) to handle digital assets at the largest
scale (and potentially future TACC HPC systems);&lt;br/&gt; 1. a comprehensive
collection of open source and commercial end-user VDA software tools;&lt;br/&gt;
2. expert visualization support, including advanced interactive user support and
training, from a team comprising many of the leading visualization researchers
in the US; and&lt;br/&gt; 3. a framework for rapidly integrating new
visualization technologies from leading research teams (including our own) to
increase user capabilities throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;aborative
Visualization and Data Analysis for the National User
Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;