* 0906640
* RUI: Dynamic Light Scattering Test of Bond Model Predictions for the Dynamics of Network-forming Liquids near the Glass Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* David Sidebottom, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2016
* USD 370,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amorphous solid phase is, in
principle, endemic to all liquids despite a propensity for some liquids to
crystallize when cooled. However, the manner in which a liquid thickens in
advance of solidification is vastly different among different materials. Past
research has demonstrated a clear link between the dynamics of a supercooled,
glass-forming liquid and its chemical structure and thermodynamic properties
referred to as "fragility". In this project, dynamic light scattering, Raman
spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry are being applied to probe
how liquid dynamics are directly affected by simple structural changes created
in network-forming systems. The results will form a precise test of a proposed
thermodynamic model (Bond Model) presently available. Work will be carried out
both by graduate (MS) and undergraduate students providing hands-on research
experience to augment their science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology thrives on exploiting the novel
properties of materials. Among these, glassy materials possess unique
mechanical, optical and electrical properties of importance for many state-of-
the-art devices. However, for their potential to be realized, glassy materials
must be solidified from the liquid state without crystallization occurring. This
then requires an understanding of the liquid-to-glass transition and in
particular an understanding of how chemical structure of the liquid affects the
thickening process itself. In this project, visible light scattered by a glass-
forming liquid is used to monitor this thickening process on a microscopic
level. A series of glass-forming liquids are to be investigated in which the
chemical structure can be systematically altered by either increasing or
decreasing the average number of chemical bonds present in the liquid. With each
modification of the structure, the corresponding changes in dynamical properties
of the liquid will be assessed to test predictions of a simple model based upon
the average number of bonds present. Graduate (MS) and undergraduate students
will conduct this research as means of training the next generation of
professional scientists.&lt;br/&gt;