* 0906980
* Metal Redox Control of Polymer Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2011
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professors Tara Y. Meyer,
William W. Clark, David H. Waldeck, and Lisa M. Weiland, at the University of
Pittsburgh to carry out fundamental/basic studies on the discovery of
electroplastic elastomeric materials whose bulk properties can be changed by the
application of electrical energy. Despite the ability of the scientific
community to create synthetic materials with mechanical properties that range
from elastically flexible to stronger than steel, few materials exist that
possess the ability to morph reversibly from one state to another and none use
electrical energy to achieve the transformation. To address this need, composite
materials comprising scaffold, polyelectrolyte and redox active metal centers
are being prepared and studied. The long term impact, both economic and
technological, of the development of this class of materials could be
significant. The current paradigm of choosing materials with mechanical
properties that match the need of the application could be supplanted in some
cases with the idea of adjusting the mechanical properties of the material to
match the application. Moreover, new applications that depend on the morphing
ability of the composite could be envisioned: adaptive manipulators for robots,
custom fitted safety or medical equipment, and universal adapters for mating
surfaces and fittings. Additionally, this project also represents an outstanding
training opportunity for students because of the rich combination of basic
science and applied engineering that is inherent in the research. The
collaborative research environment is designed to prepare these students for
post-graduate jobs that involve the translation of fundamental science into
practical technology. The interdisciplinary investigative team which is diverse
in both discipline (two chemists and two mechanical engineers) and gender (two
women and two men) has expanded further to include high school students,
undergraduates and graduate students in the research with particular efforts
aimed at underrepresented groups.