* 0906951
* Theoretical studies of dynamical organization and design principles of biominerals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Susan Coppersmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 285,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education with
the goal to understand how living organisms create the exquisitely controlled
microarchitectures of biomineralized structures that lead to their extraordinary
materials properties. A main focus of the work is on nacre, or mother-of-pearl,
which has a highly controlled and organized microstructure that gives rise to
remarkable strength and toughness - nacre is 3000 times tougher than the
aragonite mineral that constitutes 95% of it. No synthetic composites outperform
their components by such large factors. The aragonite tablets in nacre are
highly oriented, and the standard paradigm in the field is that the crystal
orientations are controlled by molecular-scale chemical templation. However,
recent work by the PI and her experimental collaborators presents strong
evidence that in nacre, the orientational ordering arises from nonlinear
dynamical processes. This award supports research to: (1) extend a theoretical
model developed by the PI for dynamical establishment of aragonite tablet
crystal orientation in nacre to encompass both sheet and columnar nacre,
enabling more comprehensive comparison between theory and experiments on a
variety of organisms, (2) investigate other aspects of nacre architecture that
could be due to dynamical self-organization processes similar to those in other
condensed matter systems and materials, (3) work to understand better the design
principles that these highly organized and complex structures are exploiting,
and (4) investigate the implication of new experiments probing the architecture
and properties of other biomineral systems with remarkable toughness, such as
sea urchin tooth. Members of underrepresented groups will be actively recruited
to participate in this research project.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education
with the goal to understand how living organisms create the exquisitely
controlled microarchitectures of biomineralized structures that lead to their
extraordinary materials properties. A main focus of the work is on nacre, or
mother-of-pearl, which is produced by some mollusks as an inner shell layer. It
is a remarkable material that has a highly controlled and organized structure
that gives rise to remarkable strength and toughness - nacre is 3000 times
tougher than the aragonite mineral that constitutes 95% of it. No synthetic
composites outperform their components by such large factors. The PI will
develop models to understand the physical processes that lead to the well
organized internal structure of nacre and other biomineral systems that exhibit
remarkable materials properties. The PI has the advantage of access to
experimentalists working on these materials. An improved understanding of how
living organisms make materials with remarkable properties can lead to the
discovery of new materials with enhanced performance for a wide range of
technological and industrial applications.

Members of underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to participate in
this research project.