* 0906467
* Vortices and Bubbles in Cryogenic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Gary Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 02/28/2013
* USD 262,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Superfluid helium at very low temperatures is
known to flow without friction, but it is known that this superfluid state can
be destroyed when the temperature of the liquid is raised above a critical
value. It is thought that this transition from a superfluid to a normal liquid
is caused by quantum whirlpools that are thermally excited in the liquid helium
as the temperature is raised, but the details of this process are still not well
understood. This project will study the superfluid phase transition in a novel
geometry, in the form of a liquid helium film only a few atomic layers thick
that is adsorbed on the surface of a carbon nanotube, which is only a few
nanometers in diameter. The superfluid properties (and hence the whirlpools that
are excited) will be monitored by propagating a temperature wave in the helium
film coating the nanotubes. It is important to unravel the nature of this phase
transition because recent experiments in high-temperature superconductors
(materials where the electric current flows without friction) show evidence that
the whirlpools are also involved in the transition from a superconductor to a
normal material, where electrical currents can no longer flow without friction.
An understanding of how the whirlpools are involved may lead to insights on how
to increase the transition temperature: the "holy grail" of superconductivity
research is to raise the transition to room temperature, which would have
enormous implications for energy technology. This work will provide the thesis
project of a Ph.D. student, giving valuable training in low-temperature
techniques, nanomaterial fabrication and characterization, and optical and laser
techniques. Undergraduate students will also participate in the experiments,
giving them experience in how research is carried out.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Quantized vortices are known to play a crucial role
in the properties of superfluid helium. As the temperature of the fluid is
raised, more and more vortices are thermally excited, until the critical
temperature is reached where the superfluid density is driven to zero by the
vortices, defining the phase transition to a normal liquid. This project will
study the superfluid phase transition in a novel geometry, in the form of a
liquid helium film only a few atomic layers thick that is adsorbed on the
surface of a carbon nanotube, which is only a few nanometers in diameter.
Initial measurements have shown that it is possible to adsorb a superfluid film
on the nanotubes, and that the superfluid properties can be probed by
propagating a temperature wave in the liquid helium coating the tubes. The
superfluid phase transition will be studied as function of the film thickness,
with particular attention to an unusual re-entrant behavior that has been
observed close to the onset thickness. A second project that will be undertaken
involves the generation of a bubble in cryogenic liquids using a focused laser
pulse, and observation of the luminescence pulse that occurs at the end of the
bubble collapse phase, where very high temperatures are generated from the
compression of the gas in the bubble. Initial studies showed this process occurs
in liquid nitrogen, and studies will also be undertaken in alcohols at low
temperature. This work will constitute the thesis project of a Ph.D. graduate
student, providing training in low-temperature techniques, nanomaterial
fabrication and characterization, and optical and laser techniques, and
undergraduate students will also participate in the experiments.