* 0906530
* Microscopic Theory of High Temperature Superconductivity in the Cuprates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Chandra Varma, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education with the ambitious goal to formulate a consistent microscopic theory
of the extraordinary phenomena which have been discovered in high temperature
cuprate superconductors. The PI sees that besides the high superconducting
transition temperatures, two new states of matter have been discovered in the
cuprates: a strange normal metallic state with extraordinary but simply
characterized properties, and a pseudogap phase in which the extrapolated normal
ground state appears to have an anisotropic gap tied to the chemical potential.
The PI will build on a microscopic approach which predicted a particular form of
broken time-reversal symmetry in the pseudogap phase, and derived a quantum
critical spectrum of the order parameter fluctuations, which leads to the
phenomenological marginal Fermi-liquid consistent with the "strange metal"
state, as well as couples to fermions with attraction in the d-wave pairing
channel. The PI aims to solidify aspects of these developments and to attempt an
understanding of aspects which are not understood. These include (i)
verification of the analytic results for the quantum fluctuations by Monte Carlo
calculations, (ii) inversion of the ARPES data to deduce the pairing spectrum to
test the theory, (iii) understanding how the time-reversal breaking state
observed in recent experiments necessarily leads to an anisotropic gap in the
"pseudogap" state, as well as other issues relevant to experiment.&lt;br/&gt;The
PI aims to achieve a firm enough theory backed by experimental results and with
clear and falsifiable predictions so that a consensus in the important field of
cuprate high temperature superconductivity can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will also take a close look at the burgeoning experimental results on the newly
discovered Fe-Pnictides and formulate a model for their
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education with
the ambitious goal to formulate a consistent theory of the extraordinary
phenomena which have been discovered in high temperature cuprate superconductor
materials. Apart from the persistence of superconductivity to much higher
temperatures than the other superconducting materials known at the time of the
discovery of the cuprates, the cuprate materials exhibit a host of interesting
puzzles including the nature of the unusual metallic states that give way to the
superconducting state as the temperature is lowered. The PI will build on his
recent controversial ideas that have support in the experimental data. His work
may lead to new insights into high temperature superconductivity and how to
discover new materials that are superconducting at much higher temperatures,
perhaps room temperature. In the superconducting state, superconductors can
carry electric power without dissipation. A room temperature superconductor
would enable efficient power transmission and save energy.