* 0906233
* Minimal surfaces and geometric flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* William Minicozzi, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 384,460.00

The PI proposes, jointly with Toby Colding, to continue
our&lt;br/&gt;investigations on minimal surfaces and related areas of
geometric&lt;br/&gt;analysis, including geometric evolution equations such as
the mean&lt;br/&gt;curvature (MCF) and Ricci flow. Our lamination theorem and
one-sided curvature estimate&lt;br/&gt;played a key role in a number of results
on minimal surfaces including the&lt;br/&gt;Meeks-Rosenberg proof of uniqueness
of the helicoid, our proof&lt;br/&gt;of the Calabi-Yau Conjectures, and the
Meeks-Perez-Ros proof of&lt;br/&gt;the uniqueness of the Riemann
examples.&lt;br/&gt; Minimal surfaces with uniform curvature (or area) bounds
have been&lt;br/&gt;well understood and the regularity theory is complete,
yet&lt;br/&gt;essentially nothing was known without such bounds. The study
is&lt;br/&gt;divided into three cases depending on the topology of the surface.
Our understanding is relatively complete in the first case when&lt;br/&gt; the
surface is a disk.&lt;br/&gt;The main problems are to get a finer understanding
of compactness in the higher genus cases, to understand &lt;br/&gt;singularities
of potential limit laminations (especially generic properties), and to
understand moduli spaces &lt;br/&gt;like the space of genus one helicoids of
&lt;br/&gt; M. Weber, D. Hoffman and M. Wolf (cf. with Hoffman and B. White).
The second broad area of the proposal centers on the study of singularities in
&lt;br/&gt;MCF, including estimates for the size of the singular sets, a
compactness theorem for the possible types of singularities, and&lt;br/&gt; a
classification of generic singularities of the flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minimal surfaces are surfaces that locally minimize their
surface area and, thus, model soap films where surface &lt;br/&gt;tension is in
perfect equilibrium and the film does not change other time.&lt;br/&gt;They have
been studied at least since&lt;br/&gt; Lagrange's 1762 memoir, but recent years
have seen&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs on many long--standing problems in the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;minimal surfaces, with important contributions from
many&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians. There is a time-varying analog of this where a
surface (which is not in equilibrium) evolves to minimize its surface area as
quickly as possible; this is called mean curvature flow or MCF. Mathematically,
this leads to a nonlinear partial differential equation which is formally
similar to the equation that governs the flow of heat in physics. Clearly,
minimal surfaces remain static under the MCF. &lt;br/&gt;MCF and other geometric
flows were developed for their intrinsic beauty as well as their
&lt;br/&gt;potential applications to other &amp;#64257;elds &lt;br/&gt;to model,
for instance, option pricing, motion of grains in annealing metals, and crystal
&lt;br/&gt;growth.&lt;br/&gt;While key foundational results have been obtained,
several of the most basic questions &lt;br/&gt;remain
unanswered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;