* 0906543
* Next Generation Superprotonic Solid Acids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sossina Haile, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2012
* USD 367,415.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to advance the science of solid acid proton conductors, where solid
acid compounds can be described generically as MnHm(XO4)p with M = alkali metal,
alkaline earth, or even rare earth, and X = S, P, Si, Se, As or Ge. A major part
of the effort will focus on exploratory synthesis to develop new compounds with
the desired characteristics of insolubility in water, stability against chemical
reduction, and high (or super-) protonic conductivity even at room temperature.
A superprotonic conductor exhibits rapid reorientation of XO4 anion groups as
the mechanism of proton transport. Hydrothermal and related synthesis routes
will be utilized to prepare hypothesized phosphate and silicate analogs to known
sulfate (and selenate) solid acids with high conductivity. The
decomposition/dehydration behavior of new and known superprotonic solid acids
will further be determined via thermal gravimetric analysis under high (up to
0.6 atm) water partial pressures to temperatures of 300 °C. From these studies
not only can fuel cell operation conditions be established, but also fundamental
thermodynamic quantities (formation enthalpies and entropies). These terms can,
in turn, be used to systematically evaluate the role of hydrogen bond formation
on compound stabilization. Simultaneously, a novel electrochemical test
configuration will be employed to probe electrochemical reaction pathways on
metal electrodes used with solid acid fuel cells, with the ultimate goal of
eliminating Pt. &lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
research are to (1) develop new proton conducting materials for fuel cell
applications and (2) understand fuel cell reaction pathways so as to ultimately
eliminate precious metals from fuel cell designs. The significance of successful
disovery of electrolyte materials with the characteristics targetted in this
work on energy technologies cannot be overstated. Solid acid fuel cells (SAFCs)
operate in a temperature regime (150-300°C) that is unexplored and as such
create opportunities for new modes of fuel cell operation. Ultimately, Pt-free
fuel cell systems without the extreme temperatures of solid oxide fuel cells may
be possible. Commercial development of SAFCs is moving rapidly (under the
auspices of the spin-off Superprotonic, Inc.), however, next-generation, truly
robust materials are required in order to fully realize the potential benefits
of solid acid electrolytes. In addition to new materials development, these
comprehensive studies will help to clarify the chemical and structural bases for
superprotonic transitions and the overall role of hydrogen bonds in stabilizing
compounds. The breadth of tools to be utilized, the relative ease with which the
materials can be synthesized, and the high level of public interest in energy
technologies, renders this an ideal system for training future leaders in
materials chemistry and its application to societally relevant problems. Such
training will be specifically achieved through participation in this research by
undegraduate, graduate and post-doctoral researchers, as well as through
outreach activities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;