* 0906697
* Superdiffusion in high viscosity liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Simon Mochrie, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Since Einstein?s original work on
Brownian motion 100 years ago, random walks and diffusion have stood as
paradigms for how scientists understand the motions of microscopic particles.
Recently it has emerged that in highly viscous fluids, ordinary diffusion is
superceded by a previously unrecognized and still incompletely characterized
process, in which the particles move further than expected on the basis of
diffusion. Such motion is therefore described as superdiffusive. This project
will systematically elucidate superdiffusive particle motions of collections of
particles as well as at the single particle level using state-of-the-art x-ray
and optical techniques. The proposed experiments will create new knowledge and
motivate new theoretical descriptions of the dynamics of particles and particle
suspensions in highly viscous fluids. This will transform our understanding of
highly viscous fluids, whose properties give rise to superdiffusion in a way
that is not currently understood. The research will also inform programmatic and
technical decisions to be made about the next generation of national x-ray
facilities, and it will support the education PhD students, who will learn how
to do the best possible science at these facilities, fulfilling a vital national
need for such trained individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion, random walks and diffusion are paradigms
of how we understand the dynamics of condensed matter systems. Recently it has
emerged that in highly viscous fluids, ordinary diffusion is superceded by a
previously unrecognized and still incompletely characterized process, for which
the particle's mean-square displacement varies, not linearly in time, as it does
for diffusion, but faster than linearly in time. Such motion is therefore
described as superdiffusive. This project will systematically elucidate
superdiffusive particle dynamics at the ensemble level using x-ray photon
correlation spectroscopy, and at the single particle level by using back-focal-
plane interferometry. The proposed experiments will create new knowledge and
motivate new theoretical descriptions of the dynamics of particles and particle
suspensions in highly viscous fluids. This will be transformative to our
understanding of highly viscous fluids, whose properties give rise to
superdiffusion in a way that currently is not understood. This research will
also inform programmatic and technical decisions to be made about the next
generation of national x-ray facilities, and it will support the education PhD
students, who will learn how to do the best possible science at these
facilities, fulfilling a vital national need for such trained individuals.