* 0906361
* SGER: Fabrication and Characterization of Asymmetric Nanoscale Surface Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2010
* K.  Jimmy Hsia, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 12/31/2010
* USD 98,847.00

Nature provides many interesting examples of liquid interacting with nano-
patterned surfaces to achieve a variety of functions such as repelling water and
contaminants. Nanotechnology, on the other hand, enables manufacturing of
nanoscale surface structures that could significantly alter surface
hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity. The objective of this SGER proposal is to
explore nanomanufacturing methods to fabricate nanoscale surface structures with
asymmetric features and characterize their effects on liquid-surface
interactions. A two-step, novel lithography method will be developed in this
study. Deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) will be employed to produce high aspect
ratio, asymmetric surface features in single crystalline silicon wafer.
Different asymmetric patterns will be explored. Measurements will be carried out
to characterize the hydrophobicity change of these surfaces as a function of
asymmetric features. It is expected that such surface structures could be
utilized to achieve functionalities that are not available in engineered
materials and structures today.

Understanding the interactions between liquid droplets and patterned surfaces
will help address important issues in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The
manufacturing method developed in this project will pave the way to creating
complex surface nanostructures. Understanding the mechanisms of liquid-solid
surface interactions in the presence of asymmetric surface nanostructures will
provide materials that could be self-cleaning, or surface structures that may be
used to repel or collect liquid. Moreover, training of graduate students in the
proposed exploratory research gives them the chances to experience the
progressive stages of scientific research, which will benefit their career in
the future.