* 0906474
* Chain Dynamics and Layering within Polyelectrolyte Multilayer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Svetlana Sukhishvili, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2015
* USD 700,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stratification of layer-by-layer (LbL)
polyelectrolyte films lies in the heart of advanced biomedical and optical
applications of polyelectrolyte multilayer (PEM) films, yet is often compromised
by molecular diffusion and intermixing. In this project, fundamental
correlations between dynamics of polymer chains and internal structure of PEMs
will be explored, and this knowledge will be applied to develop strategies for
the construction of stratified LbL PEM films and to study evolution of their
structure during aging. Specifically, inter-chain dynamics will be explored in
three cases: (1) in solution; (2) between solution and the films during
multilayer construction; and (3) at a post-assembly step during aging of LBL
films in humid or aqueous environments. Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
(FCS), a combination of FCS and in situ ATR-FTIR, and a combination of
fluorescence recovery after pattern photobleaching (FRAPP) and neutron
reflectivity (NR) will be applied for cases (1)- (3), respectively. The project
involves synthesis of well-defined polybase-polyacid (PB-PA) pairs associated
through ionic pairing or hydrogen-bonding. The central suggestion is that
translational diffusion of polymers within PEMs is anisotropic, and proposed
experiments aim to reveal the degree of this anisotropy as well as how this
anisotropy evolves with time when PEM films are aged in high humidity
environment or in aqueous solutions under varying temperature and/or ionic
strength. The knowledge generated in this proposal can be used to predict
interactions, motions, relaxations and order in a broad range of PEM
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides knowledge of dynamics and structure of self-assembled polymer
films, which will enable construction and prediction of aging of stratified
polymer films for biomedical and optical applications. One example includes
polymer coatings enabling sequential delivery of therapeutic compounds from the
surface of a biomedical device or an implant. Importantly, this project will
create a fertile training ground for the participating graduate students and
summer undergraduate students in forefront issues of polymer science, a training
ground further enriched by collaboration with NIST and ORNL. A new course on
nanostructured polymers will be developed as part of the highly
interdisciplinary Stevens Nanotechnology Graduate Program. A significant part of
the project includes working with high school students from the Northern New
Jersey area and disseminating knowledge through experimental demonstrations and
poster exhibition involving K-12 high school students. Through existing close
links with the K-12 ACS SEED and the Partners in Science Program NJ program, a
new educational initiative will be developed. Specifically, by working with a
recently started NSF-funded GK-12 initiative, New Jersey Alliance for
Engineering Education (NJAEE), and with the Stevens Center for Innovation in
Engineering and Science Education (CIESE), a teaching module Polymers in Our
Life will be built and piloted in a high school setting. The module will be
featured on the NJAEE website, and linked to the CIESE website, which enjoys
hundreds of thousands of site visits by K-12 educators and students each
year.&lt;br/&gt;