* 0906252
* Generalized Linear Models for Large Correlation Matrices Via Partial Autocorrelations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Mohsen Pourahmadi, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 195,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research will focus on developing statistical models for large correlation
matrices in the spirit of the generalized linear models using the partial
correlation as the new unconstrained parameters. In particular, computationally
efficient procedures will be developed for simulating random correlation
matrices which are of great interest in simulation testing of new statistical
methods and data mining algorithms, digital signal processing, and working
correlation matrices in the analysis of longitudinal data. Large correlation
matrices arise quite often in business and economics, epidemiology,
environmental monitoring, biotechnology and spectroscopy where modern
technological innovations have made it possible to collect massive amount of
data with relatively low cost. The three major difficulties in modeling and
simulating correlation matrices are (i) the positive-definiteness constraint,
(ii) the high-dimensionality and (iii) the additional constraint that its
diagonal entries must equal to one. While the Cholesky decomposition and other
techniques can handle (i) and (ii), they are unable to handle (iii). The
proposed research intends to reparameterize a correlation matrix in an
unconstrained and statistically interpretable manner using the basic concept of
partial correlation. Consequently, sparse and flexible statistical models, data
analytic and graphical tools for correlation matrices will be developed in
analogy with those commonly used in regression and time series analysis. The
methods and tools to be employed include: the theory of generalized linear
models, time series analysis, numerical linear algebra, theory of orthogonal
polynomials and the Monte Carlo methods.

The proposed work has the potential of elevating the basic concept of partial
autocorrelation as a bona fide tool for modeling standard multivariate data in a
manner similar to its well-established role in time series analysis, signal
processing, the theory of orthogonal polynomials and graphical models. It has
the added feature of connecting these apparently disparate areas, which brings
out the interdisciplinary nature of the work. The focus on high-dimensional data
analysis has immediate impacts on settings where large amounts of multivariate
data are collected. Important examples of such settings are financial markets,
environmental monitoring and global change, biotechnology and manufacturing.
Graduate students will be involved in various phases of the project, the results
will be incorporated in courses and presented in seminars and workshops
accessible to researchers outside the field of statistics.