* 0906816
* RUI: Theoretical (Numerical) Investigations of Novel Quantum Phases and Transitions in Strongly Interacting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Donna Sheng, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports research involving an extensive
computational study of interacting boson and spin systems which are of
fundamental importance in understanding strongly correlated many-body physics.
The research aims for fundamental insights into that may be realized in
ultracold atoms trapped in optical lattices and frustrated magnets.

The PI aims to study boson Hubbard models with frustrated hopping and long range
repulsions on triangular and other lattice systems to understand the microscopic
conditions for realizing new quantum phases including different supersolid
phases, a Mott-insulator, and possible spin-liquid phases. Such an investigation
can result in quantitative predictions for the global phase diagram of
interacting boson systems and reveal the nature of the quantum phase transitions
which may belong to a new universality class.

The PI will also study the spin liquid behavior, fractionalization, topological
order and related quantum phase transitions in strongly correlated and
frustrated magnetic systems. There are a growing number of magnetic materials
discovered by experiment which exhibit candidate spin-liquid states. The PI will
combine the exact Lanczos method with density matrix renormalization group
methods to study the low energy spectrum, topological degeneracy, and spin-spin
correlation function in various quantum spin models. The PI aims to gain
fundamental insights and the research may establish ?proof of principle?
evidence for the existence of novel spin liquid phases in simple spin models on
kagome and square lattices aiming to make contact with experiments on
Herbertsmithite and certain layered vanadium oxides and complex vanadium
phosphates.

This project supports educational experiences for students and postdoctoral
researchers; minority students will be involved. The research contributes to a
new computational course on many-body physics

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational research and education that will use advanced
computational techniques to search for new electronic states of matter. The PI
will study models for materials in which the smallest units of magnetism cannot
simply align in such a way to become a magnet or an antiferromagnet. The
interactions between neighboring smallest units of magnetism cannot be satisfied
on the crystal lattice by any alignment. These frustrated magnets are candidates
to exhibit new states of electronic matter. The PI aims to use computation to
see whether specific theoretically proposed states of matter exist in models
that are believed to be relevant to candidate materials, for example the mineral
Herbertsmithite and high temperature superconductors.

This is fundamental research that contributes to the intellectual foundations of
our understanding of materials and new electronic states of matter that exhibit
properties and exotic phenomena that lie outside our current understanding. This
is an intellectual pursuit in its own right no less fascinating than the study
of the universe, but it may also lead to the discovery of new phenomena and to
contribute to future device technologies.

This project supports educational experiences for students and postdoctoral
researchers; minority students will be involved. The research contributes to a
new computational course on many-body physics