* 0906385
* Chemical Ordering Phase Transitions in Intermetallic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kevin Coffey, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2014
* USD 308,628.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will explore the
fundamental questions concerning the chemical ordering phase transition in
nanoparticles of intermetallic metal alloys. Specifically, modeling and
measurement of the quantitative extent of chemical order of individual, sub-10nm
nanoparticles as a function of particle size, particle composition, temperature,
and process and local environment variations with a specific focus to probe the
role of kinetics and equilibrium stability. The study will focus on L10 alloys,
specifically NixFe1-xPt from the FePt family and CuAu. The ultimate goal is to
understand phase transitions in nanoparticle systems and to optimize
nanoparticle chemical ordering for magnetic storage applications. The
understanding of chemical ordering in intermetallic nanoparticle alloys is
limited. Equilibrium thermodynamic models gives a qualitative match to
experiment, but the quantitative fits are poor. These shortcomings lead to the
question: Is our understanding of nanoparticle ordering limited by the ordering
kinetics or our incomplete understanding of the equilibrium thermodynamics? The
order-disorder temperature and the order parameter through the phase transition
will be measured as a function of particle size and processing conditions. Both
in-situ TEM heating and ex-situ annealing studies will be compared. Single
particle measurements and particle-to-particle variations will be integral to
this work. The materials for study are specifically chosen to give a range of
thermodynamic and kinetic properties useful for comparison. Computational
modeling on these material systems will be closely coupled with experiment to
explore the quantitative comparison to experiment and the relative role of
possible kinetic and thermodynamic parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A phase change in a material is seen as
a significant change in structure or properties. Melting, a solid to liquid
change, is one example. Chemical ordering/disordering of alloys is one
technologically important example of a phase change. Future magnetic recording
media will be made with nanometer sized particles of chemically ordered metal
alloys. Particle size has been shown to have a big effect on melting phase
changes and similarly this program will study the effect of size and composition
variables on chemical ordering phase changes in metal alloys. A fundamental
understanding of the factors influencing the chemical ordering phase change
would eventually contribute to the societal benefit of high density magnetic
data storage and enable further sophistication in nanotechnology applications.
Both undergraduate and graduate students will be supported and trained to use
specialized experimental tools. The proposed program will further develop the
single nanoparticle analysis techniques developed for this effort.