* 0906770
* Structure-Function Analysis of an Ultra-Hard Biological Composite
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Junlan Wang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2012
* USD 458,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0906770 PI: Kisailus, David ORG: UC
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Structure-Function Analysis of an Ultra-
hard Biological Composite&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: There is a
need for new light-weight structural materials with high strength and durability
that are low-cost and recyclable. Nature has evolved efficient strategies,
exemplified in the mineralized tissues of numerous species, to synthesize
materials that often exhibit exceptional mechanical properties. These biological
systems demonstrate the ability to control nano- and microstructural features
that significantly improve the mechanical performance of otherwise brittle
materials. One such example is found in the hyper-mineralized combative dactyl
club of the stomatopods, a group of highly aggressive marine crustaceans. This
ultrahard organic-inorganic composite structure is capable of inflicting
significant damage following impact with a wide variety of biomineralized
structures (e.g., mollusk shells, crab exoskeletons, the skulls of small fish).
This project combines expertise in a number of areas including biologically
inspired materials synthesis, structural characterization, mechanical testing,
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, protein-mineral
interaction modeling, and a thorough knowledge of the biological system to be
studied. Using these approaches, the project will investigate the structure-
property relationships of the hyper-mineralized stomatopod dactyl clubs and
elucidate the primary toughening mechanisms of these unique composite materials
through the following potentially transformational investigations: (1) A
detailed, three-dimensional map of the nano- and microstructural features, with
specific mineral composition and phase information. (2) A complementary
mechanical investigation of the regional structures. (3) In-vitro mineralization
experiments to understand organic-inorganic interactions that control mineral
composition and phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This strongly
interdisciplinary research has the potential to enable significant progress in
the emerging fields of nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing by exploiting
control mechanisms established by nature to make novel materials and devices
exhibiting paradigm-shifting properties. By investigating the structure-property
relationships of these unique impact-tolerant mineralized structures using
modern chemical, morphological, and mechanical characterization techniques, the
long-term aim will be to develop the necessary tools for the design and
fabrication of cost-effective and environmentally friendly engineering materials
that mimic the various design elements and performance properties present in
biological systems. The PI, a new faculty member at UC Riverside, has
demonstrated an ability to attract a diverse group of students to his lab. Of
the six graduate students, three are female. He has 12 undergraduates working in
his lab, including four females, four Hispanics, and two African Americans. The
co-PI has an equally strong record in attracting a diverse group of students.
The UC Riverside campus is noted for its success in attracting underrepresented
minorities to a Research I environment and seeing them complete their studies
successfully. Encouragement of undergraduate research is an important component
of this success, and both PIs are making strong contributions. Although not
required of proposals submitted prior to January 5, 2009, the proposal describes
a clear and effective plan for training of the postdoctoral who will be trained
on the project. The PI has also described plans for involving high school
students and teachers from the diverse community surrounding the university in
his research. A web camera set up in the Kisailus lab will enable students in
local and more distant high schools to observe the stomatopod rearing facilities
and the experimental research as it progresses.&lt;br/&gt;