* 0906745
* New Low-Temperature Synthetic Routes to Functional Perovskite and Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Richard Brutchey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2013
* USD 345,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to develop
rational synthetic methods for the low temperature, solution phase synthesis of
functional inorganic nanocrystals for energy applications. Lower temperature
reactions are energy efficient and offer the added benefit of providing kinetic
pathways to novel nanocrystal morphologies, compositions, and crystal
structures. In the first low temperature method, a new type of chalcogen source
(i.e., dialkyl dichalcogenides) is being explored for the synthesis of well-
defined semiconductor nanocrystals. The key to this method is the thermal
instability of dialkyl dichalcogenides, particularly in the presence of Lewis
acids and primary amines. This synthetic methodology is being applied to a wide
variety of semiconductor nanocrystals using dialkyl peroxides and dialkyl
disulfide, diselenide, and ditelluride reagents, and the resulting
optoelectronic and electrochemical properties of the nanocrystals are being
measured as a function of size and composition. The second synthetic methodology
is based on the kinetically controlled vapor phase delivery of water into a
bimetallic alkoxide solution to promote the hydrolysis, nucleation and growth of
small perovskite nanocrystals at low temperatures. The key to this method is the
slow hydrolysis of a bimetallic alkoxide precursor, which circumvents the
requirement for high temperature solid-solid diffusion for crystallization. By
taking advantage of this synthesis method, a series of perovskite nanocrystals
are being synthesized at very low temperatures and the dielectric properties of
the nanocrystals are being studied as a function of their size and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite over fifty years of developments in the
field of solid-state chemistry, there are still only a limited number of ways to
synthesize materials ? the majority of which require high temperature
conditions. As such, there is a need to develop rational methodologies for the
synthesis of functional materials under low temperature conditions, much in the
same way that organic chemists have developed a very extensive and diverse
toolbox of bench-top reactions. Because of the functional size and shape
dependent properties of nanoscale (10-9 meters) materials, the impetus to design
low temperature synthesis methods also applies to the synthesis of nanocrystals.
The goal of this research program is to design new routes to functional
nanocrystals using these energy-efficient design principles, which will be
significant in the ultimate development of solar energy conversion and energy
storage technologies based on these nanocrystal platforms. Integrated into this
research plan is the educational objective of bringing the core concepts of
solid-state chemistry to students at the university, community college, and high
school levels. At the university level, integration of solid-state chemistry
into the curriculum will be accomplished via a solid-state chemistry component
in a course on Inorganic Structure and Bonding, which is taken by graduate
students and advanced undergraduates. At the community college and high school
levels, students from underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups in
Los Angeles County will be targeted for participation in a summer internship.
Using solar energy conversion and energy storage as compelling working examples,
a summer internship will be developed that exposes students to cutting edge and
interdisciplinary research occurring at the university setting. This program
will consist of a combination of discussions and hands-on work, will illustrate
how the scientific method is applied to laboratory research in the context of
solid-state chemistry and nanotechnology, and will expose the students to
opportunities available to them in science and engineering at the university
level and beyond.