* 0906763
* Multifunctional Ferroelectric Single-crystal Architecture in Glass:  Fabrication, Optical Properties, and Nanoscale Polar Order
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Himanshu Jain, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 699,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;In 2007, a joint analysis by the R&amp;D
leaders of the world's major glass companies and academia identified
'Micro/nanopatterning and Lithography' as one of the most deserving research
topic for introducing new functionalities of glass in electronic
applications/nanostructuring. Accordingly, this project aims on creating
ferroelectric (single) crystal-in-glass architecture (FCGA). It is a new class
of material that combines the exceptional electrical, mechanical, and optical
functionalities of ferroelectrics with the robustness, easy formability and low
cost of glass. The FCGA seamlessly merges the passive integrated optical
technology with optically active ferroelectrics structures that are selectively
and locally tailored. These materials would provide multiple novel
functionalities, such as micro/nano electro-mechanical transducers, sensors;
electrically addressable nonlinear waveguides; etc., which will be essential for
the next generation of health and environmental monitoring devices, optical
communication networks, and consumer electronics. The broad impact of the
project is further realized by significantly expanding the current educational
programs designed for the undergraduate and pre-college students as well as the
public-at-large. They include domestic and international research experience for
undergraduates, ?Opto-camps? for middle school children, and collaboration with
Tuskegee University - an HBCU institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The optimum development of FCGAs requires a fundamental
understanding of (i) the controlled single crystal growth by continuous wave
(CW) or femtosecond (fs) laser light under glass to paraelectric to
ferroelectric transformation, (ii) the nature of ferroelectric response of small
dimension crystals in a confined dielectric medium, and (iii) control of
ferroelectric and crystal order on the micro and nano scale. To address these
issues, a team of two PIs and a collaborator from Kyoto University are applying
their combined expertise in materials synthesis, laser-controlled fabrication,
ferroelectric manipulation and optical characterization to a model oxide glass
system that is likely to crystallize congruently and form ferroelectric crystal
by reconfiguration of local atomic structure alone with no change of
composition, thus simplifying theoretical interpretation of data. The exact
mechanism of single crystal growth by laser irradiation is investigated as a
function of laser characteristics with supporting structural information from
electron microscopy and synchrotron X-ray techniques. The ferroelectric state of
confined crystals is characterized by novel spectroscopic techniques pioneered
by the PIs. Time permitting, experiments are planned for establishing the
concepts and viability of FCGA in an infrared transmitting chalcogenide glass
system by CW laser light.