* 0906158
* EUV Photoexcitation and Emission of N2 at Low Temperatures
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Darrell Judge, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2013
* USD 317,291.00

AST-0906158&lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the
necessary photo-excitation and emission data required to understand the
important molecular physics and role in planetary atmospheres of molecular
nitrogen (N2) by investigating the strong interactions among the Rydberg and
valence states of N2 and the atmospheric N2, neutral atomic (NI) and ionized
(NII) nitrogen emissions. Measurement of high-resolution fluorescence excitation
spectra will determine the absolute predissociation yields when the experiments
are conducted under optically thin conditions. The second part of this study
will measure specific absolute branching ratios. The third significant activity
will measure absolute fluorescence production cross-sections for the NI and NII
emissions through photodissociative excitation and dissociative photoionization
excitation of N2. The last task, similar work with isotopes of nitrogen, may be
too ambitious for the scope of the current project, but would help to understand
the nitrogen isotope anomaly observed in planetary
atmospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will use an existing experimental
apparatus that provides a rapid, efficient, and cost-effective means for
observing fluorescence spectra and determining the absolute fluorescence
production cross-sections. The experimental procedures have been developed by
the PI's group, and will be conducted over a temperature range appropriate to
the atmospheres of outer giant planets and satellites. These data are required
for accurate quantitative analysis and evaluation of the nitrogen airglow models
of Saturn, Titan, Triton, and Pluto.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will
benefit atomic and molecular theorists, atmospheric modelers, and optical
astronomers. Several of the spectral features are of considerable interest as
remote global sensing alternatives or as complementary measurements to existing
bands. The study will continue successful efforts in training and research
experiences for postdoctoral associates, graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).