* 0906175
* Theory of Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Kane, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 380,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award supports theoretical research and education in theoretical condensed
matter physics. Three broad topics will be studied: (1) electronic properties of
topological insulators and related materials, (2) topological band theory, and
(3) methods for probing Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems. For each
of these topics the proposed work will explore the interplay between topological
aspects of band theory, disorder and interactions. The first topic is motivated
by recent developments which have demonstrated the existence of a new class of
insulating materials dubbed topological insulators. Two key experiments recently
observed this effect in two dimensional Hg(1-x)CdxTe quantum well structures and
three dimensional Bi(1-x)Sbx crystals. The second topic seeks to generalize the
topological classification of insulating band structures to account for other
symmetries, such as particle-hole symmetry (as in a superconductor) as well as
spatial symmetries. This is expected to lead to a richer set of topological
classifications, and it will be of interest to explore the physical consequences
of these topological classes, and to physically characterize new phases which
emerge. The third topic seeks to develop a methods for experimentally probing
Majorana fermions using topological insulators. Bound states of Majorana
fermions are interesting now because they can form the building blocks for a
topological quantum computer, which can process and store quantum information in
a way which is immune from local sources of decoherence.

The broader impact of the proposed work involves both the potential for
technological innovation and the development of human resources. Topological
insulators have potential to provide a basis for new classes of electronic
devices, both in the field of spintronics and more ambitiously in the field of
quantum omputation. The problems in this proposal will also be an ideal arena
for training a graduate student in the modern methods of condensed matter
theory. The PI also plans to develop a series of lectures for sophomore
undergraduates with the goal of introducing the students to notions of topology
in physics.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education in
condensed matter physics. The PI aims to further study a new kind of insulator
predicted by theory. It has long been known that insulators do not conduct
electric current. In the past 5 years, theory predicted that certain insulating
materials could give rise to a new state of matter. These materials remain
insulating in the bulk, but are able to support a metallic state on the surfaces
that can conduct electricity without dissipation. This new state of matter has
intriguing, exciting, and unusual properties. In a sense it is analogous to
states of matter that arise when electrons are trapped in two dimensions and
exposed to a high magnetic field perpendicular to the plane. The PI will use
theoretical methods to explore this and other new states of matter with an eye
toward devising and proposing experimental tests to uncover their intriguing
properties.

New states of matter may open new technologies, particularly electronic device
and information technologies, which contribute to competitiveness of America.
Realizing these possibilities requires solid theoretical understanding. The
discovery of new states of matter and their exploration is potentially
transformative. The research also provides ideal educational experiences for
graduate students to train them in modern methods of condensed matter theory.
The PI also plans to develop a series of lectures for sophomore undergraduates
with the goal of introducing them to how advanced mathematical concepts can help
us understand physical world around us.