* 0906639
* Recovery of Functions via Moments: Hausdorff Case
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Mnatsakanov, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2012
* USD 119,959.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The intellectual merit of this proposal is connected to the
problem of recovering a multivariate function from its assigned moments and the
problem of density estimation for high-dimensional data. The problem of
recovering a function from its moments is a special case of the classical moment
problem, which concentrates mainly on the questions of the existence and
uniqueness of a function with specified moments. The importance of the
probabilistic moment problem (Hamburger, Stieltjes, and Hausdorff) can be
explained by its application in many statistical inverse problems. For example,
in tomography, the moments of an object (a function) are uniquely defined by the
x-rays (projections) of the object being imaged. Many inversion formulas are
derived by inverting the moment generating function and the Laplace transform.
However, there are only a few approaches for recovering functions via moments.
This can be explained by the unstable behavior of the current methods (e.g., the
Maximum Entropy method applied even in the one-dimensional case) when the higher
order moments are involved. The investigator develops a new approach, which
yields a stable procedure for recovering functions within the context of the
multivariate Hausdorff moment problem. Apart from being an alternative to the
traditional estimation technique, this approach is applicable in situations
where other methods can not be applied. For example, one cannot use a
traditional method, e.g., kernel smoothing, when the observed data are the
moments. The results obtained within this project will have broad impacts not
only in the multidimensional Hausdorff moment problem, in the theory of non-
parametric estimation in indirect models (deconvolution and demixing), and in
entropy estimation of high-dimensional macromolecules, but also in numerous
applications in areas of critical importance, such as image analysis, computed
tomography, molecular physics, and homeland security. In particular, in computed
tomography, when only a few projections are available, the problem of image
reconstruction becomes ill-posed, and hence, perfect reconstruction is
impossible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator shows that proposed approach
provides a uniform approximation rate, which is an important issue in
approximation theory. Besides, in many statistical inverse problems, e.g., those
based on convolutions, mixtures, multiplicative censoring, and right-censoring,
the moments of the unobserved distribution of actual interest can be easily
estimated from the transformed moments of the observed distributions. In all
such models, one can recover a function analytically from its moments by means
of proposed technique. In the area of homeland security, the iris classification
problem represents another field, where moment-recovered constructions will have
an impact.