* 0906440
* Nonlinear and Computational Problems for Geophysical and Classical Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Roger Temam, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 404,055.00

Temam&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0906440&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the
American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleagues study nonlinear
problems&lt;br/&gt;from meteorology, oceanography, and fluid mechanics, using
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tools offered by analysis, the theory of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, dynamical systems theory,
and&lt;br/&gt;computation. Besides improving the understanding of
some&lt;br/&gt;important problems, an aim of the project is to help improve
the&lt;br/&gt;numerical simulations of phenomena which bear many societal
and&lt;br/&gt;industrial applications. The parts of this project related
to&lt;br/&gt;meteorology and oceanography focus on the issue of open
boundary&lt;br/&gt;conditions for limited domain simulations, and well-
posedness&lt;br/&gt;issues for meteorology and oceanography in the absence
of&lt;br/&gt;viscosity. Other parts of the project relate to the study
of&lt;br/&gt;singular perturbations, that is, calculations in the presence
of&lt;br/&gt;small coefficients strongly affecting the equations,
and&lt;br/&gt;theoretical issues in turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Numerical
simulations for weather forecasts are usually done&lt;br/&gt;in a limited area
around the region of interest; such&lt;br/&gt;computations include the usual
weather forecasts, or forecasts in&lt;br/&gt;extreme situations, like a
hurricane, or the study of&lt;br/&gt;desertification. Similar geographically
local questions arise in&lt;br/&gt;oceanography, for example, the study of an
estuary. An important&lt;br/&gt;issue for limited areas is the choice of the
boundary conditions&lt;br/&gt;on the nonphysical parts of the boundary that are
artificially&lt;br/&gt;created for the sake of the computations. This issue
becomes&lt;br/&gt;more crucial as better computers allow more refined
(more&lt;br/&gt;precise) calculations. Inappropriate boundary conditions
may&lt;br/&gt;create incorrect waves (or winds), which may result for
instance&lt;br/&gt;in incorrect precipitation forecasts. The investigator and
his&lt;br/&gt;colleagues tackle this problem by theoretical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;approaches. They work in close collaboration with
geoscientists&lt;br/&gt;to ensure the practical relevance of the project. The
project&lt;br/&gt;also includes strong cross-training of students and postdocs
in&lt;br/&gt;geosciences and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;