* 0906913
* Active Control of Sol-Gel-Sol Transitions of Aqueous Solutions of Doubly Responsive Hydrophilic Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Bin Zhao, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Owing to the intriguing transitions between free-
flowing solutions and free-standing gels and the associated changes in
structures and rheological properties, thermosensitive block copolymer micellar
gels have received considerable attention and have found a wide range of
applications. This project seeks to develop a strategy to actively control sol-
gel/gel-sol transitions of aqueous solutions of doubly responsive hydrophilic
block copolymers and to achieve multiple cycles of sol-gel-sol transitions under
different environmental conditions. A series of hydrophilic block copolymers
that can respond to two external stimuli will be synthesized by
?living?/controlled radical polymerization techniques including atom transfer
radical polymerization and reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer
polymerization. The functional monomers recently developed in the PI?s
laboratory will be used to prepare these block copolymers along with monomers
whose homopolymers have been reported to exhibit thermoresponsive properties in
water. The hard gel boundary phase diagrams of aqueous solutions of these block
copolymers under different environmental conditions will be mapped out by the
tube inversion method and rheometry. The structures of micelles and micellar
gels will be elucidated. The effects of various molecular parameters on the sol-
gel-sol transitions will be investigated. A variety of characterization
techniques will be employed in this research, including dynamic and static light
scattering, rheometry, fluorescence spectroscopy, small angle X-ray and neutron
scattering, differential scanning calorimetry, and transmission electron
microscopy. The knowledge gained from this research will provide a general
principle for design of multi-responsive aqueous micellar gels for technological
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
stimuli-responsive hydrophilic block copolymers developed from this research
have potential applications in controlled encapsulation and triggered release of
substances (e.g., drug molecules), tissue engineering, sensors, and many other
emerging technologies. The knowledge gained from this work will enable rational
design of multi-responsive aqueous gels for various applications. Moreover, this
research project provides a strong setting for training of graduate and
undergraduate students in the synthesis of well-defined block copolymers,
characterization of molecular, micellar, and hierarchically self-assembled
structures, and design of stimuli-responsive soft materials. The PI will
continue his effort to develop a laboratory component for the introductory
polymer chemistry course that he has been teaching. The PI is committed to help
science teaching in K-12 education. He will work with local high school teachers
and students in his laboratory through summer programs to develop new laboratory
experiments for high school chemistry classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;