* 0906547
* Nanotubular Materials and Novel Phenomena Associated with Adsorbed Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yue Wu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have shown that the
structures of water inside carbon nanotubes are very different from bulk water
and depend strongly on tube diameters. Recently, it was demonstrated that the
enthalpy and entropy of water inside carbon nanotubes can also depend
significantly on temperature leading to temperature-dependent water adsorption
properties. In this project, water adsorption and dynamics in carbon nanotubes
will be examined by nuclear magnetic resonance. Specifically, temperature and
carbon nanotube diameter dependence of water adsorption and dynamics will be
investigated. The basic knowledge and experimental approaches will also be
extended to the hydration study of some model proteins. Water adsorption in
seemingly hydrophobic nanostructures is an important phenomenon related to a
broad range of important issues such as nanofluidics, protein hydration, and
protein folding. The second type of nanotubes to be studied is titania
nanotubes. The unique structure of this material leads to novel
inorganic/organic structures with promising photoelectrochemical properties.
This project will synthesize a variety of titania nanotubes/dye hybrid
structures, characterize systematically the structures and bonding of such
inorganic/organic structures and interfaces, and examine the optical and
electron transfer properties. This research could have a major impact on solar
fuel research and development. High school students will be involved in this
nanomaterials-based solar fuel research and related topics will be incorporated
in classroom teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water adsorption in seemingly hydrophobic nanostructures
is an important phenomenon related to a broad range of important issues such as
nanofluidics, protein hydration, and protein folding. Water inside carbon
nanotubes provides an ideal model system for elucidating the mechanism of
adsorption and dynamics of nanoconfined water by hydrophobic surfaces. Using
nuclear magnetic resonance, this project will investigate systematically the
effects of the carbon nanotube diameter and temperature on water adsorption and
dynamics. This basic knowledge and approach will be extended to the study of
protein hydration. This study could provide fundamental understanding of
important phenomena from the function of engineering devices such as
nanofluidics to biological systems such as enzyme activity. The understanding of
the atomic structures and interfaces of titania nanotubes/organic molecule
hybrids is of crucial importance for developing efficient systems for solar fuel
exploration. In this project, new titania nanotube-based hybrid structures will
be developed, basic optical and electronic processes will be examined, and their
potentials for solar fuel production will be evaluated. This project will also
have active involvement of high school students. Through course development,
teaching, and summer research many high school students will be trained in using
their comprehensive knowledge on materials sciences, physics, and chemistry for
the development of renewable energy.