* 0906665
* Feature and Structure Identification and Variable Selection for Functional, Longitudinal and Cross-sectional Data
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Jianhui Zhou, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 05/31/2012
* USD 109,650.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In the functional linear regression model, the investigator proposes a feature
identification procedure to identify the null intervals of the functional
coefficients and to estimate the functional coefficients on the non-null
intervals. This procedure can be considered as variable selection and dimension
reduction in the functional setting. In the generalized linear model for
longitudinal data, the investigator proposes a structure identification
procedure to select the correlation structure for clustered data. This procedure
does not require a likelihood function, is not restricted by cluster size while
most existing methods for longitudinal data suffer from large cluster size, and
can be extended to spatial statistics and gene networks. The proposed estimators
for identifying features and structures are expected to enjoy the Oracle
property. To account for heterogeneity in cross-sectional data, the investigator
proposes the varying-coefficient index models, including most varying-
coefficient models in the current literature as special cases. Variable
selection is proposed in this general setting by utilizing B-spline
approximations to the nonparametric components and adopting a conceptually
simple optimization of canonical correlation. The proposal is expected to
inherit nice properties from dimension reduction techniques.

The investigator's proposal is motivated by an aging study, and has the
extension to geosciences, health study, and bioinformatics for addressing
important scientific questions. The investigator's work aims to broaden the
applicability of functional regression models and varying-coefficient index
models, and to enable better handling of time-dependent regression analysis in a
variety of applications. The proposed work is among the first in methodology
development with a solid asymptotic theory to address the investigated problems.
The investigator has the plan to provide free software packages to academic and
industrial users of the proposed procedures. The support of the proposed
research helps the investigator in the training of the students at the
University of Virginia, where few senior faculty members are available to
supervise a larger number of graduate students, including female and minority
students.