* 0906024
* Patterns in Nature and in the Laboratory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2013
* USD 287,973.00

The work will address two basic themes. First, we will attempt to understand
more precisely why it is that the patterns seen near the shoot apical meristems
of plants so often exhibit Fibonacci sequences, that is, leaves, bracts, and
stickers lie on families of spirals enumerated by Fibonacci sequences. The study
will explore both the mechanisms through which the biological structures are
initiated and the nature of the patterns themselves. From work to date, it would
seem that Fibonacci patterns are the preferred pattern in annular geometries in
circumstances where the pattern gets laid down sequentially, annulus by annulus,
so that the pattern forming region is quite narrow and the bias from the
previously laid down structures is strong. Connections with optimal packing will
be part of the study. Second, we will revisit the general description of
patterns with the particular aim of understanding better the nature of the point
and line singularities which occur when one moves from a microscopic description
to a macroscopic description of the system by averaging over the pattern
wavelength. What is intriguing is that the three dimensional line defects of
such patterns have naturally defined indices of plus and minus one and two
thirds and plus and minus one and that the masses of the former are much larger.
Also, the defects have an additional natural index of one half. Possible
connections with quarks and leptons will be explored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns turn up all over the place. One sees them on
desert dunes, on long sandy beaches, in cloud formations, on fingertips and
animal coats, on the feathers of birds, and on fish skins. They are also
ubiquitous in laboratory experiments on convection in fluids, on broad laser
beams, and on flame fronts. Many of the patterns arising in different
microscopic contexts have textures with much in common, so that by studying
patterns in one context one can learn about their behaviors in other systems
that share key symmetry properties. Besides being of interest for their
intrinsic beauty, patterns are also worth studying for practical reasons. They
have many potential uses from switches to information storage devices. They also
tend to be the structures which, in certain special circumstances, can optimize
such things as heat transfer in fluids and light gathering capacity in plants.
This project will investigate fundamental questions underlying pattern
formation, with the goal of providing deeper insight into this important
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;