* 0906004
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Rachel Schwartz, Schwartz Rachel
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009 and
supports a research and training plan entitled "Developing a model to guide
selection of genes to determine evolutionary relationships among species" for
Rachel S. Schwartz. The host institution for this research is Colorado State
University under the sponsorship of Rachel Mueller.

The evolutionary relationships among species are an important basis for research
in biology. One way to determine such relationships is by examining differences
in a gene within a group of species as species that are most closely related
generally have the fewest differences. Some genes are more useful than others
for estimating such relationships. For example, some genes evolve so slowly that
they are identical for whole groups of closely related species; other genes
evolve so quickly that they are so different for distantly related species we
cannot determine who is most closely related. Similarly, some genes are so short
that they do not contain enough information to identify close relationships.
This research is identifying genes that will be useful for determining
evolutionary relationships among species by simulating genetic data to determine
the characteristics of genes that will be useful for this purpose.

Scientific training objectives include gaining expertise in phylogenetics,
bioinformatics, and computational methods. Professional training objectives
include developing a research program spanning evolution from the population to
the species level and developing skills in mentoring and teaching students. This
research will contribute to correctly determining evolutionary relationships of
numerous species.