* 0906168
* Problems in geometric analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Webb, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 225,347.00

Inverse spectral geometry is the study of the extent to which the geometry of a
Riemannian manifold can be recovered from spectral data. For compact Riemannian
manifolds, the natural spectral data are the eigenvalues of the Laplacian. The
principal investigator along with various research collaborators will address
inverse spectral problems on symmetric and locally symmetric spaces and on line
bundles over Riemann surfaces. They will also study the extent to which the
spectrum of a compact K\"ahler manifold determines the structure of the
associated generalized Jacobian varieties and Albanese tori. For non-compact
manifolds, the relevant spectral data are the scattering resonances and
scattering phase. Gordon, and Webb, along with P. Perry, will continue their
study of obstacles with the same scattering resonances and scattering phase.

Spectral geometry, which is rooted in spectroscopy, studies the relationship
between the geometry of an object such as a vibrating drum and spectral data
such as the characteristic frequencies of vibration. Spectral geometry draws
from many areas of mathematics such as geometric analysis, representation
theory, and number theory and is an active area of interplay between mathematics
and physics. This project will focus primarily on geometric aspects, frequently
in settings in which Lie group representations play a central role. Symmetric
spaces are the model spaces of Riemannian geometry. One focus of the research
will be the question of whether symmetric spaces are spectrally distinguishable
from other geometry objects. Other aspects of the research will be the
relationship between the spectral data and various geometric properties such as
the lengths of closed geodesics.