* 0906525
* Quantum State Resolved Charge Dynamics in Nanoscale Heterostructures at Low Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 510,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; This
program will extend the coherent multidimensional spectroscopy (CMDS) methods
developed at the University of Wisconsin to coherent electron transport in
semiconducting nanostructures. The methods will resolve the individual quantum
states of coherent transport by creating multiple quantum coherences of states
throughout the complex nanostructures of our future solar collectors. The new
methods will define the quantum states involved in coherent electron transfer,
isolate specific coherence pathways, narrow broad spectral features, reduce
spectral congestion, resolve higher order processes, access the zero quantum
coherences and double quantum coherences that define the energies and dephasing
rates of multiexcitons, define the correlations between states created by charge
transfer, isolate and measure the coherent and incoherent dynamics, and create
spectroscopic signatures for the individual materials in a nanostructure. The
samples include quantum dots, quantum wires, hyperbranched tree structures,
core-shell structures, nanowire heterojunctions, and quantum wires on TiO2. This
program has nine goals- 1) creating spectroscopic signatures using multiple
states; 2) exploring the spectra and dynamics of multiexcitonic states; 3) probe
the potential energy surface that guides electrons in a nanostructure; 4)
identify the mechanism of charge multiplication; 5) expand the range of
nanostructured materials; 6) create multiple quantum coherences across a
nanostructured heterojunction; 7) probe donor-acceptor coupling of
multiexcitons; 8) define the quantum state alignment across heterojunctions; 9)
use charge transfer across heterojunctions to harvest the multiexcitons created
by charge multiplication.&lt;br/&gt; The project will provide the insights and
measurement tools for the synthesis of new nanostructures that incorporate
coherent electron transport. Coherent electron transport is fundamental to
making materials that have minimal energy loss in changing solar energy into
electrical or chemical energy. It will provide deeper fundamental insights to
the quantum states and dynamics in nanostructures and guide efforts to develop
better materials. The project will use five methods to disseminate our
discoveries to the broader scientific community- 1) the International Conference
on Multidimensional Spectroscopy; 2) a tutorial web site; 3) a complete on-line
course in nonlinear spectroscopy and CMDS; 4) tutorial papers and book chapters;
5) conference and university presentations; 6) collaboration with nanostructure
development research groups and faculty and students of color at Spelman
College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; Solar energy is
the most likely global solution to the world?s long-range energy needs. Solar
energy can be either directly converted to electricity or catalytically
converted into fuels that store the energy for later use. One of the most
promising methods for harvesting solar energy is using nanostructures which
absorb the light to create electrons and holes, separate the electrons and holes
before they recombine, and either deliver the electricity to power equipment or
use the electrons and holes in catalytic chemical reactions to create fuels. In
order to have the highest solar energy conversion efficiencies, it is important
to reduce all the factors that loose energy. Coherent electron transfer has no
energy loss. It occurs most commonly in superconductors at very low temperatures
but it can also occur in nanostructures at room temperature because the
distances are short and quantum effects are important. This project?s goal is to
develop the insights and tools required to create a new family of complex
nanostructures that incorporate coherent electron transport. Charge
multiplication is a promising approach to raising conversion efficiency because
it uses all the colors in the solar spectrum and no energy is wasted. This
project will develop new femtosecond laser methods that can directly observe the
coherent electron transfer and charge multiplication with quantum state
resolution. The methods will extend discoveries made at the University of
Wisconsin to the field of solar energy. The ability to directly see coherent
electron transfer and charge multiplication will guide synthetic materials
chemists? efforts to design materials that optimize the transfer and solar
energy collection efficiency. This project will involve collaborative work with
solar energy researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratories, synthetic
materials chemists and surface chemists at the University of Wisconsin, and
faculty and students of color at Spelman College. It will also develop a
tutorial web site, on-line course materials, and professional conferences for
outreach and dissemination of these new discoveries to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;