* 0906592
* Generalized Linear Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Peter McCullagh, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal focuses on mathematical models for the selection of experimental
or observational units in sample surveys, traffic studies, ecological surveys
and clinical trials. The PI studies the concept of auto-generation of units, a
marked point process for the occurrence of events, interpreted as observational
units, the mark incorporating all relevant quantitative information. This is
intended as a probabilistic model for situations such as marketing studies and
animal behaviour surveys, where each sampling unit is a event having a random
type or mark, including both covariate and response. Since the number of units
and the covariate configuration are both random, care must be taken in
calculating the response distribution because different schemes for sampling the
point process yield different sampling distributions. The sampling scheme may be
biased in the sense that it favours larger values of the response. Less obvious
biases may occur in samples drawn from binary random-effects models. For
example, there may be interference from the covariate value for other events.
Moreover, the response distribution for a unit taken by quota sample from a
fixed covariate stratum need not be the same as the conditional distribution for
an autogenerated unit having the same covariate value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the traditional statistical formulation taken from field trials, the set of
units is regarded as fixed in advance, and treatment is assigned at random to
those fixed units. In survey work, the sample units are selected from the
population by an objective randomization mechanism independent of the
response.&lt;br/&gt;By contrast, in animal behaviour studies, each behaviour
event is a unit, and neither the number nor the configuration of units is pre-
specified. In clinical trials, the patients are not fixed in advance, nor are
they selected by random sampling. Instead, they are volunteers, to some extent
self-selected, and frequently subject to pre-screening to improve compliance
rates. The aim of this work is to develop probabilistic schemes tailored to
biased-sampling schemes of this sort, where the response distribution among
sampled units may be different from the response distribution in the broader
population.