* 0906083
* US-Brazil: PhD Dissertation-  Quantifying fruit yields of a major forest crop in Amazonia's last frontier: do pollinators matter?
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Roxaneh Khorsand Rosa, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 03/31/2012
* USD 18,000.00

This dissertation research proposal aims to support Ms. Roxaneh S. Khorsand
working under PI Dr. Suzanne Koptur to conduct research in Brazil on the
reproductive biology of a particular non-timber forest product in Roraima,
Brazil, namely the dioecious palm, Mauritia flexuosaa, also known as "buriti".
Ms. Rozaneh will collaborate with two mentors in Brazil and share their
laboratory facilities. They are: (a) Dr. Reinaldo Barbosa, a primary researcher
at the National Institute for Amazonian Research (INPA); and (b) Dr. Silvana
Buzato, an ecology professor and pollination specialist at the University of Sao
Paulo, Brazil. Graduate student Khorsand will also compare the palm's
pollination and fruit set among undisturbed habitats and habitats fragmented by
soy plantations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goals of the research are
to: 1) elucidate the pollination biology of this species; 2) quantify pollinator
diversity in each habitat; and 3) determine if pollinators and fruit set differ
across habitats, and if they do, identify the ecological and physiological
causes of these differences. Furthermore, the study will examine the
consequences of anthropogenic disturbance for the reproductive success of the
species, including an anthropological component to gain a better understanding
of the cultural and economic importance of the palm.