* 0906966
* Experimental Interrogation of Exciton Dynamics within One-Dimensional Semiconductor Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Richard Loomis, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 356,048.00

Technical. This project utilizes and combines synthesis expertise with unique
optical spectroscopic measurements, to create novel electronic/photonic
materials, and to seek greater understanding of the chemical roles that internal
and surface compositions as well as capping ligands play in influencing quantum
wire photoluminescence (PL) lifetimes, quantum yields, and intensity
intermittency. Materials to be explored include CdSe, CdTe, InP, and InAs. The
research approach includes: determination of the origin and mechanism of the PL
intensity fluctuations recently observed along entire quantum wells (QWs);
measurement of exciton lifetimes and relaxation processes within single QWs as a
function of material uniformity and surface composition; characterization of
variations in the potential energy and the energetics of trap sites along single
QWs by recording spectra and PL lifetime data as a function of temperature; and
probing exciton diffusion along the long axis of single QWs. Non-Technical. The
project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of
electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance. There is
potential that the research could substantially impact the development of novel
electronic devices and sensors. Participation in this research program will be a
primary foundation for the education of graduate students with a significant
role for undergraduates. The PI will continue to bring students from
underrepresented backgrounds into his group to enhance their science education.
He is active in three programs (including co-founder of a minority outreach
research program) that strive to expose young minds to the wonders of science
and independent research. The integration of coursework learning and research
has been found to have a very significant impact on the retention of students in
science, and this approach will continue to be emphasized.