* 0906703
* Crystallographic Textures Induced by Dry Sliding Wear in Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2013
* USD 315,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The crystallographic textures generated by dry sliding wear in metallic elements
and alloys are investigated in this project. These crystallographic textures
develop in the severely plastically deformed (SPD) nanograin layers that are
produced by wear just below the sliding surfaces, and extend over a depth of the
order of one micrometer. In contrast to textures produced by metal-forming
processes such as rolling, drawing, or extrusion, there is only partial and
scattered data on wear-induced textures. This is despite the fact that texture
is known to affect friction and wear. The main objectives of this research are
firstly to investigate systematically the effects of wear parameters, such as
load, sliding velocity, and temperature, and material parameters, such as
twinning tendency and initial grain size, on texturing. Textures are evaluated
by electron backscattering diffraction in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and
by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Secondly, since standard methods do
not provide a direct measurement of plastic strain in the SPD layer owing to
grain fragmentation, a specific method is implemented where pre-existing
nanoscale precipitates are used as markers. TEM characterization of the
precipitate shape evolution provides direct measurement of plastic strain.
Thirdly, the mechanical properties of the textured nanograined layers are
determined by combining indentation and scratch tests, both at the micro and
nanoscale using nanotribometry. Integration of all these results will contribute
to designing a strategy to select materials with improved friction and wear
response by taking advantage of the crystallographic texturing induced by
sliding wear. The impact of the proposed research is broadened by developing and
integrating 2 modules, one on wear and the other one on texture, into an
existing senior laboratory course and by providing research experience for
undergraduate students. The research also benefits from an international
collaboration with Prof. Chevalier (France) on texture induced by severe plastic
deformation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Premature wear is the primary cause of failure of many mechanical systems,
leading to losses estimated to well over 100 billion dollars in the U.S. alone.
The development of materials with lower friction coefficient and improved wear
resistance could reduce these losses as well as improve energy consumption. To
that end, the present research aims at developing the knowledge and
understanding of the crystallographic textures, i.e. the distribution of
crystallographic orientations of grains in a polycrystalline material, that are
stabilized by dry sliding wear in metallic materials. While texture control is
widely used in industry to optimize the processing and the properties of use of
materials, lack of knowledge has prevented until now the application of a
similar approach to guide the design and the selection of wear resistant
materials. The proposed research attempts to bridge this knowledge gap by taking
advantage of important advances in characterization techniques such as
orientation imaging microscopy and transmission electron microscopy, as well as
in nanoscale mechanical testing. The research will provide education for one
graduate and three undergraduate students in the important technological field
of wear. Special effort will be made to recruit female and underrepresented
minority students. An international collaboration with Prof. Chevalier (France)
will also be established.