* 0906521
* FRG: Coherence and Entanglement in Correlated Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Dale Van Harlingen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,520,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The ability to control the flow of electrons
through materials has been the key to technological progress in our society.
Common electronic technology is based primarily on the ?classical? motion of
electrons through metals or semiconductors. However, the next revolution in
electronics will likely be based on the ?quantum mechanical? properties of
electrons, such as their wave-like behavior and inherent ?spin?. These
properties may form the basis of advanced cryptography and ultra-powerful
?quantum? computers. The goal of this research is to study and control such
quantum electronics in nano-scale materials such as carbon nanotubes,
superconducting wires, and magnetic wires. These materials are relevant because
of their potential applications; they are also interesting because of the
diverse phenomena stemming from their strongly interacting electrons. The
research will target physics at the nano-scale, which is the next frontier for
technology and where quantum properties are prevalent. A series of experiments
supported by theories will work toward implementation of advanced quantum
electronic devices and address fundamental, open questions regarding the
behavior of electrons in nano-scale materials. The collaborative structure of
the research will provide a rich environment for training undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in a broad spectrum of
nanotechnology and materials-related work. Educational aspects will be further
integrated through the development of courses directly related to the proposed
research and through research-related seminars and meetings that target high-
school teachers, women, and underrepresented minorities.

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The goal of this project is to observe and
characterize the properties of correlated electron pairs at nanoscale interfaces
between superconductors and strongly-correlated materials. Coherent electron
pairs emerging from superconducting sources will be studied in materials such as
nanotubes, graphene, and ferromagnetic wires. In addition, methods for splitting
injected Cooper pairs and then non-locally preserving quantum correlations will
be developed, with the ultimate goal of realizing solid-state quantum
entanglers. Experimental measurements of transport, phase coherence, and noise
correlations will be supported by theoretical studies. The research will address
major issues such as the influence of competing ordered states, the proximity
effect at superconductor-correlated state interfaces, quantum phenomena in
reduced dimensions, and optimal configurations for entanglement tests. This work
will enable significant progress in our understanding of strongly-correlated
nanoscale systems, and may form the basis of future solid-state quantum
cryptography, teleportation, and quantum computation devices. The collaborative
structure of the research will provide a rich environment for training
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in a broad
spectrum of nanotechnology-related work. Educational aspects will be further
integrated through the development of courses directly related to the proposed
research and through research-related seminars and meetings that target high-
school teachers, women, and underrepresented minorities.