* 0906790
* Nonparametric Curve Estimation in the Presence of Nuisance Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Sam Efromovich, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 345,000.00

The proposal focuses on developing statistical methodology, theory and methods
of adaptive nonparametric curve estimation in the presence of nuisance
functions. It is motivated by biological and medical applications. The
investigator studies four main classes of considered problems. Each is
classified by how an estimator can match the performance of an oracle knowing
underlying nuisance functions. They are: (a) Estimator can match oracle. An
example is a regression problem with a smooth design density being nuisance
function. (b) Estimator can match oracle if complementary observations are
available. Examples are deconvolution and regression with measurement errors in
predictors where complementary observations are needed to estimate distribution
of measurement error. (c) Estimator cannot match oracle. An example is
estimation of the density of regression error when a nuisance regression
function is not sufficiently smooth. (d) A mixture of the above-formulated
settings. It is proposed to develop a general theory of adaptive estimation for
the aforementioned classes of statistical problems with particular applications
to: missing, stratified and censored data, hidden components, mixed multivariate
models involving continuous and nominal or ordinal categorical variables, and
time series. Theoretical results are tested and applied to the analysis of ChIP-
on-chip microarrays and ultra-fast fMRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus
of the research is to create adaptive statistical procedures which can work in
the presence of nuisance functions. This research is motivated by and tested on
well-understood applications in the statistical analysis of: (i) ChIP-on-chip
microarrays used to find regulatory protein binding sites in a bacterial genome.
Interactions between protein and DNA are fundamental to life. They facilitate
and mediate gene expression, DNA replication and repair. The proposed
statistical analysis of ChIP-on-chip microarrays points on exact location of
protein-DNA binding sites. Because the statistical analysis does not require
measuring of nuisance functions, it makes microarray experiments cheaper, faster
and more accurate. (ii) Ultra-fast functional magnet resonance images, which
help in understanding aging and brain diseases such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's Diseases. Ultra-fast fMRI is an exciting new technology for studying
brain functions with the temporal resolution of 50 milliseconds. This resolution
sheds light on both neurons and physiological activities in the brain. Proposed
statistical analysis, which is robust to nuisance functions, can denoise
emodynamic responses, study cognitive functions like memory, speech and emotion,
and create a map of physiological activities of the human brain.