* 0906904
* New Sonochemical Methodologies for Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Kenneth Suslick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2012
* USD 340,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The chemical effects of ultrasound do not come from a direct interaction with
molecular species. Instead, sonochem¬istry arises from acoustic cavitation: the
formation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles in a liquid. Collapse of
bubble clouds pro¬duces in¬tense local heating (&#61627;5000 K), high pressures
(~1000 atm), enormous heating/cooling rates (>1010 K/sec), all in isolated sub-
micron reactors (each bubble is 10-15 L). Cavita¬tion provides a unique
interaction of energy and matter. The overall goal in this proposed research is
to develop a fundamental understanding of the nature and applications of
ultrasound in the synthesis of new nanostructured materials. The specific
objectives in the proposed work fall into three areas: (1) synthesis of novel
nanostructured materials from the sonolysis of volatile precursors (i.e.,
?homogeneous? sonochemistry); (2) the effects of acoustic cavitation in liquids
on materials in the liquid, specifically liquid-powder slurries (i.e.,
?heterogeneous? sonochemistry), and (3) synthesis of novel nanostructured
materials using ultrasonic spray pyrolysis. Cavitation in liquid-solid slurries
generates shockwaves that can drive solid particles together at velocities that
approach the speed of sound in the liquid. These interparticle collisions can
have dramatic effects on the reactivities of the powders. There exists a simple
model of the nature of these interparticle collisions based on the competing
factors of increasing cross-section vs. increasing viscous drag which will be
quantitatively tested by both direct microscopy of slurries after sonication and
by real time observation of the mechanoluminescence produced by particle
fragmentation. Finally a new synthetic methodology based on ultrasonic spray
pyrolysis of a hot liquid nanodroplets in a gas will be explored as a
potentially displacing technology for the synthesis of nanoparticles and
nanostructured materials. Of special focus will be (1) hierarchically
nanostructured carbons and carbon quantum dots and (2) encapsulated nanoparticle
aluminum and nanothermites.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The chemical effects of ultrasound do not come from a direct interaction with
molecules. Instead, sonochem¬istry arises from ?cavitation?: the formation,
growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles in a liquid. Collapse of bubble clouds
pro¬duces localized hot spots with temperatures as hot as the surface of the
sun, pressures as large as at the bottom of the ocean, with durations shorter
than a lightening bolt. The field of sonochemistry has undergone a renaissance
during the past decade. As the scientific understanding of the chemical effects
of ultrasound has grown, so too has the impact of sonochemistry on a wide range
of the physical sciences. Importantly, sonochemistry also has substantial
strategic research significance to the U.S. industrial economy. Ultrasound
already has major industrial applications (e.g., cleaning, welding,
emulsification, biotech processing), and the U.S. dominates the world market in
production of ultrasonic equipment. Commercial generators of high intensity
ultrasound for large scale liquid processing are available off the shelf, and
ultrasonic cleaning is now the standard for both general purpose industrial and
microelectronics applications. Thus, the development of sonochemistry and its
applications will advance a global market in which the U.S. has a significant
commercial advantage. Broader impacts also include the education of the general
public about sonochemistry, e.g., through popularized articles which the PI has
written for essentially all the general science magazines and major
encyclopedias. Significant pre-college outreach efforts are made by the PI and
his research group, which impact some 3000 youngsters annually. Finally,
substantial success has been made in advanced technical training: during this
past grant, 10 Ph.D.?s were graduated, including 4 women and one African-
American.