* 0906011
* NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Matthew Helmus, Helmus                  Matthew        R
* Fellowship Award
* Julie Dickerson
* 12/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
training and development plan is entitled "Testing for an effect of common
ancestry on species interactions" for Matthew R. Helmus. The host institution
for this research is the University of Chicago, and the sponsoring scientist is
Timothy J. Wootton. A portion of this research will be performed at the
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, Yunnan, China under the tutelage of
Charles H. Cannon. Interactions among species, such as competition and
predation, are fundamental drivers of biological diversification. Because
interactions depend on species traits and traits evolve and reflect common
ancestry, one would expect to see phylogenetic signal in how species interact.
Phylogenetic signal is the propensity for closely related species to have
similar traits (e.g., frogs look like frogs and snakes look like snakes).
However, there are few explicit tests to determine whether directly measured
species interactions do in fact show phylogenetic signal. This research compiles
an extensive set of species interaction data that were directly measured by
experiment and observation and develops the statistical tools to test how
phylogenetic signal varies across different types of direct and indirect
interactions. Thus, this research searches for evidence to support a widely held
but largely untested assumption in the evolutionary and ecological sciences and
creates a statistical foundation for applied research into the use of phylogeny
to predict, for example, the impact of introduced species on native species.

This project has strong international, open-source software development, and
mentoring components. Software that streamlines data processing and analyses is
being developed in collaboration with scientists at the Xishuangbanna Tropical
Botanical Garden, Yunnan, China. Interaction and phylogenetic data sets are
being compiled and statistical models are being developed at the University of
Chicago in collaboration with the sponsoring research laboratory. These
bioinformatic tools and data sets are being disseminated and made freely
available to the public. Furthermore, the Fellow is mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students on independent research projects directly related to his
research topic both in China and the United States.