* 0906229
* Teichmüller Theory, Kleinian Groups, and the Complex of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Brock, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 210,754.00

The classification of finitely generated Kleinian groups and their associated
quotient hyperbolic 3-manifolds has generated significant new tools for studying
many problems at the interfaces of Teichmüller theory, Kleinian groups and low-
dimensional topology. In particular, the existence of a model manifold for a
hyperbolic 3-manifold M that is uniformly bi-Lipschitz to M has foregrounded the
extent to which many problems in the study of closed and finite volume
hyperbolic 3- manifolds can be understood in terms of combinatorial structures
associated to surfaces. Likewise, large-scale questions in the geometry of
Teichmüller space have come into relief in terms of a new understanding of these
combinatorics: the asymptotic geometry of geodesics in various metrics has been
reconstituted and understood in a new language, yet the structure of the
classical Weil-Petersson metric from this point of view remains largely unclear
and tantalizingly open. Our proposed research will demonstrate how model
manifolds serve as building blocks for hyperbolic structures on closed manifolds
via Heegaard splittings, to develop control on the synthetic geometry and
dynamics of the Weil-Petersson metric on Teichmüller space via the complex of
curves, and to continue to reveal applications of the model manifolds to the
topology of deformation spaces of hyperbolic 3-manifolds.

The idea of a "coarse model" in geometry proposes that one might sacrifice a
certain degree of precision in the interest of capturing more large-scale
structure. Frequently a coarse model plays a similar role to DNA in biology: it
can determine fine features of a space despite its apparently coarse nature. In
a recent result of the P.I. with R. Canary and Y. Minsky, such models were used
to classify all `constantly negatively curved,' or `hyperbolic' three-
dimensional spaces of infinite volume that are `tame' in a certain sense. The
classification result solved a long-standing conjecture of William Thurston, and
opened the door to developing a more detailed and complete picture of geometries
on manifolds previously considered understood. After Perelman's solution to
Thurston's geometrization conjecture and the famous Poincaré conjecture, the
groundwork is in place for a fundamental investigation of algebraic, geometric
and topological properties of all spaces of 3-dimensions and how these
properties interrelate.