* 0906711
* Experimental Studies of Graphene Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Eva Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2014
* USD 409,500.00

-----------------Technical
abstract---------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene, the recently
isolated two dimensional crystal of carbon, &lt;br/&gt;possesses extraordinary
electronic properties arising from a low energy &lt;br/&gt;excitation spectrum
which mimics ultra relativistic particles. This &lt;br/&gt;makes it possible to
achieve high quality field-effect transistors and &lt;br/&gt;to observe the
quantum Hall effect at room-temperature. The object of &lt;br/&gt;this work is
to access the intrinsic properties of graphene by isolating &lt;br/&gt;it from
the environment and to explore the emergence of new physical
&lt;br/&gt;phenomena in response to the controlled introduction of chemical or
&lt;br/&gt; mechanical perturbations. We will seek to understand and minimize
&lt;br/&gt;environmental effects on the electronic properties by exploring the
&lt;br/&gt;influence of various substrates as well as that of removing the
&lt;br/&gt;substrate altogether. We will explore the role of interactions,
&lt;br/&gt;boundaries, magnetic field and dopants on the quasiparticle spectrum
in &lt;br/&gt;search of emergent phases and new physical properties. We will
&lt;br/&gt;investigate the feasibility of fabricating graphene nano-devices
based &lt;br/&gt;on these properties. The primary experimental probes in this
project &lt;br/&gt;include scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy atomic
force &lt;br/&gt;microscopy and magneto-transport. Work on this project will be
carried &lt;br/&gt;out with the active participation of students at the
undergraduate and &lt;br/&gt;graduate level and with post doctoral fellows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;----------Non-technical
abstract------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The recent
discovery of graphene, a two-dimensional crystal consisting &lt;br/&gt;of a
single atomic plane of graphite, gives access to extraordinary
&lt;br/&gt;electronic properties arising from charge carriers that mimic
&lt;br/&gt;ultra-relativistic particles. Because of the low dimensionality and
the &lt;br/&gt;possibility of attaining charge transport with exceptionally high
&lt;br/&gt;carrier mobility, graphene holds the promise of becoming the building
&lt;br/&gt;block for a new generation of nanoelectronics devices. The goal of
this &lt;br/&gt;project is to access the intrinsic properties of graphene by
isolating &lt;br/&gt;it from the environment and to explore the emergence of new
physical &lt;br/&gt;phenomena and new phases of matter in response to the
controlled &lt;br/&gt;introduction of chemical or mechanical perturbations. We
will explore &lt;br/&gt;the feasibility of fabricating graphene nano-devices
based on these &lt;br/&gt;properties. The primary experimental probes will
include scanning &lt;br/&gt;tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, atomic force
microscopy and &lt;br/&gt;magneto-transport. Work on this project will be
carried out with the &lt;br/&gt;active participation of students at the
undergraduate and graduate &lt;br/&gt;level. Work on this project will be
carried out with the active &lt;br/&gt;participation of students at the
undergraduate, graduate and post &lt;br/&gt;doctoral levels. They will receive
training in cutting edge research and &lt;br/&gt;in the use of state of the art
equipment that will prepare them for &lt;br/&gt;filling demanding technical and
research positions.&lt;br/&gt;