* 0906825
* Phase-Change Memory Material in Periodic Mesoporous Silica: Structure and Phase-Transition Behavior under One-Dimensional Confinement
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gang Chen, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 357,373.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Non-volatile memories such as those used in DVDs retain
stored information even when power is not supplied. Phase-change memories (PCM),
due to their high-speed phase transitions used for information storage, have
attracted tremendous interest as a highly promising candidate for next-
generation non-volatile memories. A major challenge needs to be overcome -- that
is, phase changes usually demand high power consumption making PCM less power
efficient than their low-speed counterparts. The goal of this project is to
resolve this issue by testing the hypothesis that PCM materials confined in
nanosized cylindrical pores with unusual structures and thermodynamic behaviors
could exhibit enhanced material properties that lead to reduced power
consumption. State-of-the-art characterization tools will be employed including
synchrotron X-ray techniques. Work on the nanoscale confinement of PCM materials
is also closely collaborated with a leading theoretical research group at Ohio
University (OU) to further investigate the mechanisms of phase transitions in
the confined PCM. This project offers abundant opportunities for students at all
levels to be trained in a cross-disciplinary setting. In addition to supporting
graduate students at OU, internships are provided for underrepresented
undergraduate students to conduct research at both OU and Argonne National
Laboratory. Students will have the opportunity to access a variety of world-
class synchrotron facilities at the Advanced Photon
Source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;PCM materials are very
promising candidates for applications in next-generation non-volatile memory
devices because they exhibit high-speed phase transitions under electrical pulse
excitation. An outstanding issue lies in the fact that fast phase transitions
also demand high power usage. This research aims to address this problem by
exploring the nanoscale confinement of PCM materials which could result enhanced
properties that lead to reduced power consumptions. The PCM material chosen for
this study is a PCM prototype, Ge2Sb2Te5. Periodic mesoporous silica glasses
with cylindrical pores and various pore sizes (2 - 30 nm) that are synthesized
through a sol-gel process act as the confining media. Subsequently, magnetron
sputtering is used to finish the confining process by filling the pores with
Ge2Sb2Te5. The characterization part employs a variety of techniques including
synchrotron-based X-ray absorption fine structure, small/wide-angle X-ray
scattering, and X-ray microdiffraction. As a computational aspect of this
project, molecular dynamic simulations are also performed to help further
understand the relationship between the engineered structures and the phase-
transition mechanisms as well as other material properties such as electronic
and transport properties. This research project is expected to provide a general
approach to significantly advance both the understanding and applications of
existing PCM materials. Students, including those from underrepresented groups,
will be trained on an extensive series of topics such as glass science,
semiconductor materials and devices, self-assembly-based nanotechnology, and
advanced X-ray characterization techniques.