* 0906109
* Vortex dynamics in quantum and classical fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Katepalli Sreenivasan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;At very low temperatures, liquid helium
becomes a superfluid with unusual properties and zero viscosity owing to quantum
mechanical effects. One unusual aspect of superfluids is the existence of
quantum vortices, sort of quantum mechanical tornadoes, that form the backbone
of superfluid helium flow. This award supports a project using a unique
technique to observe the formation and motion of the quantum vortices. Most of
the phenomena the project will explore have not been seen before and include the
motion of vortex rings and the crossing of the vortices which causes a violent
snapping at the point when they touch. Undergraduate and graduate students form
the heart of the project as they learn many new techniques and prepare for
scientific careers. Beyond a better understanding of how superfluidity is
different from normal fluids, the research serves an unusually broad need for
scientific discovery in related systems involving deformation of metals, solar
magnetic fields, geophysics of rotating flows, and high energy theory involving
the Higgs field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT ****
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to investigate and characterize the
formation and dynamics of quantized vortices in superfluid helium. These studies
will use a unique capability to visualize micron-sized hydrogen particles, which
can be trapped by the vortices. The research focuses on studying vortex
reconnection, vortex rings, thermal counterflows, rotating flows, and quantum
turbulence. Furthermore, the project will explore the similarities and
differences between quantum and classical turbulence in order to better
understand both. Quantized vortices in superfluid helium serve as a model for a
number of other systems, such that this project has the possibility to impact
not only a number of sub-fields in condensed matter physics, but also
astrophysics, solar physics, the geophysics of rotating flows, and high energy
theory involving the Higgs field. The project broadens its impact through the
involvement and training of undergraduate and graduate researchers, and through
public outreach activities.