* 0906921
* Topics in Ultracold Fermi Gases and Topological Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Anthony Leggett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 555,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education that
will explore two separate realms of condensed matter theory. The first area
concerns various questions in the theory of very degenerate Fermi or Bose
systems, with particular reference to the ultracold alkali gas systems where
they may receive experimental input. Specifically, studies will be made of (a)
the occurrence or not of a first- order phase transition in an s-wave
superconductor containing magnetic impurities; (b) ?pseudo-Couette? flow in the
presence of dipolar forces; (c) the angular momentum of a ?p+ip? Fermi
superfluid; and (d) the decay of persistent currrents in a Bose-condensed
system. The second area will be evaluating the prospects for the implementation
of topological quantum computation in the strongly layered superconductor
strontium ruthenate. The questions to be investigated are (a) the complications
caused by the probable domain-type in homogeneities in this system; (b) the
general conditions for the existence of thermodynamically stable ?halfquantum
vortices? in a p+ip Fermi superfluid, and possible reasons for the failure to
observe them in the A phase of superfluid helium; and (c) the nature of the
many-body groundstate wave function of a system that can sustain ?Majorana
fermions? and the general conditions for the latter to exist.

The problem of the formation of Cooper pairs in a system of degenerate fermions
was posed more than 50 years ago. Although progress has been made at the mean-
field level in the past half-century, many questions, even in the case of simple
s-wave pairing, remain unanswered. For example, under what circumstances, if
any, do magnetic impurities induce a first-order phase transition at low
temperatures? In the case of anisotropic pairing, some even more basic
questions, such as the intrinsic angular momentum of the state believed to
correspond to the A phase of superfluid helium, have still not received a
definitive answer. There is now a real hope of answering some of these questions
experimentally in the ultracold alkali gases, and this project will provide a
theoretical framework for such experiments.

A specific implementation of one of the most intriguing ideas to have emerged in
the field of quantum information over the last few years, namely topological
quantum computation, will also be addressed in this project. An explicit
analysis not only of the elementary excitations of the topologically nontrivial
class of systems in question but also of the nature of the many-body groundstate
will be undertaken, as well as a more ?nuts and bolts? assessment of the
constraints due to the physical properties of the specific system of choice.

This research program will provide excellent opportunities for the education and
training of graduate students in analytical and mathematical methods at the
cutting edge of condensed matter theory research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
two broad areas. One exploits the potential of atoms at very low temperature
trapped by light waves to address conceptual issues raised by the study of
materials, such as superconductors which develop a cooperative electronic state
at sufficiently low temperatures often noted for its ability to carry electric
current without dissipation. These fundamental questions are difficult to
resolve in materials, but might succumb to experiments on systems of trapped
cold atoms. The second area involves the study of vortices in an unusual kind of
superconductor, where it has been theoretically shown that one can carry out the
fundamental operations of computing by moving vortices around each other. The PI
will study the extent to which this form of quantum computing, the manipulation
of a quantum mechanical state to perform computation, is theoretically possible
through a careful study of the superconducting electronic state and the effects
of other defects, besides vortices.

This research program will provide excellent opportunities for the education and
training of graduate students in analytical and mathematical methods at the
cutting edge of condensed matter theory research.

