* 0906415
* Elucidating the Anomalous Metallic State in Strongly Correlated Two-D Fermions with Density of States Measurements
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Loren Pfeiffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 342,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

**** NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Two-dimensional (2D) electron systems, systems
where the motion of the electrons is confined to a plane, i.e. 2D, are not only
relevant to advanced microelectronic and optoelectronic devices, but also
important platforms in the study of electrons in reduced dimensions. In the past
few decades, 2D electron systems based on semiconductor nano-scale structures
(quantum wells) have revealed a plethora of remarkable phenomena which have led
to many discoveries and subsequently a deeper understanding of various quantum
states of matter. A current focal point in 2D electron physics research is the
study of how the strong Coulomb interaction between electrons influences the
system?s electronic properties. Conventional wisdom based on weak Coulomb
interaction asserts that all 2D electron systems are insulators as long as there
are impurities in the sample. However, recent experiments have shown that 2D
electrons can show a puzzling metal-like state if the Coulomb interaction
between electrons is strong. This project will employ thermodynamic and
tunneling experiments as spectroscopic tools to elucidate the nature of 2D
electron systems in the metallic phase. The scientific results obtained will
shed new light on the long standing problems of the puzzling metallic phase and
metal-to-insulator transition in 2D electrons. In addition, this research will
advance understanding of current questions of great interest, such as what
happens to the properties of a material when the electrons? motions are strongly
correlated with each other. Through educating and training students, this
project will strengthen the nation?s workforce in science and technology. This
project will support a full time graduate student towards his/her PhD degree and
will also train part time undergraduate students. Graduate and undergraduate
students will gain laboratory skills that will be excellent preparation for them
to continue toward career in both academia and industry.

**** TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The metal-insulator transition (MIT) in two
dimensions (2D) is a long- standing unsolved problem at the heart of condensed
matter physics, as a 2D metallic state challenges the celebrated scaling theory
of localization which asserts that all disordered 2D Fermion systems are
localized (insulating) at zero magnetic field. Although more than ten years have
passed since the first report of a possible 2D MIT in silicon, there is still no
consensus on the underlying mechanism of the metallic-like transport behavior in
strongly correlated 2D Fermion systems. This project will tackle the problem on
new fronts by focusing on spectroscopic studies in the metallic state. Both
thermodynamic and tunneling density of states (DOS) experiments will be
performed in addition to the conventional transport measurements to study the 2D
metallic state in p-type gallium arsenide quantum wells with high carrier
mobility. Through investigating the compressibility and energy-resolved
tunneling DOS spectra of the 2D metal, this project will lead to new insights to
some widely debated questions: e.g. is the ?2D metallic state? a new state of
matter? If so, what kind of electronic state of matter is it? This project will
also support a full time graduate student and several part time undergraduate
researchers. The experimental work to be implemented by the graduate and
undergraduate students will provide them a comprehensive education and training
in different research areas including low-temperature physics, nanofabrication
and low-noise experimentation. This training will motivate and prepare the
students for scientific careers in both academia and industry.