* 0906123
* Surface Engineering Strategies for Studying Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells (hMSCs).
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 325,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0906123 PI: Gopalan, Padma ORG: University of Wisconsin

Title: Surface Engineering Strategies for Studying Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells
(hMSCs)

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This proposal describes a three-year plan of integrated
research, education, and outreach on a biomaterial platform for studying human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). It is proposed to develop model platforms that
will allow for stable presentation of cell adhesion motifs over an extended time
frame, to clearly address the hypothesis: ECM-derived cell adhesion ligands
strongly influence osteogenic hMSC differentiation. The synthetic templates for
studying cellular interactions, should meet multiple requirements such as: (a)
presentation of multiple signals in optimized combinations on a bioinert
background, which requires synthetic flexibility, (b) ability to apply to a
range of planar and non-planar substrates, (c) stability over extended time
period for long differentiating cells, and (d) the ability to spatially localize
the signals. The last two requirements would extend the applicability of the
template to biomedical implants and devices. UV-crosslinked thin-films (30-50nm)
with 2-3 % of crosslinking will be examined. The intellectual impact of the
proposed research is in exploiting the attributes of crosslinked thin-films such
as exceptional stability, application to atypical substrates, chemical
tailorability to be cytophobic or cytophilic, and photo-patternability for
studying long differentiation processes. The specific tasks that will be
undertaken towards this goal are: (a) Materials synthesis of a range of UV-
crosslinkable copolymers based on polyethylene glycol copolymers containing a
controlled distribution of photo-crosslinkable and ligand (biological signals)
groups. (b) Evaluation of mechanical and chemical stability of the templates by
a combination of surface characterization methods and fluorophore tagged
peptides. (c) Study the cell adhesion, growth and differentiation in standard
cell culture medium and cell culture medium containing pro-osteogenic
supplements. (d) Evolve methodology to modify a variety of non planar substrates
by dipcoating, microcontact printing and use of an ultrasonic microplotter.

BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impact of the proposal will be developing a new
class of biomaterials coatings with unique set of properties for stem cell
studies. In order to clearly understand the effects of microenvironmental
signals on stem cell behavior, there is a critical need for experimental systems
that present specific signals, and complex signal combinations, to stem cells.
Ultimately, this line of research may result in identification of signals that
promote lineage-specific stem cell differentiation, leading to development and
optimization of substrates that promote stem cell differentiation in vitro and
in vivo. The PI and co-Pi also propose to introduce interdisciplinary curriculum
development through two courses, Polymeric Materials, based in Materials Science
& Engineering, and Stem Cell Bioengineering, based in Biomedical Engineering.
Ongoing educational outreach to the K-12 level will continue to develop hands-on
exhibits for use in school settings with special attention to matching the K-12
Science Standards of the State of Wisconsin. The PI and co-PI will mentor female
and underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students in their research
laboratories.