* 0906015
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2010,01/31/2012
* Tracy Teal, Teal                    Tracy          K
* Fellowship Award
* Julie Dickerson
* 01/31/2012
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009 using
funds from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). The training and development plan is entitled "Genomics of terrestrial
microbial communities associated with the production and consumption of
greenhouse gases" for Tracy Teal. The host institution for this research is
Michigan State University, and the sponsoring scientist is Thomas Schmidt.

Soil microbial communities have been affected by the conversion of native lands
to agricultural use. This conversion has resulted in an increased production of
carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide from soils and a decreased consumption of
methane. These changes exacerbate the problem of rising concentrations of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. This research (1) describes soil microbial
communities and quantifies the methane consumption and nitrous oxide flux in
areas under different land management practices, (2) compares the utility of
various methodological metagenomic techniques to assess the strengths and
limitations of particular data types, and (3) develops new easy-to-use tools for
metagenomic analysis, with a particular focus on protein domain finding.

Training objectives are to acquire analytical computational and mathematical
techniques and develop open-source tools for metagenomic data analysis. As the
acreage of land brought under agricultural management expands, due to increased
biofuel production as well as increased food production, an understanding of the
effects of agriculture on the microbiology of soils has broad impacts for land
management practices to mitigate potential negative consequences associated with
such uses. Additionally, open-source tools developed for this project are being
made available to the microbial ecology research community.