* 0906504
* Applications of Statistical Physics to Complex Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to apply non-equilibrium statistical physics to fundamental
natural processes, including interfaces in coarsening magnetic systems,
stochastically-driven search algorithms, diffusion of Brownian particles in
complex media, and evolutionary biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometry of
coarsening interfaces will be studied in the simplest geometrical setting of a
single infinite right angle corner that separates two broken-symmetry ordered
phases. In two dimensions, the smoothing of this corner interface can be exactly
solved by constructing an isomorphism between the corner interface and an
exclusion process. One of the goals of this work is to extend this approach to
the challenging case of the three-dimensional corner by developing a mapping
between the interface evolution and a 3-species exclusion process on the
hexagonal lattice and then solving the latter model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will construct optimized strategies for a searcher that seeks a target by
detecting tracer particles that are steadily emitted by the target. The searcher
adjusts its trajectory when tracers are detected so as to move closer to the
source. A range of strategies will be studied in order to find the optimal
search process as a function of fundamental parameters, such as the nature of
the tracer motion, the tracer lifetime and its concentration. Another research
project is to apply first-passage propagation as an efficient way to simulate
diffusion in porous media and, as a byproduct, provide a novel way to
reconstruct microscopic Brownian particle trajectories in a porous medium from
first-passage information at widely separated time intervals. Such information
would provide a non-invasive way to determine the micro-structure of porous
media in a non-invasive manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A complementary research
effort will be focused on determining the number of species of a given mass in
related animal groups. From basic features of fossil data, a minimalist
diffusion-reaction model can be distilled that accounts for the observed broad
distribution of the number of species of a given mass. The time dependence of
this distribution will now be studied, both to describe the species abundance
distribution in different epochs, and to understand how punctuated evolution
manifests itself in the development of species abundance
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute substantially
to graduate education by providing the basis for the Ph.D. thesis research of
several graduate students. Some of the research projects will be performed in
collaboration with colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) and at the newly-
relocated Schlumberger research lab in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The project on
species abundance has brought a more quantitative dimension to current SFI
efforts to understand macro-scale phenomena within systems biology. The projects
on first-passage propagation and trajectory reconstruction could provide
Schlumberger scientists with new theoretical tools to help predict the physical
properties of oil-bearing rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
advance statistical physics to encompass physical and material systems that are
far from equilibrium. Many important processes ranging from materials growth to
the physical processes that support life are nonquilibrium systems that lack the
intrinsic balance of (thermodynamic) forces that characterize equilibrium
systems, a pillar in the conceptual foundations of statistical physics.
Statistical physics has a broad reach and the research encompasses several
problems, among them is to better understand of the process of coarsening in
which interfaces that separate different phases in a material shrink and
eventually disappear. This process is ubiquitous in materials science. The PI
will also study diffusion through porous media with an aim to develop insights
that will enable one to deduce the nature of the porous material without
damaging the material. Finally, the PI will also apply the methods of
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics to problems at the interface of the
physical sciences with biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired in large part by
fundamental problems in materials science, this research contributes to the
further development of the powerful framework of statistical physics enabling
insights into a wide range of problems that extend beyond materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute substantially to
graduate education by providing the basis for the Ph.D. thesis research of
several graduate students. Some of the research projects will be performed in
collaboration with colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) and at the newly-
relocated Schlumberger research lab in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The project on
species abundance has brought a more quantitative dimension to current SFI
efforts to understand macro-scale phenomena within systems biology. The projects
on first-passage propagation and trajectory reconstruction could provide
Schlumberger scientists with new theoretical tools to help predict the physical
properties of oil-bearing rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;