* 0906584
* Solid Solution and Isotope Effects on the Properties of Boride Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on the
fundamental thermal properties and oxidation response of boride ceramics such as
zirconium diboride (ZrB2). Boride ceramics are capable of withstanding extreme
thermal, mechanical, and chemical environments such as those associated with
hypersonic flight, advanced ceramic-based cutting tools, buffer layers for
microelectronic circuits, and inert matrix fuel forms for nuclear reactors. A
deeper understanding of the thermal properties and oxidation response is needed
to enable designers of future systems to fully utilize the unique combination of
properties offered by refractory diborides and other ultra-high temperature
ceramics (UHTC). The ability to use these materials in commercial products would
allow systems to operate more reliably and at higher temperatures, which will
increase efficiency and decrease energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed effort is to understand the elevated temperature thermal properties and
environmental response of refractory diboride ceramics. Zirconium diboride will
serve as a representative system, but the research will also encompass other
diborides. The research is motivated by contradictory and unexplained thermal
property and oxidation results, which may be due to variations in the amounts
and compositions of impurities introduced during synthesis and processing. A
combination of experimental studies, physics-based modeling, and analytical
characterization will be used to investigate the roles of trace impurities,
intentional solid solution additions, and the isotopes of the constituent
elements on thermal properties and oxidation behavior. The research has the
potential to transform the understanding of boride ceramics, which could enable
their utilization in future generations of hypersonic aircraft, cutting tools,
electronic devices, or nuclear reactors. The project will train two graduate
students and at least one undergraduate per year in specialized techniques
required for processing, testing, and characterizing materials for extreme
environments. The project team will also promote potential careers in science
and engineering to K-12 students, primarily through a statewide math and science
competition for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;