* 0906443
* FRG: Switchable Two-Dimensional Materials at Oxide Hetero-Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,212,001.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Technical. The goal of this focused research
group (FRG) proposal is to achieve an atomic-level understanding of the growth
and novel properties of switchable oxide hetero-interfaces, with advanced
properties and new functionalities. The idea is to create new 2D interfacial
materials, switched by external stimuli, whose electronic, magnetic, optical,
and transport properties depend critically on atomic-scale materials
characteristics. Switchable interface materials with, spatially modulated
conductance, tunable by an applied electric field, and spin-polarized interface
materials responding to magnetic fields will be explored. The focus is on
identification and understanding of atomic level mechanisms and electrical
transport associated with atomic layer-by-layer synthesis. It is anticipated
that functionalizing 2DEGs at oxide interfaces may be transformative, in that it
could lead to new research fields where interplay between ferroelectricity and
2D transport reveals unexplored properties important for device applications.
Logic devices with switchable electron and/or spin current based on 2D interface
materials are envisioned. The approach involves a collaborative coordinated
effort to explore materials science issues of growth and novel properties of
switchable oxide hetero-interfaces. Specific tasks are (1) theoretical
exploration of the dependence of interfacial properties on materials
characteristics; (2) atomic layer epitaxial growth and characterization of
switchable two-dimensional oxide hetero-interface materials; (3) electrical
transport and magnetic characterization of interfacial electronic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having technological
relevance. This research is expected to identify and resolve fundamental
materials science issues in switchable 2D interfacial oxide heterostructures;
prototype electronic devices fabricated from these interfacial materials may
find new and wide-ranging applications. Education and outreach activities will
be integrated with the research. The education goal is to provide a broad
interdisciplinary experience for all students. This includes first-year student
rotation through research groups, working in an international institution and
the Argonne National Laboratory, research interactions with individuals of
diverse backgrounds, and participating in outreach programs. Students from
underrepresented groups will be actively recruited through collaboration with U.
Puerto Rico-Mayag√ºez. Secondary school teachers will come from Puerto Rico to
the U. WI for a nanoscience learning/research experience. They will develop
classroom material, and put in place programs for implementation at their
schools in Puerto Rico. Graduate students will be involved as mentors to the
teachers. The results of the program will be widely disseminated through teacher
presentations at schools and at education conferences, and through published
articles. &lt;br/&gt;