* 0906455
* An Internship Opportunity for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students in Polymer Blends
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 09/30/2013
* USD 198,171.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) students will participate in classroom and
laboratory research work in the field of polymer blends as novel proton exchange
membranes in fuel cell technologies. A small team of college-age students will
perform an internship at Tufts University for six weeks during the summer. The
classroom and laboratory components address the materials chemistry and physics
of polymers and polymer blends, crystallization and melting of polymers, the
interaction of X-rays and light with polymers, mechanical properties of
polymers, and the connection between thermal processing, structure, and ultimate
properties of polymers. DHH interns will make and characterize polymer blends,
comprising a semicrystalline polymer, poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF, with an
amorphous polymer, poly(4,5-vinyl imidizole), PVIm, protonated with a liquid
ionic salt, for ultimate use as novel proton exchange membranes for fuel cell
technologies. They will fabricate films, electro-spun fibers, and/or oriented
tapes, and characterize the structure and properties of the resulting materials.
This research will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the effects of
blend composition and thermal treatment on crystal structure of PVDF, and
ultimately on the potential of these blends to serve as proton exchange
membranes for fuel cell technologies.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

A fuel cell is used to convert chemical energy into electrical energy, which can
then be used to power devices. Use of hydrogen-based fuel cells may help reduce
dependence on foreign oil, and provide ?green? alternative energy sources.
Inside one type of fuel cell is a polymer membrane which allows hydrogen ions
(protons) to pass through in one direction, while blocking the flow of oxygen in
the other direction. Student interns will perform research to investigate
candidate materials for use as the polymer membrane in fuel cell technologies.
The program is aimed at a disadvantaged minority population, of deaf and hard of
hearing college age students. Students of all disability levels are candidates
for this program, including those students who neither hear nor voice nor lip-
read. The broader impact will be to transform the lives of the deaf and hard of
hearing students by bringing them into the larger scientific community as
professionals, by providing positive scientific experiences at a formative time
in their educational lives. The long-range goals of the proposed program are to
increase participation of deaf and hard of hearing students in science and
engineering, provide enrichment and mentoring for these students, while
contributing new materials for the Nation?s energy program.

