* 0906245
* Connecting Dynamical Structure and Statistical Analysis in Quasi-2D Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Nicholas Ouellette, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 320,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Complex systems that
are far from equilibrium are ubiquitous in nature; common examples include fluid
flows, weather systems, and many biological systems. Developing accurate and
efficient models for these types of systems is very important, but has proved to
be tremendously challenging. One of the central problems in modeling complex
systems is how to identify the salient features that produce the majority of the
observed phenomena. Statistical tools, which have proven very valuable in
treating equilibrium systems, have often been applied to complex systems as a
way to capture the average properties, with varying degrees of success. Models
have also been proposed that rest on the tendency of nonequilibrium systems to
self-organize spontaneously into dramatic structures, such as long-lived
vortices in fluid flows. This project seeks to bring these two approaches
together by conducting laboratory experiments in a two-dimensional fluid flow, a
flexible model system that both forms coherent structures and has well
characterized statistics. This project will provide concrete tools for
determining accurate simplifications of complex systems, and will lay the
groundwork for the next generation of models that combine structure and
statistics. The project will support the training of a Ph.D. student in both
nonlinear physics and in modern, high-precision fluid measurement techniques.
Undergraduates will also be involved in the research, both giving them research
experience in an interdisciplinary field and helping the Ph.D. student acquire
mentoring skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). This project seeks to find a link between two common descriptions of
complex, nonlinear systems: one based on specification of the statistical
properties, and one based on self-organized dynamical structures. Both
approaches have been studied previously, but little progress has been made on
joining the two. This project will address the connection between statistics and
structures using a model experimental system: a quasi-two-dimensional fluid flow
(generated by electromagnetic forcing of stably stratified thin layers) that can
be operated in the laminar, spatiotemporally chaotic, or turbulent regimes.
Several types of self-organized structures will be studied, including dynamic
topological singularities, spatially extended structure such as vortices, and
clusters of fluid elements that move and deform with the flow. The system will
be characterized by powerful particle-tracking techniques, which will be
released to other researchers as a part of this project. Additionally, a
database of the raw particle trajectories will be made available. The award will
support a Ph.D. student, who will carry out the experiments and thereby be
trained in the high- precision, flexible particle-tracking techniques employed
in the research. Undergraduates will also be involved in the project, giving
them strong research experience in an interdisciplinary field.