* 0906929
* Information-Theoretical Methods in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Zsolt Talata, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2013
* USD 110,000.00

The investigator studies statistical model selection problems using information
criteria approach. The research concentrates on two related problems:
statistical estimation of context trees and statistical estimation of basic
neighborhoods of Markov random fields. Statistical estimation of context trees
means estimating the memory structure of a discrete-time and finitely-valued
stochastic process from a realization of finite length. As the memory length may
depend on the actual past, the memory structure can be represented by a tree
graph. In the literature, the memory length is usually assumed to be bounded.
Then the process is a Markov chain, but the context tree model provides a more
efficient description of the memory structure. The research focuses on dropping
the finite memory assumption, therefore arbitrary stationary ergodic processes
are considered. Model selection methods using information criteria are studied
to estimate context trees, using information theoretical, statistical and
probability tools. The notion of strong consistency is generalized and new
statistical aspects are considered. Markov random fields can be regarded as
generalizations of Markov chains to higher dimensional index sets. Statistical
estimation of basic neighborhoods of Markov random fields means estimating the
interaction structure of finitely valued random variables on an integer lattice,
from a realization in a finite region. The basic neighborhood is the smallest
region around a site that affects the distribution at the site. The research
focuses on modified information criteria to develop consistent estimators of the
basic neighborhood. In both of the investigated areas, computational complexity
aspects and applications are also considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Context tree
models are used in statistics, information theory, bioinformatics and various
other disciplines. Specific areas of applications include lossless data
compression, universal prediction of individual sequences and genetics to model
DNA and protein sequences. Markov random fields are special Gibbs fields,
therefore they provide essential models in statistical physics for modeling
interactive particle systems. They are also used in several other fields,
including image processing and pattern recognition. The project aims at two
directions. On one hand, it aims to achieve progress in the theory of model
selection methods using information criteria, in particular, in context tree
estimation and in estimation of basic neighborhoods of Markov random fields. On
the other hand, it aims to bring the theoretical achievements to the fields of
applications. The research includes collaborative work with researchers in the
area, and it also involves the potential of broadening the applications of the
results in collaboration with researchers from the areas of applications,
namely, from bioinformatics and engineering. A goal is to involve graduate
students to the research.