* 0906879
* Bridging the Miscibility Gap in InGaN Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Hongxing Jiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 475,183.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;Technical. This project addresses the epitaxial
growth of high crystalline quality InGaN across the complete composition range.
The aim is to gain greater understanding of the properties of the miscibility
gap and to explore methods that can consistently provide single phase InGaN
films. Theoretical studies suggest that phase separation in layers having the
interface oriented parallel to the c-axis (such as a- or m-plane InGaN) is
dramatically suppressed. Thus, the approach is to develop MOCVD processes for
the growth of InGaN epilayers on a-plane through different epilayer templates
(AlN, GaN, and InN). Studies to understand fundamental effects of growth
orientation and strain on the miscibility gap in InGaN are expected to lead to a
new approach for achieving single phase device quality InGaN epilayers. These
films will then allow for studies of fundamental optical and transport
properties of InGaN in composition ranges which were previously inaccessible.
Detailed studies concerning the optical and transport properties of InxGa1-xN in
the miscibility gap region (0.45 &lt; x &lt; 0.75) have not been possible
because these InxGa1-xN films generally have been of very low crystalline
quality and exhibit weak or negligible photoluminescence. It is anticipated that
many of the important physical properties (structural, optical, and electrical)
of InxGa1-xN in the miscibility gap region will be characterized through these
studies. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research
issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having
technological relevance. The realization of device quality InGaN epilayers over
a more complete alloy range would yield significant benefits for many III-
nitride based optoelectronic devices. The bandgap of InGaN expands from about
0.7 eV to 3.4 eV, which covers the entire solar spectrum. In principle, a
multijunction solar cell or photoelectrochemical cell based on multi-layers of
InGaN with different In-contents is highly efficient at capturing different
wavelengths of the sunlight passing through the cell. InGaN alloys could also be
potentially important thermoelectric (TE) materials and may be an attractive
alternative to other materials for the development of TE generators that are
able to directly convert heat to electricity in new generation automobiles,
radioisotope TE generators in spacecraft or cooling modules for enhanced
efficiency and lifetime of micro/nano-scale sensor networks. Attainment of high
quality InGaN in the previously predicted miscibility gap region would also
significantly benefit the development of high efficiency LEDs with wavelengths
longer than 550 nm. The successful attainment of highly efficient green/yellow
InGaN LEDs would then enable the technology for white LEDs through the R-G-B
three color chip integration approach providing highly efficient light sources
for general illumination. The bandgap of In-rich InGaN could also be engineered
to match the fiber optic communication wavelength around 1.5 um. Postdoctoral
and graduate students will be actively involved in a research program that is
highly interdisciplinary in nature including state-of-the-art epitaxial research
of photonic materials and structures to advanced materials characterization and
micro/nano-scale prototype photonic/optoelectronic device research.
Undergraduates will also participate in this research using Whitacre Endowment
funds. Plans for education and outreach include the development of hands-on
activities to be presented to teams of high school teachers and students on
'Nanophotonics' in conjunction with activities conducted by the Center of
Engineering Outreach at TTU.