* 0906051
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Biology for FY 2009
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jennifer Franck, Franck                  Jennifer       A
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 123,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2009. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan entitled "Computer Simulations
to Investigate Flapping Vertebrate Flight" for Jennifer Frank. The host
institution for this research is Brown University and the sponsoring scientist
is Kenneth Breuer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the lift and
propulsion of vertebrate flight using computational fluid dynamic (CFD)
techniques borrowed from aeronautical engineering. Animal locomotion through air
and water is of great interest due to the variety of efficient propulsion
mechanisms. In particular, the flapping flight of insects and birds produces
agile maneuvers that cannot be explained with traditional aerodynamic
principles. This research uses a numerical technique called large-eddy
simulation, which is capable of simulating the unsteady, turbulent flow
associated with flapping flight of vertebrates, especially larger birds and
bats. These simulations give a better visualization and prediction of the
unsteady fluid dynamics surrounding the wing than other methods, and thus a
better understanding of how vertebrates produce lift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integral part of the training involves working closely with the evolutionary
biologists and experimentalists who perform a variety of wind tunnel experiments
with bats, as well as membranes and structures that model aspects of the
animal's wing in flight. This close interaction aids in the modeling and
simulation efforts and develops skills to better interface computational science
with biological research. The interdisciplinary research broadens the Fellow's
research expertise and helps develop collaborations with experimental
biologists. It also provides valuable teaching and mentoring opportunities
beneficial to a future academic career.