* 0906276
* Separability and logic in geometric group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 96,339.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0906276&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Henry Wilton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment&lt;br/&gt;Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will pursue several
lines of research&lt;br/&gt;motivated by three deep open questions in the theory
of&lt;br/&gt;word-hyperbolic groups. (1) Is every hyperbolic group
residually&lt;br/&gt;finite? If so, then in fact word-hyperbolic groups satisfy
much&lt;br/&gt;stronger separability properties. The PI intends to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;these separability properties for known examples
of&lt;br/&gt;word-hyperbolic groups and related groups, including
3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;groups and relatively hyperbolic groups. (2) Is the
elementary&lt;br/&gt;theory of a torsion-free hyperbolic group decidable?
Together&lt;br/&gt;with Daniel Groves, the PI intends to give an affirmative
answer&lt;br/&gt;by proving algorithmic versions of the results of Sela. (3)
Does&lt;br/&gt;every word-hyperbolic group contain a surface subgroup? Little
is&lt;br/&gt;known about this famous question of Gromov, even for some
very&lt;br/&gt;basic examples of word-hyperbolic groups. The PI proposes to
use&lt;br/&gt;various new techniques to find surface subgroups in examples
of&lt;br/&gt;word-hyperbolic groups, including doubles of free groups
along&lt;br/&gt;maximal cyclic subgroups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group is a
collection of symmetries, for example the collection&lt;br/&gt;of all
translations of the Euclidean plane that preserve the&lt;br/&gt;integer lattice.
This group is generated by the translations of&lt;br/&gt;one unit of length in
the north, south, east, or west directions,&lt;br/&gt;in the sense that any
element of the group can be obtained by&lt;br/&gt;composing copies of those four
basic translations. Every&lt;br/&gt;finitely generated group carries a notion of
distance between&lt;br/&gt;pairs of its elements, defined by counting the number
of&lt;br/&gt;generators that must be applied to carry one element of the
group&lt;br/&gt;to another. These projects concentrate on word-
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;groups, which have many of the properties of the hyperbolic
plane&lt;br/&gt;from non-Euclidean geometry and are known to be so common that
a&lt;br/&gt;randomly selected finitely generated group is almost
surely&lt;br/&gt;word-hyperbolic. This award is jointly funded by the programs
in&lt;br/&gt;Topology and Foundations.&lt;br/&gt;