* 0906539
* Interactive Microscopy of Graphene Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Alex Zettl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2012
* USD 457,000.00

******TECHNICAL ABSTRACT*******

Graphene is a remarkable newly isolated two-dimensional material that has novel
physical properties and great potential for new nanotechnological advances. The
central goals of this research project are to understand and control atomic-
scale behavior in graphene nanostructures via newly developed techniques of
"interactive microscopy". These methods allow graphene nanostructures to be not
only probed at the atomic scale, but also to be manipulated. The strategy for
this project revolves around the complementary use of scanning tunneling
microscopy and transmission electron microscopy to characterize and manipulate
graphene in a collaborative effort between the groups of M.F. Crommie and A.
Zettl. Both microscopy techniques will be used in a coordinated, collaborative
approach to explore the fundamental electronic and structural properties of
graphene nanostructures such as edges, defects, nanoribbons, and nanoplatelets,
and to correlate these properties with graphene nanodevice behavior. This
project will provide scientific training to graduate students, undergraduates,
and high school students in a strongly interdisciplinary area.

*******NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT********

Graphene is a remarkable new material that consists of a single sheet of carbon
atoms chemically bonded in a periodic honeycomb pattern. This material has great
promise for creating new electronic, magnetic, and mechanical devices that can
be miniaturized beyond the level of current technology, with great potential
advantages. To realize these advantages, however, the properties of graphene
must be understood and controlled down to the atomic-scale (i.e., down to the
size of single atoms). The central goal of this research project is to perform
this task via newly developed interactive microscopy techniques. These
techniques allow graphene to not only be imaged at atomic length scales, but
also to be manipulated and changed at this same small length scale. Different
state-of-the-art microscopy techniques with atomic-scale spatial resolution will
be used in a coordinated, collaborative approach to explore the fundamental
electrical and structural properties of graphene devices having different shapes
and disorder properties at very small length scales. Critically important shapes
include, for example, ribbons of graphene that have a width in the range of 10
nanometers. This project will provide interdisciplinary scientific training to
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students in the most powerful
modern methods of microscopy and device characterization.