* 0906945
* RUI: Spectroscopy of Many-Body Processes in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 123,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
develop analytical and numerical methods to analyze the role of many-body
interactions on electron dynamics in nanostructures. The research will focus on
the spectroscopic properties of hybrid systems comprised of dye molecules and
metallic quantum dots and on spin dynamics of excitons in semiconductor quantum
wells with applied magnetic field. The goal is to provide an accurate
description of optical characteristics that are enhanced by plasmons and
modified by Coulomb correlations. These studies are relevant for applications
such as sensors and biomedical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to address
the energy transfer processes that determine radiation of a dye molecule in the
proximity of gold or silver nanoparticle the research will expand methodologies
based on time-dependent local density approximation. Quantum mechanical effect
associated with the size of the nano-particles will included to study
fluorescence or surface-enhanced resonant Raman scattering spectra. Cooperative
phenomena will be accounted within a classical description. The research will
also investigate the non-linear optical response of two-dimensional magneto-
exitons in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and phonon-assisted spin-orbit
scattering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students at Jackson State
University will be involved in the research and receive educational experience
on a variety of analytical and numerical methods. The students will present the
results of their work in publications and conference presentations.
Undergraduate students at a Historical Black College will participate in
advanced research projects and learn the mathematical and scientific skills
crucial for a successful career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy is a widely used experimental techniques to
probe the properties of materials at the atomic level. This award supports
theoretical research and education to predict and interpret the experiments on
systems comprised of complex molecules that interact strongly with light and
very small metallic particles. The optical properties associated with the
interaction between many electrons and light in semiconductors will be also
investigated. These studies are relevant for applications such as sensors and
biomedical devices. Undergraduate students at a Historical Black College will
participate in advanced research projects and learn the mathematical and
scientific skills crucial for a successful career.&lt;br/&gt;