* 0906566
* Quantum Phase Transitions: Disorder, Dynamics, and Frustration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Vojta, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 324,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
correlated quantum materials and nanostructures. These show a rich variety of
novel phenomena due to the competition between quantum fluctuations, various
interactions, quantum confinement and disorder. The quantum phase transitions
that separate the different ground state phases in these systems play an
important role for at least two reasons. On the one hand, their peculiar
properties can control large parts of parameter space. On the other hand, they
provide a novel perspective for understanding the entire phase diagram of a
complex quantum system which is complimentary to traditional perturbative
approaches. The major objective of this proposal is to explore quantum phase
transitions in a variety of quantum materials, concentrating on three areas: 1.
Quantum phase transitions and quenched disorder: The PI will focus on disorder
effects at first-order quantum phase transitions including those of the order-
disorder type as well as transitions between competing ground state orders.
Motivated by recent interesting experiments in cerium-palladium-ruthenium
systems and nickel-vanadium systems, the PI will analyze the disordered
itinerant ferromagnetic transition. 2. Dynamics and transport at quantum
critical points: The PI will study the transport properties at the
superconductor-metal transition in ultrathin MoGe and Niobium nanowires. The PI
will develop a theory of electronic transport in the magnetic Griffiths phases
of metallic ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. 3. Quantum phase transitions in
geometrically frustrated magnets: The PI plans to investigate how the interplay
between degeneracy, fluctuations and disorder leads to novel phases in
geometrically frustrated quantum magnets, and he will study the quantum phase
transitions between these phases.

To carry out the research, the PI will use a combination of analytical
techniques, including mean-field theory, perturbative and strong-disorder
renormalization groups, and computer simulations, including classical and
quantum Monte-Carlo methods, numerical renormalization group.

Undergraduate students will be involved in the research. To help close the gap
between classroom and research, the PI intends to complement his computational
physics course, which has been instrumental for attracting undergraduates, with
a seminar course on high-performance scientific computing aimed at bringing
together the interested Missouri S&T students from various disciplines. The PI
also aims to establish a series of ?Nobel Prize talks? to be given each fall
after the Physics Nobel Prize has been announced. These talks will give an
elementary introduction into the physics behind the prize, at a level accessible
for non-science majors and high-school students. This series would help
disseminate the excitement of science to a broader audience.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
an important aspect of materials in which electrons interact with each other
particularly strongly. These materials often exhibit many different phases such
as different kinds of magnetism and superconductivity ? an electronic state of
matter which exhibits no resistance to the flow of electricity. These phases may
be separated by an unusual kind of phase transition which takes place at the
absolute zero of temperature called a quantum phase transition. The points that
separate phases can control the electronic properties of materials over a wide
range of temperature. The PI will use advanced theoretical methods and computer
simulations to study the effect of imperfections in the crystal lattice on these
quantum critical points and the properties of the electronic states near quantum
critical points that separate novel states of matter.

The research will contribute to our understanding of an interesting and growing
class of materials that display new electronic states of matter and new
phenomena that provide the intellectual foundations for possible new electronic
device technologies.

Undergraduate students will be involved in the research. To help close the gap
between classroom and research, the PI intends to complement his computational
physics course, which has been instrumental for attracting undergraduates, with
a seminar course on high-performance scientific computing aimed at bringing
together the interested Missouri S&T students from various disciplines. The PI
also aims to establish a series of ?Nobel Prize talks? to be given each fall
after the Physics Nobel Prize has been announced. These talks will give an
elementary introduction into the physics behind the prize, at a level accessible
for non-science majors and high-school students. This series would help
disseminate the excitement of science to a broader audience.

