* 0906709
* Novel Photoinitiated Controlled Nitric Oxide Release Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Megan Frost, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0906709 PI: Frost, Megan ORG: Michigan Tech

Title: CAREER: Novel Photoinitiated Controlled Nitric Oxide Release Materials

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Nitric oxide (NO) releasing polymeric materials have shown
great promise in enhancing the biocompatibility of implanted biomedical devices.
S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs) are a class of NO-donor of great interest due to their
presence in biological systems and their physiological role in the storage,
transport and release of NO. Light is known to decompose RSNOs to release NO.
The light mediated NO generation from these molecules provides a means of
precisely controlling spatial and temporal delivery of NO in biomaterials
applications. The intellectual merit of the proposed activities contained herein
is to systematically develop novel RSNOs that have different substituents on
aromatic thiol compounds such that stability and NO-release properties can be
controlled. These novel NO-donors will then be appropriately entrapped in
polymer matrices such that NO release can be controlled by using light as an
external on/off trigger and no RSNO or parent thiol compound can leach form the
polymer. These will be the first NO-releasing materials that can be applied to
biomaterials research and development that offer the ability to variably control
NO generation on-the-fly (increased intensity of light causes increased NO-
release). The research proposed here will help increase our fundamental
understanding of the behavior of RSNOs and develop potentially useful polymeric
systems that generate NO locally to be used to actively mediate the biological
response toward materials that are placed in contact with blood and tissue.

BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts resulting from this research will
significantly further our understanding of what levels of NO are needed to
impart desired physiological effects in specific tissues and what levels will
cause damage to healthy tissue surrounding NO-releasing implants. This will be
achieved by developing novel research tools that will allow quantitative
information to be gained regarding how different cells respond to controlled
surface fluxes of NO. This information will significantly increase our
understanding of physiological roles of NO and lead to the intelligent design of
NO-releasing biomaterials. Additionally, these tools will allow work to be
undertaken that will begin to quantitatively correlate how cells respond to
different surface fluxes generated in vitro and in vivo. There is a serious lack
of ability to predict how new biomaterials will function in the complex and
dynamic environment of the body. Materials that function beautifully in vitro
often time fail when placed in vivo. Work contained within the proposal will
develop a waveguide device upon which cells can be cultured that generates
defined surface fluxes of NO with precise temporal and spatial control. This
will allow quantitative in vitro cellular response to NO to be determined. Fiber
optic probes that can generate precise surface fluxes of NO will also be
developed that can then be inserted in vivo to correlate if identical surface
fluxes cause identical cellular response in vitro and in vivo. Although detailed
studies of cellular response to NO are not included in this specific proposal,
the technology that will allow these studies to be undertaken will be developed
within the scope of the proposed activities.