* 0906842
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Traps in GaInAs/GaAsSb Multiple Quantum Well Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Patrick Fay, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2014
* USD 259,498.00

Technical. This collaborative project addresses materials science
growth/processing research of InGaAs/GaAsSb multiple quantum wells (MQW) with
related investigations aimed toward mid-IR wavelength detector applications. The
nature of the band alignment allows tuning of the en-ergy gap by varying layer
thickness, strain, and composition. Emphasis is placed on gaining greater
understanding of the trap formation in GaInAs/GaAsSb MQWs and correlation of
their formation with prototype device performance. The approach involves the use
of InP to provide advantages: these include the use of compressive and tensile
strained materials for flexible device design options; mature wafer foundry
capabilities for processing InP-based structures; the ability to leverage
advances in InP-based epi-growth over the past decade; and the ability to
leverage fu-ture advances driven by InP electronics. Currently, device
performance apppears limited by mid-gap traps in the absorption region; hence
this work is focused on providing a more complete un-derstanding of these traps
and correlating them with device performance. While the MIR photo-diode test
structure used in this work has its merit from device perspectives, the basic
under-standing of trap states in GaInAs, GaAsSb, and GaInAs/GaAsSb MQWs will
improve our fun-damental understanding of these materials. In turn, this will
help to better understand the nature of the Sb-based MQW structure.
Additionally, these MQWs also impact other important devices such as
heterojunction bipolar transistors and mid-IR semiconductor lasers.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of elec-tronic/photonic materials science having technological
relevance. Societal benefits of the pro-posed research of these materials are
potentially broad since the materials and prototype devices being studied
support civilian and military applications including pollution detection,
medical di-agnostics, night vision, and missile tracking. At present, the best
detectors are based on band-to-band transitions in HgCdTe or quantum-well
infrared photodetectors (QWIPs) using III-V com-pound semiconductors. Neither
technology is well-suited for operation at or near room-temperature. An
important advantage of InGaAs/GaAsSb MQW detectors is the potential for high
detectivity at relatively high temperatures (200-300K). Through their
participation in state-of-the-art research both graduate and undergraduate
students will gain invaluable skills and better understand the connection
between materials growth, characterization, device design, and device
fabrication. To show the impact of mid-IR photodiodes on applications, the
photodiodes devel-oped will be used in a trace-gas monitoring demonstration
platform. This platform will be used in outreach programs (Engineering Open
House; a summer program called Introduction to Engi-neering (ITE); and ENGR 162
(UVA) and EG EG10111/10112 (Notre Dame) required first year engineering courses)
designed to illustrate the societal benefits of Electrical Engineering. The
goals of these outreach activities are to (i) educate the public about
engineering, (ii) recruit pre-college students to pursue engineering as a
career, and (iii) motivate first-year engineering students to remain in the
major after their first year.