* 0906576
* Crystalline Encapsulants and Functional Materials Through Molecular Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2014
* USD 620,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Few organic solid-state systems are amenable to systematic
and precise manipulation of crystal architecture and lattice metrics with
predictable structural outcomes, which is crucial for the design and synthesis
of molecular-based functional materials. Hydrogen-bonded frameworks based on the
two-dimensional guanidinium-sulfonate (GS) sheet, however, have proven to be a
benchmark in ?crystal engineering? owing to their structural robustness, which
permits facile interchange of molecular constituents in selected framework
architectures that often can be predicted and controlled through straightforward
empirical principles. The versatility of the GS system will be exploited for (i)
the synthesis of new class of GS hosts derived from a library of calixarene
tetrasulfonates that form molecular baskets, suspended from the GS sheet,
capable of including guest molecules within the calixarene rather than within
the gallery regions between opposing GS sheets, (ii) examination of the hydrogen
sorption characteristics of various guanidinium calixarenetetrasulfonates, (iii)
the exploration of ferroelectric behavior associated with polar guests embedded
within the suspended calixarenes, (iv) GS channel inclusion compounds with laser
dyes as guests, aimed at regulating of the aggregation states of the dyes and
their corresponding emission characteristics, (v) GS channel inclusion compounds
with organic nitroxide guests, aimed at unraveling structure-property
relationships in a new class of molecular magnets, (vi) enantioselective
inclusion by chiral organomonosulfonate hosts, (vii) synthesis of discrete
molecular capsules based on complementary hydrogen-bonding spacers between
opposing calixarene units.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project aims to capitalize on molecules that can be
used as ?tinkertoys? to construct designer materials with optical, electronic,
magnetic and storage properties that can be tuned systematically through
swapping of the molecular components, which is difficult to achieve through more
conventional routes. As such, these materials have to potential to impact
several U.S. technologies, including data storage, communications, energy,
health, and specialty chemicals, including pharmaceutical materials.
Additionally, the project will provide education and research training in STEM
while cultivating the next generation of scientists and engineers through (i)
summer research experiences for undergraduates and faculty from minority-serving
and four-year institutions through connections to the NYU Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center and a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
site, (ii) research experiences for high school students from various NYC
schools, including the Spence School, and all-girls K-12 institution in NYC,
(iii) development of courses for high school teachers enrolled in the NYU
Chemistry Masters of Science for High School Educators program, thus enhancing
science education in the largest and most diverse school system in the U.S.,
(iv) offer professional development of student and postdocs through the creation
of a Northeast Solid State Chemistry Symposium that will elevate their skills
and confidence in scientific presentations, (vi) expose graduate students and
postdocs to scientists from industrial laboratories and other academic
institutions, U.S. and international through direct research collaborations.