* 0906271
* SGER/GOALI: Industry Presence on Campus:  Cross-linking of Collagen Binders for Foundry Cores to Reduce VOC Emissions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Fred Cannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 110,000.00

The objective of this award is to develop a collagen-based binder that can be
used in foundry core sands. Cores create the hollow cavities within cast iron
products; and the cores are comprised of silica sand plus a core binder. The aim
is to replace petroleum-based binders that use phenolic urethane or furan /
toluene. The collagen offers a means of creating a sustainable binder from a US
food processing source that is otherwise mostly discarded. The collagen binder
will release about 20-30% as much volatile organic compounds into the air, when
compared to the conventional petroleum-based binders. The work herein will focus
on discerning a favorable cross-linker that will cause one collagen strand to
chemically bind to neighboring strands. This will increase the strength of the
binder, and render it less susceptible to softening when immersed in water, as
when applying a core wash. Preliminary results show that a cross-linker will
yield a binder that hosts a tensile strength of 300-400 pounds per square inch,
when 1% collagen-based binder is used.

This transformative research aims to provide a means for foundries to diminish
pollution while delivering high-quality iron castings. This will help the
foundries be good neighbors in the local communities, while maintaining
important manufacturing jobs in America. The research will open the way for
collagen to be used in a broad range of new applications that include medicine,
environmental sorbents, and electronics. This research and development will
engage a Ph.D. candidate who has worked in the foundry industry. In this role,
this student devised a means to cut foundry sand waste, via other NSF-funded
projects. As a deliverable, the results will be widely disseminated via refereed
journal papers and conference presentations. Also, with foundry partners, the
subsequent aim is to test these collagen-based binders at the demonstration-
scale or full-scale.

This project is jointly funded by the Materials Processing & Manufacturing
Program, of the Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation Division and by
the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry Program of the
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships Division.