* 0906244
* Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity - Element 7495
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Anna Feldman, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2011
* USD 20,656.00

The main purpose of the workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic
Creativity (CALC-09) is to strengthen research in automatic detection,
classification, understanding, and generation of neologisms, figurative
language, indirect speech acts, poetry, fiction, and other phenomena
illustrating linguistic creativity. The workshop also welcomes descriptions and
discussions of computational tools that support people in using language
creatively. These include computational and cognitive models, metrics and tools
for evaluating the performance of creativity-aware systems, specific application
scenarios, and the design and implementation of creativity-aware
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The CALC-09 workshop is held in conjunction with
the NAACL - Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT 2009) conference in Boulder,
Colorado. This award subsidizes travel and accommodation expenses for students
actively participating in the workshop. These travel grants support geographic
and other minorities by giving them an opportunity to exchange ideas, get into
contact with key persons in the field, and gain invaluable feedback from the
senior participants. The award also subsidizes travel and accommodation for an
invited keynote speaker from the U.S.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop brings
together people working on different forms and modalities of linguistic
creativity. It fosters collaboration between theoreticians and practitioners
working in academic or industrial settings, across disciplines. Thereby, the
workshop facilitates the integration of current punctual efforts on different
aspects of linguistic creativity into more comprehensive approaches.&lt;br/&gt;