* 0907219
* Controlled Crumpling of Polymer Thin Films and Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 324,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The physical properties of thin polymer films are critical for
the development of numerous technologies, ranging from alternative energy
sources to ?smart? coatings. In the thin film regime, the size scale of
individual molecules is commensurate with the film?s thickness; therefore, the
inter-molecular and intra-molecular mechanisms that define a material property
are influenced by surface properties. Recent efforts in the polymer scientific
community have focused on the impact of confinement on properties such as the
glass transition temperature and elastic modulus, but relatively little is known
on the impact of geometric confinement on properties related to non-linear
deformation. The proposed research will use novel methods to fold and crumple
thin polymer films, while quantifying the energy focusing and strain localizing
processes involved in these non-linear mechanics. The specific research plan
includes three primary efforts: 1) the folding and crumpling of homogenous, thin
polymer films; 2) the folding and crumpling of nanostructured polymer films; and
3) the characterization of crumpled surface properties. These efforts will be
distinguished from recent research on crumpling by studying films with
molecular-scale thickness and combining crumpling mechanics with the properties
of pre-patterned substrates to control long-range order in crumpled sheet
morphologies. Additionally, the energy focusing processes of folding will be
used to assemble nanoscale components, including tailored inorganic
nanoparticles. The fundamental knowledge of folding and crumpling gained through
this research not only will provide insight into materials properties at
molecular length scales, but also will lead to advanced concepts for controlling
the morphology and structure of thin polymer films for advanced applications.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The proposed research is focused on developing novel
methods to fold and crumple ultra-thin polymer films, which are only a few
molecules thick. The results of this research will have broad impact, from
providing new knowledge of how molecular assemblies respond to mechanical stress
at the nanometer length scale to developing robust strategies for patterning
surfaces in future applications, such as alternative energy source technologies.
In addition to the research funded by this program, the research team will
introduce an innovative program to involve high school students from diverse
backgrounds in the creative aspects of scientific research. This program, the
Materials Challenges Competition (MCC), will build upon existing programs that
are common in undergraduate engineering disciplines (e.g. the solar powered
vehicle competition) to initiate a materials competition among high school teams
from the Western Massachusetts region. The implementation of this program will
provide opportunities for students and the general public in Western
Massachusetts to realize the importance of materials research in answering
current technological challenges.

