* 0907487
* Ordered Mesoporous Materials with Closed Pores
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michal Kruk, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 185,796.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A grand challenge in materials chemistry is to
control the structure and properties of materials at nanoscale. One of the focal
points in the effort to meet this challenge is the ability to introduce well-
defined nanoscale voids (pores) in the structure of materials. While the last
two decades brought milestones in the design of materials with accessible (open)
nanopores, advances in the development of materials with closed (isolated)
nanoscale pores were limited, even though the latter materials are of
significant interest in electronics industry as low-dielectric-constant on-chip
insulating media in integrated circuits. The current project is focused on
exploring a predictive way to synthesize closed-pore materials, which is based
on the use of surfactant micelles as templates to generate well-defined pore
arrays. The surfactant templating has revolutionized the synthesis of nanoporous
materials, but because of the need to remove the surfactant template from the
pores, it seemed to be inherently suitable for open-pore rather than closed-pore
architectures. Recently, the micelle-templating approach to generate closed-pore
materials was developed which was based on identifying conditions at which the
template is removed before the pores close. The current research effort is
focused on extending the scope of this powerful approach on new material
compositions and on achieving more beneficial structural properties of the
closed-pore materials. Thus, the project will provide a knowledge base for the
development of closed-pore materials with designed structures and properties and
is expected to benefit a broad range of scientists and engineers that study and
apply porous materials. The project involves postdoctoral fellows, graduate
students and undergraduate students, with a special focus on minority
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This work will
explore a new and transformational approach to the synthesis of well-defined
materials with closed (isolated) nanopores, which is based on recently
discovered thermally-induced pore closure phenomenon in micelle-templated
mesoporous materials. This process promises to be a predictive pathway for the
synthesis of closed-pore nanoporous silicas and is expected to be applicable for
organosilicas. Ways to obtain silicas and organosilicas with closed spherical
pores of diameter 5 nm or lower, which are most appropriate in applications as
low-k materials, are being explored. Materials that exhibit the pore closure at
as low temperatures as possible (preferably around 300Â°C) are sought. Ways to
achieve the thermally-induced pore closure with minimized extent of shrinkage
will be delineated. Periodic mesoporous organosilicas, which are inherently more
suitable than silicas for low-k applications due to their lower bulk dielectric
constant, are being explored as closed-pore materials candidates. Ways to
increase the pore volume of closed-pore materials, thus reducing the dielectric
constant, are being developed. Synthetic pathways to materials with closed
cylindrical pores are being explored. The study focuses on samples in powder
form due to the lack of readily accessible facilities to characterize thin
films, but conclusions of the study are expected to extend to materials in the
thin-film form. The project will generate the knowledge base for the synthesis
of closed-pore nanoporous materials with tailor-made framework composition, pore
size, pore shape and pore volume. This effort contributes to the current quest
to overcome limitations in the processing speed of electronic devices by
exploring a new avenue to the low dielectric constant materials. The project
involves the training of scientists and students in the synthesis and
characterization of cutting-edge nanoscale materials. &lt;br/&gt;