* 0907493
* Nanorod Assembly in Polymer Matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2015
* USD 813,250.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed research on
?Nanorod Assembly in Polymeric Matrices? is to understand the fundamental
principles that drive nanorod assembly when spatially confined. An underlying
theme is controlling the location, alignment and packing of nanorods to optimize
targeted properties. The work to be undertaken during this project involves
&lt;br/&gt;(1) orienting gold nanorods in homopolymer thin films and lamellar
block copolymer films that confine the nanorods, and measuring their
polarization dependent optical properties; &lt;br/&gt;(2) applying thermodynamic
principles to design systems that incorporate and align gold nanorods within
cylindrical domains of block copolymers, and then studying nanorod induced phase
transformations in block copolymer morphologies; and &lt;br/&gt;(3)
investigating unique nanorods including TiO2, silica with a gold nanoshell and
Janus nanorod systems to explore how rod diameter, surface functionality, and
biphasic surfaces direct the location of nanorods in block copolymers.
&lt;br/&gt;A successful outcome of the proposed research will be precise control
over assembly of functional nanorods in polymer films using spatial confinement.
As a proof of concept, a nanorod/polymer device will be fabricated and its
polarization-dependent optical properties tested to demonstrate that these
coating can be used as color polarizing filters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer nanocomposites (PNCs) are
utilized in applications ranging from sports (golf balls) to transportation
(tires) because they combine materials with synergistic properties. Presently,
PNCs are attracting interest for information storage as well as electronic and
energy applications. The proposed research will provide scientists with the
rules for selecting the materials that will lead to optimum efficiency in PNCs.
The broader impacts include laboratory experience for middle and high school
students, high school teachers and undergraduates including those from
underrepresented groups. An annual science day for middle school students (6th ?
8th grade) will continue at the University of Pennsylvania. In addition, female
elementary school students are introduced to a summer camp called Girls in
Engineering Math &amp; Science Camp (GEMS). A successful partnership with
Central High School (CHS) in Philadelphia that has already resulted in a new
innovative Materials Science course will continue. Future plans include
extending the course from one to two sections, developing laboratories, exposing
students to new characterization tools, and facilitating joint research
projects. The first materials science textbook aimed at high school students is
also planned. Because CHS draws academically talented, multicultural and diverse
(32% African American, 5% Latino, 50% female) students, this partnership will
have a profound and lasting impact on the scientific and technological literacy
of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;