* 0907578
* Active Cell Culture Using Surface Shape Memory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Patrick Mather, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,364.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0847578 PI: Henderson, James ORG:
Syracuse&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Active Cell Culture Using Surface Shape
Memory &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of this proposal is to
create and understand active cell culture substrates using surface shape memory
and, in parallel, to study unique properties of shape memory polymers (SMPs)
that promise broad application in biological and biomedical fields. To achieve
this goal, a series of coordinated objectives will be pursued. SMP material
characteristics will be tuned by systematically varying temperature transition,
elasticity, and soft-elasticity plateau. The micron-scale viscoelastic
constitutive behavior of SMPs of varying phase composition, orientation, and
crosslink density will be determined using a new lateral force indentation
method. The biocompatibility and amenability to cell culture of SMPs will be
rigorously evaluated using the agar diffusion assay to quantify cytotoxicity,
the MTS tetrazolium colorimetric assay to quantify cell attachment kinetics, and
measurement of modulus, gel fraction, phase transition temperature, and
microstructure to analyze long term stability in an aqueous environment. Methods
for preparing surface SMPs that transition from a flat surface to a complex
surface geometry, and vice versa, will be studied by employing processes that
prescribe equilibrium shapes then fix temporary shapes with embossing. Complex
surface geometries for application in active cell culture will be designed
following analysis of established, bioactive surface geometries. Methods for
cell-compatible thermocycling of liquid crystalline elastomer substrates and in
situ imaging of the cell response will be developed using a heated stage and
reflected light microscopy. Lastly, proof-of-concept active cell culture
substrates with specific target uses, such as directing cell lineage
specification, stretching cells, assaying cell traction forces, and orienting
and patterning fields of homogeneous cells or heterogeneous cells, will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The goal of the proposal is to
create a new multimedia program, entitled At the Interface, to educate the
public about research at the biology/engineering interface. The program will
target high-school students and the non-technical public while also providing a
useful entry point for scientists and engineers who may want to proceed to more
technical assessment of the topics covered. Biomaterials will frequently be used
as a theme, but diverse topics from all areas of the research interface will be
addressed. A collaborating team of students and faculty from the Syracuse S. I.
Newhouse School of Public Communications has been assembled to add to the
expertise of the PI and co-PI in the areas of magazine, newspaper, and online
journalism and television, radio, and film journalism. The team will achieve its
goal by pursuit of the following focused objectives: (1) Produce short videos
showcasing current research at the interface of biology and engineering to be
hosted on the website of the Syracuse Biomaterials Institute. (2) Produce brief
(&lt;5 min) educational radio spots that report on technological advances at the
interface for broadcast on the central New York NPR affiliate, WRVO. (3) Develop
short text-based summaries of all video and radio pieces to be available in the
form of press releases in English and Spanish. (4) Develop and deploy metrics
for assessing the penetration of the video, radio, and text platforms in the
community and the resulting impact on public understanding. (5) Study the
potential for the video and radio platforms to be expanded to include more
content and a larger audience. &lt;br/&gt;