* 0907024
* Nanocrystalline Metals and Thin Films: Quantized Plasticity, Internal Stress, and Grain Boundary Strength
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter Anderson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2013
* USD 371,885.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The proposed research aims to understand unusual characteristics of
nanocrystalline metals through study of the underlying physics of deformation.
This is accomplished by developing a new continuum description called quantized
crystal plasticity and informing it with results from atomistic simulations and
mechanical testing. The atomistic studies achieve this by measuring
distributions of critical strength to trigger slip events. They also explore
fundamental descriptions of the local features of grain boundaries that control
dislocation absorption, repulsion, and nucleation. In this sense, two scales of
simulation?continuum and atomistic?are coupled. The informed quantized crystal
plasticity model can address experimentally relevant sample sizes and strain
rates that are not possible with atomistic simulations. Specifically, the model
is coupled to tensile experiments to study stress-assisted grain growth and the
effect of bimodal grain size distributions on nc ductility. There are two
primary expected technical outcomes of this work. The first is a fundamental
description of the distribution of critical strengths and distribution of
internal stress state in nanocrystalline metals. This includes an understanding
of how these distributions evolve with macroscopic deformation. The second is a
finite element based model that captures these features, and permits the
prediction of the mechanical response of nanocrystalline metals to various
stress or deformation paths. These outcomes provide a basis for structure-
mechanical property relations for nanocrystalline metals.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Nanocrystalline metals embody an extreme strategy to make a high strength
metal?namely to shrink the size of individual crystals to only a few hundred
atoms across. This can reduce or eliminate defects that traditionally weaken
metals and also introduce barriers that strengthen the metal. Indeed,
nanocrystalline metals show promise in terms of extraordinary resistance to
yielding, large fracture energy at low temperature, and improved resistance to
failure under oscillating loads (fatigue). The proposed work will team
researchers from US and international institutions to understand the fundamental
strengthening processes. A key outcome is a computational tool to predict the
mechanical properties of nanocrystalline metals based on their underlying
structure. This enables optimization of the performance of such materials. Two
graduate students will be trained in the use of advanced computational and
experimental techniques. They will also assist in the development,
implementation, and refinement of project-based learning modules for a new
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) secondary school. A
spin off of this effort is novel, web-based interfaces to improve comprehension
of materials engineering concepts, and the anticipated involvement of students
from under-represented groups.