* 0907247
* Computational Study of the Generation of Crystal Defects and Controlled Modification of Surface Microstructure by Short Pulse Laser Irradiation
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2014
* USD 271,654.00

This award supports computational and theoretical research, and education aimed
at investigation of a range of fast non-equilibrium processes responsible for
material modification and surface nanostructuring by pico- and femtosecond scale
laser pulses. The research involves large-scale simulation and has potential for
making a transformative impact on the fundamental understanding of material
response and microstructure evolution under extreme conditions of ultrafast
heating and cooling, as well as for opening new directions for controlled laser
material modification with nanoscale resolution. The goal of this research
program is to reveal, through large-scale atomistic simulations, the fundamental
processes responsible for the modification of surface microstructure of metal
targets irradiated by short laser pulses. A computational model combining the
molecular dynamics method with a continuum description of the electron heat
conduction and electron-phonon coupling will be used to perform a detailed
analysis of the mechanisms of laser-induced generation of crystal defects and
their role in the evolution of surface microstructure and atomic mixing. The
conditions leading to the formation of a nanocrystalline surface structure and
the atomic-level processes controlling the nucleation and growth of crystallites
within a strongly undercooled liquid region of the target will be investigated
with a particular focus on the effect of the free surface on the nucleation
kinetics and crystallographic orientation of the new grains. The relative
contribution of different diffusive and non-diffusive mechanisms of atomic
mixing occurring under conditions of rapid melting/solidification, plastic
deformation and laser-induced supersaturation with point defects will be
investigated in combined molecular dynamics and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
performed for binary alloys and multi-layered targets. The physical processes
responsible for the formation/stabilization of metastable crystalline and
amorphous phases will be investigated and related to the irradiation conditions
in short pulse laser processing. This award supports educational initiatives in
the areas of scientific computing and laser-materials interactions include the
active involvement of graduate and undergraduate students into various aspects
of high-performance computing, development of a new graduate course on Laser-
Materials Interactions, as well as incorporation of the research results into an
existing course, Introduction to Atomistic Simulations. The PI will continue to
maintain close contacts with the Office of Minority Programs in recruiting
undergraduate students from traditionally under-represented groups.
International collaborations with groups from Germany, France, Russia, and Iraq
will involve short and long-term mutual visits and will enrich the educational
and cultural experience of the participating graduate and undergraduate
students. The educational component of this project also includes a design of an
interactive web-site ?Materials under Extreme Conditions.? A non-technical
description of general concepts of ultrafast materials phenomena induced by
short pulse laser irradiation will be illustrated by the research results
obtained in this program and presented in the form of images, computer
animations, and simple interactive simulations.

