* 0907018
* Polymer Dynamics at Interfaces and in Complex Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Steve Granick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2015
* USD 790,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research
focuses on a central problem of polymer physics ? how polymers diffuse along the
solid-liquid interface and in confined geometries. This will be studied using
novel experimental platforms of fluorescence spectroscopy, sometimes with
single-molecule resolution (FCS, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy),
sometimes with FRAP (fluorescence recovery after photobleaching), sometimes with
FRET (FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer), sometimes with single-particle
imaging. As implemented, these experiments will yield spatially-resolved
measurements with spatial resolution &lt;0.5 &amp;#956;m. The research will
focus on the polymer side of the interface ? the dependence of polymer
translational diffusion on chain length, polymer surface coverage, and in the
case of confined polymer melts, on film thickness -- seeking to understand the
universal aspects of this problem. The intellectual merit is to develop new
understanding of how polymers diffuse at surfaces and in confined geometries,
which is fundamental in many scientific and technical applications, including
adhesion, interdiffusion, friction, the mechanical behavior of composite and
nanocomposite materials, and functional properties of other kinds, and also to
develop new experimental tools to quantify polymer mobility in ultra-thin films
that are impossible to characterize by conventional methods. The graduate
students will be part of an interdisciplinary research group with other students
from chemistry, chemical engineering, physics, and materials science,
integrating research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks new fundamental understanding
of how polymers and plastics move about at surfaces and in confined geometries.
One of the most pressing unsolved problems of polymer science, to solve it will
open the door to technical applications and technological improvement in areas
including adhesion, friction, composite and nanocomposite materials, and
functional materials. This research will produce new experimental tools to
quantify polymer mobility impossible to characterize by conventional methods.
This will improve research infrastructure in the polymer field. This laboratory
has an excellent track record regarding diversity, especially in involving women
undergraduate and graduate researchers, and integrating research with education.
The broader impact of this research involves strong connections with industry,
with international collaborators, and the promotion of educational diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;