* 0907600
* Sn-Containing Group-IV Semiconductors for Energy Applications in Photovoltaics and Thermoelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jose Menendez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 884,357.00

0907600&lt;br/&gt;Menendez &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."
&lt;br/&gt;Technical. This Focused Research Group (FRG) project explores energy
applications of group-IV (Si, Ge) semiconductor materials incorporating Sn. The
combination of Sn with Si and Ge may allow desirable structural and electronic
properties with advantageous opportunities in photovoltaics and
thermoelectricity. Fundamental studies of the Si-Ge-Sn system are planned for
the specific purposes: a) designing multijunction solar cells with fully
optimized band gaps; b) exploring the potential of the Si-Ge-Sn system for
intermediate band photovoltaics; c) designing materials with dramatically
enhanced impact ionization rates; d) fabricating structures with ultra-low
thermal conductivities; and e) engineering enhanced Seebeck coefficients. The
size of the compositional space being explored, combined with possible
nanostructural arrangements for a given composition, benefit from a
multidisciplinary FRG approach. Theoretical simulations will be used to identify
the most promising structures which will be synthesized using CVD methods
introducing new precursors and modifications as required. Electrical and
contactless optical characterization methods will be employed. &lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area
of electronic/photonic materials science having energy related technological
relevance. Additionally, the project will include several education/outreach
efforts: hosting a regional workshop "Semiconductors and Society" for high
school pre-seniors to (i) research student perceptions of how science and
engineering innovations impact high-tech products relying on semiconductors (ii)
elucidate how intellectual innovations can impact future manufacturing
technologies to preserve the semiconductor sector as the major high-technology
industry in Arizona and (iii) increase student interest in science and
engineering and encourage the pursuit of advanced education in related technical
fields. Also, new courses in materials and solid-state chemistry will be
developed at ASU with integrated simulation and experimental components. These
will be included in the undergraduate curriculum of a newly established "Science
Master's in Nanoscience" program. Teaching modules and workshop materials will
also be developed and disseminated through the project's web page.