* 0907632
* Inference in high-dimension: statistics, computation and information theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

This research proposal consists of two related research thrusts, all centered
around the common goal of an integrated treatment of statistical and
computational issues. The first research thrust concerns various issues
associated with the use of structured regularization methods in high-dimensional
inference. Such types of regularization are natural in different settings,
including estimation of structured covariance matrices, graphical model
selection, and hierarchical data modeling. The researchers propose to provide
sharp characterizations of when structured regularization, with its typically
higher computational costs, is guaranteed to yield improvements in statistical
efficiency, or conversely, when structured regularization might impair
statistical efficiency. The second research thrust addresses the role of
statistical stability in optimization, and the development of new methodology
for choosing path length parameters in iterative
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical inference problems of a high-
dimensional nature---meaning where the number of observations n is similar to or
even smaller than the number of parameters p---are ubiquitous throughout various
areas of science and engineering, among them genomics, neuroscience, remote
sensing, natural language processing, data compression, financial time series,
and statistical signal processing. As a concrete instances, consider the problem
of estimating the structure of a social network consisting of a large number of
individuals (p could be 10,000 or larger) based on a relatively small number of
snapshots (n could be 100 to 1,000). The overarching theme of the proposal is
the development of new methodology and theory for high-dimensional data. Given
the ubiquity of such data, such developments have the potential to impact a
variety of fields making use of statistical modeling and tools, among them
information technology (IT), neuroscience, remote sensing, and data compression.
Moreover, the proposal is inter-disciplinary in nature, and so has the potential
to strengthen bridges between statisticians and researchers in other departments
(e.g., computer science, electrical and civil engineering) also working on IT
applications. Via this type of intellectual unification, the proposed research
is likely to have broader impact---much beyond any specific technical
contributions---in terms of bridging different research communities, and
providing broad training to graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.