* 0907122
* Principles for Formation of Transversely Modulated Heterophase Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, a new class of
materials with controlled transversely modulated heterophase nanostructures
(TMNS) will be developed. The research will integrate theory, modeling,
experimental characterization, and design of TMNS with controlled scale and
morphology. The basic idea of this research effort is to design TMNS by
exploiting epitaxial self-assembling of constituent phases on a crystalline
substrate. Formation of such self-assembled nanostructures requires establishing
epitaxial relations between each phase and the substrate. These epitaxial
relations lead to self-organization of constituent phases and formation of 3D
heteroepitaxial nanostructures with coherent or semi-coherent interfaces. By
selecting different substrates or substrate orientations and changing the
thickness of the nanostructured layer, it is possible to control morphology of
the self-assembled nanostructures on a scale that is difficult to obtain with
other techniques. Because of the nanoscale of the component phases, dislocation-
mediated mechanisms are suppressed resulting in significant elastic strain.
Therefore, controlling this stress becomes a new mechanism for manipulating film
properties, similar to semiconductor heterostructures. The goal of this research
is to develop experimentally verified theoretical principles and computational
tools to design materials with modulated nanostructures using epitaxial control.
The ability to control morphology, scale, and stress state will be demonstrated.
Self-assembled modulated structures on substrates will be formed as a result of
either: (a) solid-solid phase transformation (polymorphic, martensitic, or
eutectoid), or (b) eutectic crystallization from an amorphous or liquid phase.
As a consequence of this research, new principles of design will be developed
for thin film materials consisting of controlled heterophase nanostructures for
tailoring of interfaces at the nanoscale, as well as the associated processing,
characterization, and modeling techniques necessary to realize
TMNS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured materials are important for a wide
spectrum of structural and functional applications, such as sensors, actuators,
magnetic recording media, wear resistant coatings, high temperature or corrosion
resistant structural materials, and thermoelectric devices. This research will
provide an entirely new principle for designing materials with controlled
heterophase nanostructures that will lead to materials that are stronger, better
at sensing, and more durable, as well as new materials that would not otherwise
be possible such as multilayered composite structures whose properties can be
actively tuned through self-assembly of the nanostructures. Broader impacts of
this research include a coupled theoretical and experimental approach to
research and education that ensures broad access to the knowledge needed to
enhance the interest and skills of future engineers and researchers using
sputtering techniques, nanoindentation, and computational materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;