* 0907324
* Graphene-based Materials for Ultracapacitance Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rodney Ruoff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 633,687.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the DMR is supporting the research and educational goals of Professor
Rodney S. Ruoff of the Department of Mechanical Engineering and Professor
Christopher W. Bielawski of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of Texas at Austin. The Ruoff and Bielawski groups will co-develop
new methods to synthesize high performance ultracapacitors based on graphene for
applications in electrical energy storage. In particular, they plan to: (i)
develop graphene-based electrode materials for the enhanced performance of
ultracapacitors with higher energy and power densities; (ii) characterize the
morphologies, structures and properties of materials which can lead to
unprecedented ultracapacitance performance; (iii) develop a fundamental
understanding of the electrochemical double layer in graphene-based
ultracapacitors and of other factors which determine their performance; (iv)
investigate the compatibility of ionic liquids as an electrolyte for graphene-
based ultracapacitors; and (v) develop new ultracapacitor cell assembly
approaches and cell-testing methods. The relationship between
morphology/structure and performance will emerge through the combined efforts of
chemical synthesis, processing, characterization, and physical properties
measurements. To meet the state-of-the-art requirement of improving the energy
density while lowering the cost of energy storage, fundamental research in the
Ruoff and Bielawski laboratories will help to drive the development of graphene-
based materials on a large scale and in a cost-effective manner. The development
of a deeper understanding of graphene-based electrochemical capacitance will
also provide a meaningful reference for other energy storage devices such as Li-
ion batteries. This fundamental investigation is likely to lead to interesting
or novel phenomena in the general field of electrochemistry. Inherent to the
multidisciplinary nature of the proposed research plan, students working on this
project will gain experience in a wide range of scientific and engineering
concepts and techniques. Professors Ruoff and Bielawski are actively involved in
educational programs that are designed to train undergraduate and graduate
students in materials chemistry, carbon science, and engineering. They will
develop complementary lecture and laboratory courses in engineering, chemistry
and physics, including the development of energy-related curricula for grades
7-12 in local primary and high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;As a single sheet of graphite, graphene has a number of
exceptional properties, including: extraordinary mechanical properties, high
thermal conductivity and excellent electrical conductivity. Combined with its
very high specific surface area (for the individual sheet, ~2630 m2/g or about
one half of the area of a football field per gram), materials based on graphene
are poised to meet the state-of-the-art requirement of improving the energy
density and lowering the cost of energy storage in contemporary ultracapacitors.
With this award, the Ruoff and Bielawski groups at UT-Austin will combine their
respective strengths and experiences to co-develop a new class of high
performance ultracapacitors based on graphene. They will also develop a
fundamental understanding of graphene-based ultracapacitors which will provide a
meaningful reference for other energy storage devices, such as Li-ion batteries.
Based on the breakthroughs that are possible in energy storage applications due
to the exceptional electrical conductivity and extremely high surface area of
graphene, the current technology in use in diverse fields such as the electric
power grid, automobiles, and portable electronic devices could be
revolutionized. Fully integrated into these research efforts, the Ruoff and
Bielawski groups also have a number of outreach and educational activities
planned, including research programs for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, continuous as well as summer research training for high school and
undergraduate (including minority) students and high school teachers, additions
to course materials being offered both in engineering, chemistry and physics
courses, including curriculum development for grades 7-12. To maximize these
efforts, collaborations with a number of local and international companies
interested in developing graphene-based ultracapacitors are also planned.