* 0907515
* Topological Interactions in Polymer Gels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Rubinstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 290,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the area of polymer networks and entangled gels. The elastic
properties of polymer networks and gels, used in a wide range of applications
from hard rubber boots to soft gel replacements for eye lenses, are determined
by chemical cross-links as well as by topological entanglements between network
strands. Existing theories of gels treat entanglements in qualitatively the same
way as crosslinks. However, experiments suggest that their relative role changes
upon network swelling and deformation. Thus a microscopic theory is needed that
provides a qualitative explanation of this phenomenon as well as a quantitative
description of macroscopic properties of deformed and swollen entangled gels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop a theory that will allow the
calculation of the elastic modulus and equilibrium swelling of entangled gels
along with stress-strain dependence for their uniaxial and biaxial deformations.
The theory will be extended to explore novel networks with unique properties
such as high deformability and low elastic modulus. The effect of trapped
entanglements in swollen and deswollen gels will be modeled, emphasizing their
qualitative difference from temporary entanglements in polymeric liquids. The
dependence of topological interactions on network deformations will be
calculated, and used to understand why the strength of these interactions
becomes weaker in elongation directions and stronger in compression directions.
New numerical methods will be developed to determine the dependence of
entanglement parameters, such as confining tube diameter and persistence length,
on deformation of polymeric systems with fixed topology. These methods will be
used to test the assumptions and predictions of different theories of entangled
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows with an excellent opportunity for training in valuable
analytical and numerical techniques. Some of the results of this research will
be used to develop material for a textbook. The proposed project will stimulate
the interest of high school students in modern scientific methods by engaging
them in active research. Examples of elastic gels will be used in the design of
the updated "Zoom In" exhibit at the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center as
well as in lectures by PI to high school students at the "Science Spectrum" and
"Science at the Edge" series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on
networks of long chain-like molecules, including interpenetrating chains that
are swollen by a solvent, like water. The unique interplay of solid-like
properties on large length scales and liquid-like properties on small length
scales makes these polymer networks and gels the world?s most deformable elastic
materials. Their elastic properties, used in a wide range of applications from
hard rubber boots to soft gel replacements for eye lenses, are determined by
chemical interactions between the chain-molecules as well as by entanglements
among chain-molecules in the network. Most theories for the elastic and
mechanical properties of these kinds of materials treat the effects of
entanglements in polymer networks qualitatively the same way as chemical bonds
creating hard links between polymer strands. Experiments suggest, however, that
the relative role of the two physical effects changes upon network swelling and
deformation caused by external conditions. The PI aims to fill the need for a
microscopic theory that can explain this phenomenon and describe the properties
of these materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory has the potential to
uncover new routes for designing soft materials with a desired set of
properties. The project will provide undergraduate and graduate students as well
as postdoctoral fellows with an excellent opportunity of training in valuable
analytical and numerical techniques. Some of the results of this research will
be used in the developing materials for a textbook. The proposed project will
stimulate the interest of high school students in modern scientific methods by
engaging them in active research. Examples of elastic gels will be used in the
design of the updated "Zoom In" exhibit at the Morehead Planetarium and Science
Center as well as in lectures by PI to high school students at the "Science
Spectrum" and "Science at the Edge" series.