* 0907483
* GOALI: Quantifying Growth Mechanisms in Semiconductor Nanowires using Real Time Transmission Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Frances Ross, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2012
* USD 705,373.00

Technical: Semiconductor nanowires are one of the primary nanostructured
materials under investigation in the field of nanoscience. Because of their
compatibility with existing semiconductor device processing methods and the
possibility to control their electronic properties via such mechanisms as
diameter selection, doping and heterostructure creation, they hold great promise
as active elements in future electronic and optoelectronic devices. Significant
industrial efforts focus on aspects of nanowire electronics such as integration
and device performance. Critical to the success of these efforts is a
fundamental understanding of the crystal growth processes involved in nanowire
creation. In this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project, real-time transmission electron microscopy techniques are used to
characterize the mechanisms of semiconductor nanowire growth. The research aims
to quantify growth kinetics relevant to the creation of advance device
geometries, with a focus on heterostructures creation, interface abruptness and
dopant effects. It seeks to provide fundamental insight into the semiconductor
nanowire growth process via the technologically important vapor-liquid-solid and
vapor-solid-solid growth processes. These insights are expected to lead to
improved understanding of the self-assembly process and will provide a much
needed scientific underpinning to the development of nanowire integration
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
Nanoscale electronic devices offer the potential of allowing advances beyond the
limits imposed by traditional lithographic fabrication methods. Graduate and
postgraduate training forms a core activity of the project, with a program
encompassing extensive lab experience at the world's leading industrial lab for
basic research in semiconductor electronics. Additionally, in-situ transmission
electron microscopy is one of the primary "eyes" into nanoscale behavior,
allowing exciting, dynamic videos of real physical processes to be obtained. The
PI will continue work with a scientific visualization company to develop
realistic and scientifically accurate animations of nanowire growth. These
animations will be used to describe the science of nanotechnology to a broad
audience through multiple dissemination routes, and will be utilized along with
real dynamic observations in a web-based class on Thin Film Deposition
coordinated through Purdue's NSF sponsored NanoHUB.