* 0907913
* Two Partial Differential Equations Modeling Geophysical Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2013
* USD 175,941.00

Wu&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0907913&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the
American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The
project focuses&lt;br/&gt;on two well-known partial differential equations
modeling&lt;br/&gt;geophysical fluids: the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG)
equation&lt;br/&gt;and the two-dimensional Boussinesq equations. The
major&lt;br/&gt;objective is to develop strategies and effective approaches
for&lt;br/&gt;solving the global regularity problem on the classical
solutions&lt;br/&gt;of these equations. The global regularity issue concerning
these&lt;br/&gt;equations has recently attracted substantial attention and
much&lt;br/&gt;important progress has been made. However, it remains open
in&lt;br/&gt;the cases of the inviscid SQG equation, the SQG equation
with&lt;br/&gt;supercritical dissipation, and the inviscid Boussinesq equations.
&lt;br/&gt;To deal with the inviscid or supercritical SQG equation,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator combines extensive numerical computations
with&lt;br/&gt;analytic and geometric approaches. The immediate plan is
to&lt;br/&gt;study the curvature of the level curves in the spatial
regions&lt;br/&gt;where the gradients are comparable to the maximal gradient.
The&lt;br/&gt;boundedness of the curvature in these regions would rule out
any&lt;br/&gt;finite-time singularities. The strategy on the global
regularity&lt;br/&gt;issue for the two-dimensional Boussinesq equations is
to&lt;br/&gt;gradually reduce the dissipation and thermal diffusion.
The&lt;br/&gt;first aim is at the case when there is only vertical
dissipation&lt;br/&gt;or thermal diffusion. In contrast to the recently resolved
case&lt;br/&gt;with horizontal dissipation or thermal diffusion, the
situation&lt;br/&gt;now is more sophisticated due to the "mismatch" of
derivatives. &lt;br/&gt;To handle this case, new tools such as logarithmic
type&lt;br/&gt;inequalities involving Sobolev norms of derivatives in
different&lt;br/&gt;directions are developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The three-
dimensional quasi-geostrophic equations derived by&lt;br/&gt;J. G. Charney in
the 1940s have been very successful in modeling&lt;br/&gt;large-scale motions of
atmosphere and oceans. The dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;these three-dimensional
equations with uniform potential&lt;br/&gt;vorticity reduces to the SQG
equation. The SQG equation has been&lt;br/&gt;very useful in studying many
weather phenomena such as&lt;br/&gt;frontogenesis, the formation of sharp fronts
between hot and cold&lt;br/&gt;air. Mathematically, frontogenesis corresponds to
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental issue of whether classical solutions of this
equation&lt;br/&gt;can develop finite-time singularities. This project
helps&lt;br/&gt;improve the understanding of many weather phenomena governed
by&lt;br/&gt;this equation. Boussinesq equations model many flows in
nature&lt;br/&gt;such as oceanic circulation, central heating and
natural&lt;br/&gt;ventilation. The study here of the potentially singular
behavior&lt;br/&gt;of solutions to the Boussinesq equations not only yields
a&lt;br/&gt;significant contribution to the mathematical issue of
global&lt;br/&gt;regularity but also has potential environmental applications.
As&lt;br/&gt;part of this project, several Ph.D. students of the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;are actively involved in the proposed research and
develop&lt;br/&gt;analytic and computational skills that enable them to
become&lt;br/&gt;capable scholars and highly skilled workforce. &lt;br/&gt;