* 0907766
* SMASS-Next: Next Generation Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2018
* Richard Binzel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Linda French
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,247,100.00

AST-0907766 Binzel

Dr. Binzel, two postdoctoral fellows, and students, will extend the ongoing
Small Main-belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey (SMASS) to significantly fainter
limits than previously possible. Key to this achievement is the use of a new
NSF-funded state-of-the-art folded-port infrared echellette spectrograph on the
Magellan 6.5-m telescope in Chile. The new instrument is expected to obtain
spectra of near-Earth asteroids at diameters of less than 100m. The overarching
goal is a better understanding of the connections between asteroids and
meteorites and the clues they provide to the history of our solar system. Near-
infrared spectra of some 120 near-Earth asteroids (down to less than 0.8 km in
diameter) will be obtained and analyzed in a five-year program to explore the
compositional distribution of the near-Earth asteroids. The results will be used
to test the Yarkovsky effect (where heating of one side of an asteroid by the
Sun can affect its orbit) and will help determine the origin of near-Earth
asteroids (e.g., are they moved into the inner solar system by the Yarkovsky
effect, or through collisions in the main asteroid belt?). The resulting
insights will be critical to understanding solar system formation and evolution.

This work is expected to have an impact on the planning of future sample return
missions to nearby asteroids by greatly increasing the sample with known
compositions. It will also materially improve our understanding of the nature of
potentially hazardous asteroids. The project includes the support and training
of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate researchers, who will be involved
in all aspects of the research.