* 0907861
* 2009 International Conference on Plant Mitochondrial Biology (ICPMB), Lake Tahoe, California
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Sally Mackenzie, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

The 2009 International Conference on Plant Mitochondrial Biology (ICPMB), to be
held Saturday, May 9, 2009, through Thursday, May 14, 2009, in Lake Tahoe,
California, will bring together a truly international group of cellular and
molecular biologists, metabolic biochemists, and geneticists investigating a
wide range of fundamental problems related to the biology of these plant
organelles. The field has advanced significantly in recent years with the
expanded understanding of the plant mitochondrial genome and its control by the
nucleus, together with an explosion of information regarding numerous metabolic
pathways that intersect within the mitochondrion or that respond to
mitochondrially derived signals. Mitochondria play important roles in plant
metabolism, pollen fertility, programmed cell death, and ROS-mediated cellular
control. Much of the recent momentum in this field has been fueled by powerful
and unprecedented tools afforded investigators by genome and organelle
sequencing projects and advances in cell imaging technologies. The present
conference will highlight recent progress in mitochondrial evolution, molecular
determinants of mitochondrial morphology and the inheritance of mitochondrial
genomes, mitochondrial gene expression and RNA processing, and nuclear-
organellar interactions and signaling mechanisms. The latest progress in
understanding mitochondrial influence on plant growth, development, and stress
response will also be highlighted. This field is particularly exciting at the
moment because it is moving beyond description towards manipulation of
mitochondrial behavior and dissection of important signals and pathways.

This conference has a history of moving between continents, with the most recent
meetings having been held in Australia, France and Japan, a geographic span
reflecting the important contributions that have been made by the worldwide
community of scientists in this field. The conference, the first in the U.S.
since 1995, will be held in Lake Tahoe, CA. It is the only conference that has
traditionally fostered interaction between international investigators with
interests in mitochondrial gene function and inter-organellar interaction and
those investigating metabolism and electron transport functions. The conference
is designed to include presentations by young scientists just entering the field
and postdoctoral trainees, together with established leaders in the field. The
program enhances the field by inviting new ideas and new participants, and
providing new opportunities for international collaborations. With the upsurge
in research on biofuels, the focus of the meeting on plant mitochondria and
metabolism is extremely timely.