* 0907347
* Topological Grain Growth: 3D Simulaton and Experimental Investigaton
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Alan Sprague, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 04/30/2010
* USD 169,999.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This program examines the topological nature and mechanisms of 3D grain growth
with the goal of describing how interconnected grains interact to perform the
complex sequence of steps that must balance for self-similar grain growth to
occur. The different types of topological events have long been known to be
necessary for grain growth, and the rates of these different types of events
must set the overall growth rate, but the inability to observe them in 3D has
hindered the understanding of the mutual feedback that must exist between the
grain volume distribution and the topological events to produce the observed
steady state. Particular goals of the study are to determine to how the widths
of the related grain volume and topological distributions evolve throughout
growth, how and to what extent the initial distribution controls the final
steady state distribution, and how the instantaneous distributions control the
rate of topological events and overall grain growth. The study is founded on the
triad of theoretical modeling and comparative computer simulation and
experimental grain growth studies. Experimental studies will include direct
imaging of the grain structure via three-dimensional x-ray diffraction (3DXRD)
and tomography to monitor evolution of the grain volume distribution and
topological events. Comparative grain growth experiments using serial section
reconstruction and stereological analysis will also be performed for similar
materials and conditions as the direct imaging. The 3D simulations will
similarly examine the evolution of the grain volume distribution in relation to
topological events and evolution. Data mining of the simulation results and
reconstructed microstructures will help determine the grain volume and
topological configurations leading to the different types of topological events.
The results of this in-depth comparative study will provide a first-time view
and understanding of the previously unknown means by which steady state grain
growth occurs. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The goal of this program is to understand the fundamental means by which the
crystals, or ?grains?, in a metallic or ceramic material grow at high
temperature, such as during industrial heat treatment or in high temperature
use. The grain size of these materials is a primary factor controlling
properties such as strength, ductility and ability to be formed to shapes, and
controlling the amount of growth is a critical concern in materials science and
engineering related industries. The overall ?grain growth? process involves a
sequence of finite topological steps of growth and shrinkage among neighboring
grains. These events cannot be directly observed in opaque materials, and the
mechanism of the steady-state process has not previously been understood. This
study will provide a first-time coordinated investigation of the grain growth
process bringing together novel 3D x-ray diffraction techniques performed with
scientists at Riso National Laboratory in Denmark, using the European
Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble, computer simulation expertise
at Sandia National Labs in Albuquerque, and experiments, computer simulations
and theoretical development at the University of Alabama at Birmingham and the
University of Florida. The results of these studies will provide a first-time
understanding of this important process. In addition, the graduate students
performing the Riso/ESRF experiments will gain experience in international
collaboration, performing research and working in residence for several months
per year at a major European research center. UAB also has a very strong history
of outreach to minorities, including student recruitment.