* 0907167
* Investigations of the Size Effects on the Relaxation Rates of Polymer Coated Magnetic Nanoparticles for Hyperthermia
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Olin Mefford, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 290,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907167 PI: Mefford, Olin T. ORG: Clemson University

Title: Investigations of the Size Effects on the Relaxation Rates of Polymer
Coated Magnetic Nanoparticles for Hyperthermia

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The PI proposes to investigate the factors affecting
magnetic hyperthermia in nano-scale polymer-coated magnetic oxide particles.
Magnetic particles acquire thermal energy from applied electromagnetic radiation
and if the particles can be targeted into cancerous cells these cells can be
killed by heating them to moderate temperatures (> 40 Â°C) without harming the
surrounding tissue. The rate of response of the particle-coating complex to an
alternating electromagnetic (EM) field is related to its relaxation time, and
the materials issues that govern this behavior are not fully understood. A major
objective of the proposed research is the acquisition of a fundamental
understanding of the relaxation mechanisms. The sizes of the magnetic core and
polymeric stabilizing layer can both greatly influence the response of these
materials to EM radiation. However, it is not well understood how the ratio of
these two dimensions affects the thermal response to different magnetic fields
and field frequencies. The PI proposes to develop model systems of coated and
non-coated magnetic nanoparticles, measure how the sizes and size distributions
of the core particles and the polymer/particle complexes affect the relaxation
rates of the suspensions, measure the heating rates of different nanoparticle
systems in solvent systems similar to those found in the human body and tailor
the sizes of the magnetic core and the polymer brushes to optimize heating at
specific heating frequencies and fields.

BROADER IMPACTS: The topic of the proposal is of current interest, and there
will be abundant opportunities for dissemination of results in conferences and
in publications. The work provides a foundation for pharmaceutical companies to
develop new nanoparticle-based therapies and imaging agents. A successful
outcome will impact not only hyperthermia research but also magnetism, polymer
chemistry, and colloid chemistry. This project is at the intersection of
physics, chemistry, and biology and thus provides a platform for
interdisciplinary training of students. In addition to the graduate students on
the project, it will provide opportunities for two undergraduate research
students. The development of good writing and oral presentation skills is
critical for the development of future scientists and engineers. One of the
goals of the project is to provide opportunities for the students to present
their work at national and international meetings. The PI will participate in
the J. E. Sirrine Summer Program that exposes South Carolina high-school
students to materials science research. It is expected that his group will
mentor two of these students. One of the goals of this work is to develop
teaching tools for Clemson representatives to travel across the Southeast to
educate high school students on research in bionanomaterials.

