* 0907260
* Growths of High In-Content InGaN and InN Semiconductors for Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nelson Tansu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 329,562.00

Technical: This project explores materials science of high indium content InGaN
and InN semiconductors for high-efficiency solar cells and thermoelectric
applications. Fundamental studies of metal-organic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD) growth of InN and high In-content InGaN (with In>50%) alloys on sapphire
and silicon (111) substrates will be conducted. The investigations include the
use of alternative precursor (Dimethyl-hydrazine), pulsed MOCVD, InN-GaN
superlattices along with various types of characterization to evaluate the
potential for solar cell and thermoelectric applications, and to further basic
understanding of the doping mechanism for p-InN and p-InGaN semiconductors. Non-
technical: This project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. High-efficiency solar
photovoltaic cells have broad potential impact on economy and human life through
more efficient electrical energy generation. Thermoelectric materials provide
important solutions for device cooling and heat recycling and for electrical
power generation. The project allows graduate and undergraduate students to be
trained in a multidisciplinary research environment, encompassing the physics of
semiconductor, optoelectronics materials and devices, materials science and
MOCVD epitaxy, physics of semiconductor nanostructures, and semiconductor device
design and fabrication. Graduate students also serve as mentors for
undergraduate students conducting independent studies in the PI's lab. Outreach
activities focusing on grade 5th - 9th female and underrepresented minority
students are included to raise their interest in science and engineering.