* 0907043
* New Tunable Thieno[3,4-b]Pyrazine-Based Materials for Photonic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Seth Rasmussen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2012
* USD 445,000.00

This award is co-funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program in the
Division of Materials Research, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project aims to advance the understanding
and design of conjugated polymeric materials with low electronic bandgaps, in
particular materials based on thieno[3,4-b]pyrazines. The research activities
couple development of new materials/chemical synthetic strategies to fabrication
of new materials with low bandgaps, improved stability, reduced defects, and
increased solubility. The research investigates the oxidative sensitivity of
these materials and their basic structure-function properties. It has on the
following goals: (1) Production and application of new families of
functionalized thieno[3,4-b]pyrazines, acenaphtho[1,2-b]thieno[3,4-e]pyrazines,
and related derivatives to new homopolymeric and alternating copolymeric
materials. These species will go beyond the current simple dialkyl or diaryl
species to include a wide variety of electron-donating and electron-withdrawing
groups, thus allowing more extensive tuning and control of the resulting energy
levels. (2) Production of new thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine-based materials with reduced
defects and increased processability through the application of Grignard
metathesis polymerization methods. (3) The application of new synthetic methods
for the production of thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine-based terthienyls comprised of up to
three unique thiophene units. The use of such low bandgap precursors will allow
additional side chains to increase solubility without additional steric
interactions that limit conjugation and band gap, as well as provide the ability
to produce more complex three-component materials. (4) The incorporation and
testing of these new materials in infrared detectors for telecommunication
applications and photovoltaic devices for the development of more efficient
solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The project addresses basic scientific
issues in a topical area of materials and chemical sciences with high
technological relevance. The sciences involved in this research project will
impact the fields of telecommunication and renewable energy. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in the fundamentals of chemistry, polymer
science, and materials science. The activities include multi-disciplinary
efforts with scientists at the University of Newcastle, Australia, as well as
those at the US industry. Such an approach exposes students to a wide variety of
viewpoints and experiences, from synthesis and characterization, to film
formation, processing and device fabrication. This overall broad training
results in the production of a highly trained, next generation of scientists
ready to move forward the advances in the field and production of technological
devices for the benefit of society.