* 0907844
* Calculus of variations on rigid elastic structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mohammad Reza Pakzad, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 126,828.00

Pakzad&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0907844&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work is a part of a
long-term project of the&lt;br/&gt;investigator and his collaborators to study
the elasticity&lt;br/&gt;properties of materials through methods of calculus
of&lt;br/&gt;variations. Here, the focus is on situations when the
elastic&lt;br/&gt;bodies exhibit some sort of rigid behavior. In this manner,
the&lt;br/&gt;study of geometric properties of structures, e.g. the
properties&lt;br/&gt;of various spaces of isometries and infinitesimal
isometries of&lt;br/&gt;2-dimensional surfaces, comes to the fore. This differs
from&lt;br/&gt;classical differential geometry in the weaker regularity of
the&lt;br/&gt;given surface or of the deformations. A first objective is
to&lt;br/&gt;identify and rigorously derive variational theories for
thin&lt;br/&gt;shells from the 3-dimensional theory of nonlinear
elasticity&lt;br/&gt;through Gamma-convergence methods. The derived
theories&lt;br/&gt;naturally depend on the scaling regimes of the elastic energy
or&lt;br/&gt;body forces in terms of shell thickness. In this context,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator works on problems involving various spaces of
weakly&lt;br/&gt;differentiable isometries. In parallel, properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;derived theories, such as multiplicity and regularity
of&lt;br/&gt;solutions, or their dependence on the geometry of the shell,
are&lt;br/&gt;investigated. Another line of investigation is the study
of&lt;br/&gt;non-stress-free configurations observed e.g. in the growth
of&lt;br/&gt;leaves. A tangentially heterogeneous 3-dimensional
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;elastic model is studied and the Gamma-limit approach is
used to&lt;br/&gt;reduce the dimension and analyze the model.
Quantitative&lt;br/&gt;rigidity estimates also are studied as a strong
analytical tool&lt;br/&gt;in tackling these variational problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies different mechanical
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;under the unifying umbrella of the nonlinear elasticity
theory. &lt;br/&gt;Elastic materials exhibit qualitatively different responses
to&lt;br/&gt;different kinematic boundary conditions or body forces.
This&lt;br/&gt;fact has given rise to many interesting questions in
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory of elasticity. The main goal of this
theory&lt;br/&gt;is to explain various, apparently different, phenomena in
terms&lt;br/&gt;of some shared mathematical principles. The variational
approach&lt;br/&gt;to the nonlinear theory has been very effective in dealing
with&lt;br/&gt;these questions. It has also been helpful in rigorously
deriving&lt;br/&gt;models for elastic shells or plates pertaining to
different&lt;br/&gt;scaling regimes of the body forces. In the latter context,
the&lt;br/&gt;strength of this approach lies in the fact that it can
predict&lt;br/&gt;the appropriate model together with the response of the
elastic&lt;br/&gt;plate for the given scaling of forces or kinematic
boundary&lt;br/&gt;conditions without any a priori assumptions other than
the&lt;br/&gt;general principles of the 3-dimensional nonlinear elasticity.
&lt;br/&gt;Another feature of this approach is that it can lead to
new&lt;br/&gt;models that were not previously considered. &lt;br/&gt;