* 0907031
* GOALI:  Crystallization of Organic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2012
* USD 782,878.00

DMR 0907031 GOALI: Crystallization of Organic Glasses TECHNICAL SUMMARY: In this
collaborative project, Profs. Lian Yu, Mark Ediger, and Juan de Pablo of the
University of Wisconsin ? Madison, Dr. Geoff Zhang of Abbott Laboratories, and
their research student colleagues will investigate the crystallization of
organic glasses. Glasses are liquids that are too cold to flow. According to the
current view that crystallization is controlled by diffusion, organic glasses
should not crystallize readily. Yet recent work has shown that many do
crystallize, sometimes at rates 105 times faster than predicted by the standard
models. This study concerns two modes of crystal growth activated near the glass
transition temperature: a bulk mode and a surface mode. Both growth modes are
too fast to be controlled by bulk diffusion. The team will test the hypothesis
that molecular motions native to the glassy state can cause crystal growth,
without involving substantial bulk diffusion, if sufficient similarity exists
between the crystal and liquid structures. They will determine whether crystal
growth in the glassy state becomes faster if bulk molecular motions are
amplified with an external field. They will study whether surface-enhanced
crystal growth results from surface-enhanced molecular mobility. Surface
diffusion coefficients of organic glasses will be measured for the first time by
the method of surface grating decay and correlated with surface crystal growth
rates. The project will examine what properties of coating materials are
important for suppressing surface crystallization. Computer simulations will
identify the underlying mechanisms of bulk and surface crystal growth of organic
glasses. For each growth mode, a screening experiment will be performed to
assess its generality and polymer additives will be added to perturb it for
further insights on its mechanism and control. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
Crystallization influences almost every aspect of modern technology. While it
has been extensively studied for hard inorganic materials, crystallization
remains poorly understood for organic materials. In this collaborative project,
a team of academic and industrial researchers will seek to understand the
crystallization of organic glasses. Glasses are liquids that are too cold to
flow; they are the preferred materials for many applications, ranging from
pharmaceutical development to telecommunication. The team will study the
activation of new, fast modes of crystal growth as a liquid becomes a glass and
the control of these new modes in developing amorphous materials. The results of
this research will benefit scientists in a range of fields where crystal growth
is important; for example, amorphous pharmaceuticals and organic electronics.
The enormous potential of using amorphous solids to enhance the bioavailability
of poorly soluble drugs has motivated Abbott to partner with the University of
Wisconsin in this project. It is a unique advantage that the Chicago-based
Abbott is only a short distance away from Madison, enabling close interactions
between the collaborators. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from
the multi-disciplinary nature of this project, having significant exposure to
experiments and simulations, crystals and glasses, high and low molecular weight
organic materials, and both industrial and academic research labs. Personnel
supported by this grant will work with UW-Madison?s Pre-college Enrichment
Opportunity Program for Learning Excellence (PEOPLE), which has a proven record
of increasing the enrollment of minority and low-income high school students in
colleges and universities. This program provides experiences that help students
to become scientifically literate citizens and encourages them to consider
careers in science and engineering.