* 0907607
* Molecular Mobility in Polymer Glasses Under Stress
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2011
* USD 260,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Measurements of molecular mobility in polymer glasses during active deformation
will be performed. Recent results show that stress can increase segmental
mobility in a glass by more than a factor of 1000. This suggests that plastic
flow should be understood as stress creating sufficient segmental mobility that
the glass effectively is transformed into a very viscous liquid. From this
perspective, understanding how stress creates mobility in a glass is the key
issue that must be addressed in order to develop better predictions of polymer
glass deformation. In this work, segmental mobility will be measured during the
deformation of polymethylmethacrylate, polycarbonate, polystyrene, and a fully
cured Epon epoxy resin. In addition to single step tensile creep measurements,
multistep creep and constant strain-rate measurements will be performed.
Previous mechanical experiments have shown an important influence of the thermal
and mechanical history of polymer glasses on their subsequent deformation; aging
a glass, for example, can transform a ductile response to brittle failure. It is
anticipated that these phenomena are all controlled or significantly influenced
by stress-induced mobility and this view will be tested with measurements of
molecular mobility during deformation after various aging times. Collectively
these experiments will provide new insights into the dynamics of polymer glasses
and provide data needed to develop better predictions of polymer glass
deformation.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymer glasses are important materials and, for some applications, their
ability to deform significantly without breaking is a critical attribute. This
work will measure how deformation accelerates the rate at which polymer chains
can move in glass; this information is needed to make accurate predictions about
how polymer glasses will deform in a wide range of applications. This work may
have a significant economic and environmental impact because of the broad use of
polymeric materials. As an example, measurements of mobility changes during the
deformation of an epoxy resin should be directly relevant to the development of
advanced composites needed to manufacture lighter, more efficient aircraft. In
addition, the funding of this proposal will advance the training of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students through the integration of materials
research and education activities. The scientists and students supported by this
grant will work with the University of Wisconsin-Madison?s PEOPLE program to
prepare high school students from under-represented groups for college. Each
summer, those supported by this grant will staff a thirty-hour polymer materials
course for 15 high school juniors. The PEOPLE program has a proven track record
of preparing students to succeed in college; currently, the University of
Wisconsin-Madison has more than 220 undergraduates who are graduates of the
PEOPLE program. In collaboration with a high school science teacher, modules
from the polymer materials summer course will be modified for use in Wisconsin
public high schools.

