* 0907793
* Topologically Ordered Phases of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Alexander Seidel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2012
* USD 240,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award in the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program supports research in theoretical condensed matter physics that will
study the quantum mechanical states in fractional quantum Hall liquids, which
are one of the landmark discoveries of the past twenty five-years. Recent
numerical and experimental evidence indicates the possibility of an even more
exotic variant of these systems, so-called nonabelian quantum Hall states. The
latter may provide the proper hardware for a fault tolerant topological quantum
computer. Although many powerful approaches exist to describe quantum Hall
systems, our understanding of non-abelian states is still limited compared to
that of abelian states, due to the far greater complexity of the former.

The main goal of the research is to establish a simple and efficient language in
which problems in abelian and non-abelian quantum Hall systems can be formulated
and attacked. This language makes explicit use of the effectively one-
dimensional structure of the Hilbert space of low lying excitations in a strong
magnetic field. Concrete topics include the derivation of non-abelian statistics
from wavefunctions, the discussion of phase transitions in multi-component
quantum Hall systems, the derivation of edge physics via a new "constructive"
method for abelian and non-abelian fractional quantum Hall systems, and the
derivation of constraints for the quantum numbers of abelian and non-abelian
quantum Hall phases within the formalism discussed in this proposal.

The broader impact of this research will be the availability of a more
pedagogical language in which abstract concepts in quantum Hall research and
topological quantum computing, such as "fractional charge", "topological
sector", and "fusion rules", can be communicated more easily to people with an
undergraduate physics background. This will help interested students to start
research in this fascinating field earlier, and will make the field more
universally accessible to non-physicists. The latter will be of paramount
importance should a topological quantum computer be built. The projects
described in this proposal will give rise to multiple research opportunities for
students at the graduate and advanced undergraduate level.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award in the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program supports research in theoretical condensed matter physics that will
study the quantum mechanical states in fractional quantum Hall liquids, which
are one of the landmark discoveries of the past twenty five-years. An exotic
variant of these systems, so-called nonabelian quantum Hall states, may provide
systems appropriate for constructing a fault tolerant topological quantum
computer. Exploring the feasibility of fault tolerant quantum computing is one
of the major efforts in the physics community today.

The broader impact of this research will be the availability of a more
pedagogical language in which abstract concepts in quantum Hall research and
topological quantum computing, such as fractional charge, can be communicated
more easily to people with an undergraduate physics background. This will help
interested students to start research in this fascinating field earlier, and
will make the field more universally accessible to non-physicists. The latter
will be of paramount importance should a topological quantum computer be built.
The projects described in this proposal will give rise to multiple research
opportunities for students at the graduate and advanced undergraduate level.