* 0907958
* Comparative studies of electronic structure and dynamic process in model photosynthetic complexes using spectral hole burning and single complex spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Ryszard Jankowiak, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 06/30/2013
* USD 380,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Under this award, supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ryszard Jankowiak from
Kansas State University will use spectral hole-burning (SHB) and single
photosynthetic complex spectroscopy (SPCS) to study excitonic structure and
excitation energy transfer (EET) processes in two photosynthetic complexes from
the cyanobacterium Synechocystis. It is anticipated that information from SBH
data will provide new insights into the electronic structure and EET dynamics of
the PSII core and PSI-C43' complexes. The key goals are to improve understanding
of EET processes and the electronic properties of the cofactors in these two
photosynthetic systems, and to broaden applicability of SHB. The rationale is
that a better understanding of the structure-function relationship of these
natural systems will further facilitate the development of artificial
photovoltaic devices. One of the key objectives is to develop an algorithm to
(simultaneously) model various types of optical spectra to improve our
understanding of the functioning of photosynthetic complexes. Excitonic
calculations will be performed using available crystal structures to correlate
experimental results with known structures and to provide more insight into the
structure-function relationship. In summary, a number of complementary methods
and new approaches will be used to advance our understanding of photosynthesis.
Professor Jankowiak will devote considerable attention to the involvement of
students from under-represented groups and will develop a program for high
school students to influence them early in life to pursue careers in science. A
Chemistry Symposium will be organized once a year for high schools students and
chemistry teachers from Kansas.