* 0907030
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Microstructural and Chemical Mapping of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Electrodes: Processing, Structure, Stability, and Electrochemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Katsuyo Thornton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 393,646.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Microstructural
and&lt;br/&gt;Chemical Mapping of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Electrodes:
Processing,&lt;br/&gt;Structure, Stability, and
Electrochemistry&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date:
06/11/09&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Solid oxide
fuel cells (SOFCs) offer an important new option for converting fuels to
electricity with increased efficiency, reduced pollution, and reduced greenhouse
gas emissions. The race to reap the commercial and environmental benefits of
this technology is largely being decided by practical issues, including cost and
device reliability. The proposed project seeks to better understand how SOFC
performance and reliability are linked to manufacturing methods and constituent
materials properties, by the acquisition and analysis of three-dimensional
images of the fuel cells. Such images can be used to determine what structures
yield improved performance and hence reduced cost, find manufacturing conditions
that yield the desired structure/chemistry, and examine the factors causing fuel
cells to degrade over time.&lt;br/&gt;The improved structural and chemical
information will be disseminated to the fuel cell research and development
community where it will help enable critical connections, for example between
industrial developers ? who need reliable performance/lifetime predictions ? and
modelers ? who require good structural/chemical information to make such
predictions. A substantial number of graduate and undergraduate students, in
many cases from underrepresented groups, will receive training through this
project. There are a number of other educational impacts, including high-school
science teachers participating in summer research.&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;The limited quantitative information available on electrode
structure and interfacial chemistry poses a major barrier to fundamental
understanding of fuel cell performance and stability. This Focused Research
Group is examining the relationships between the processing, structure, and
electrochemical properties of key SOFC materials, utilizing a set of tools based
on focused ion beam ? scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) to determine the
microstructure of SOFC electrodes in three-dimensions (3D). The
project&lt;br/&gt;includes fabrication of state-of-the-art SOFCs, detailed
electrochemical characterization using novel impedance spectroscopy methods,
structural measurement using FIB-SEM, segmentation of the data into 3D phase
maps, visualization of the microstructures, extraction of macrohomogeneous
structural parameters, and simulations of microstructural coarsening and
electrochemical polarization based directly on 3D data sets. Additional
information regarding interdiffusion, accumulation of cation
species&lt;br/&gt;and/or impurities at interfaces, and second phases is obtained
with analytical scanning transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis and
synchrotron X-ray methods. Availability of this 3D microstructure information
will be instrumental for transforming our understanding of how fuel cell
electrodes work to a more quantitative science. Broad impacts of the project
include the continued growth of a 3D structural data library available to
researchers/developers nationwide, and development of analysis
tools&lt;br/&gt;relevant to the broader 3D microstructure community. Students
and teachers involved in the project receive training on state of the art tools
for fuel-cell fabrication, electrochemical testing, microscopy, and materials
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;