* 0907841
* The dynamics of disk clearing, late stage planetesimal disk and planetary system evolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Alice Quillen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2012
* USD 289,134.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Alice Quillen (University of
Rochester) will lead a theoretical study of the orbital dynamics of the early
phases of planet formation. She will focus on the gravitational interactions of
protoplanets and small bodies, and will relate dust production and morphology to
processes such as planet growth, migration, scattering, and resonance crossing,
and explore how these processes could be observed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will increase the numbers and mass range of particles simulated, compared
to previous efforts, and will consider collisional evolution, accretion, and
gravitational interactions. This will require computer codes of increased
capability, so this group will develop methods for performing parallel
computations on graphics processing units. These units have several potential
advantages, mainly that they are low-cost platforms combining many processors
with fast and large on-device memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Quillen and her
group will develop and run a yearly workshop on parallel computing with graphics
cards for summer research students and faculty. Students will learn to write,
test, and execute simple programs in the CUDA (Compute Unified Device
Architecture) programming language. As in previous years, new workshops will
host students and research faculty from multiple departments; this will provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration, promote transference of ideas
and algorithms across disciplines, and maximize student involvement and research
productivity. There will also be other workshops of an introductory nature for
students with limited programming experience.