* 0907036
* Growth and Physical Properties Measurements of Novel Condensed Matter Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2014
* John Neumeier, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates low-
dimensional solids, which are known to exhibit unusual forms of electrical
conduction, magnetism, superconductivity, and highly correlated electron
behavior. The thermal expansion will be measured to investigate their phase
transitions and to expand the state of knowledge regarding dimensionality in
such systems. The thermal expansion technique, which was developed at Montana
State University, offers relative resolution of 1 part in 108. This is at least
1000 times better than x-ray or neutron diffraction. This resolution, coupled
with measurement of other physical properties, will enable evaluation of the
role of structure in determining the physical properties, a subject of great
importance in condensed matter physics. The results will also be used to develop
and test fundamental thermodynamic relationships regarding phase transitions in
solids. Sample preparation, single crystal growth, specimen characterization,
and the development of new measurement technologies add breadth to the project.
The research involves collaboration with other experimentalists, a theoretician,
and it is the core of an active mentoring and training program involving
undergraduates, graduate students and international visitors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates novel compounds, which are known to exhibit unusual forms of
electrical conduction and magnetism. Study of these compounds helps to evaluate
new candidates for applications in cutting-edge technologies, while at the same
time answering questions of fundamental scientific interest. Sample preparation,
single crystal growth, and specimen characterization are important components of
the work; they provide valuable training to students and young scientists that
can readily be applied in the private sector. A significant component of the
project is the measurement of thermal expansion with extremely high relative
resolution, a technique that was developed at Montana State University. Further
improvements in the technique will result from the planned work. Young
scientists will participate in these improvements while simultaneously applying
this tool, in conjunction with other measurement methods, to current research
problems. The project involves collaboration with researchers at national
laboratories and universities, and it is the core of an active mentoring and
training program involving undergraduates, graduate students and international
visitors.