* 0907233
* Solvation Studies of Responsive Polymers in Solution and at Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* David Bergbreiter, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

ARRA STATEMENT:

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This proposal will examine the effect of polymer
microstructure, solvent additives and solution components on lower critical
solution temperature (LCST) phenomena both in solution and at surfaces. The
studies proposed will use solution state light scattering analyses of cloud
point behavior mostly using a bulk phase microanalytical automated digital
melting point apparatus to study small scale samples in parallel. Other
analytical techniques will be employed too. For example, fluorescence
spectroscopy with labeled polymers will probe polymer aggregation events that
occur before and after visible phase separation starts and ends. The effects of
small molecule and macromolecular co-solutes on LCSTs of a variety of polymers
with structurally isomeric repeating units will be carried out to determine how
ionic, covalent and macromolecular co-solutes affect a given polymer's LCST. The
structural and chemical information generated in these solution-state studies
will then be used to develop new sorts of stimuli-responsive surfaces that
reversibly change between being superhydrophobic or hydrophilic. Such surfaces
physical properties will also be studied to determine if the hydration changes
of the polymer grafts alter surface mechanical properties such as viscoelasticty
and adhesion. These surfaces with be studied using a battery of analytical
methods. The surface structural changes associated with reorganization of these
surfaces that will be in the form of thin film nanocomposites in response to
solutes in bulk water component will be followed, and, in suitable cases, will
be monitored in real time.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This proposed work will study the molecular details of
stimuli-responsive macromolecular solubility. This will primarily involve
studies of how a macromolecule's temperature-dependent solubility changes in
response to the presence of other species in solution. These studies will
include studies of aqueous polymer solutions and studies of polymer-containing
coatings on solid surfaces. Such responsive polymer solubility studies are
important because such materials are components of responsive catalysts and
sensors. Polymer solubility and the temperature dependence of polymer solubility
is also critically important in determining the stability and activity of
proteins and enzymes. Extending studies of solution behavior of macromolecules
to include surfaces will lead to a better understanding of responsive
wettability of surfaces and the design of 'smart' surfaces. Such 'smart'
surfaces have potential as new materials that are self cleaning, that have
controllable adhesion, or that have varied surface friction. These studies will
have broader impacts that include both undergraduate and graduate education in
the research laboratory and classroom. Extramural dissemination of results in
presentations to audiences in industry, at predominantly undergraduate
institutions, and at international venues will publicize the results of these
studies. The chemical methodology used in this research will be developed into
experiments that will be used in freshman chemistry courses to educate students
about the consequences of enthalpy and entropy in macromolecule hydration.
International research collaborations will be fostered and will involve programs
with groups in Europe, China, and Qatar.