* 0907790
* Completing the Galactic Plane Infrared Polarization Survey (GPIPS)
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Dan Clemens, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2014
* USD 906,060.00

The magnetic field threading the Galaxy's interstellar medium (ISM) is poorly
revealed and its roles in cloud and star formation are unclear. Dr. Dan Clemens
(Boston University) and his team are addressing these problems using a powerful
instrument (Mimir, a near-infrared wide-field imaging polarimeter) coupled with
substantial observing time (about 50 nights per year, with key project status)
on the 1.8-meter Perkins telescope outside Flagstaff, Arizona. Presently, the
team is about midway through the telescopic observations comprising the Galactic
Plane Infrared Polarization Survey (GPIPS) and, through this award, will
complete all GPIPS observations over the next four years. GPIPS expands existing
optical/infrared (OIR) probes of the ISM magnetic field by four to five orders
of magnitude, to about 500,000 stellar polarizations, and reveals the field five
times more distant than seen before using OIR methods, to and beyond the nearest
spiral arm and through dark clouds to a visual extinction of 25 magnitudes.
GPIPS represents a huge increase in the data available for probing the Milky
Way's magnetic field. The inner midplane region offers a wealth of correlative
data concerning the stellar targets, as well as revealing a wide variety of
distinctly different environments in the diffuse and dense ISM. The new magnetic
field insight GPIPS will uncover will help test models across many size scales
to gauge the role of the magnetic field in a wide range of ISM environments in
the Galaxy.

The public release of high-quality, well-calibrated data products will allow
other astronomers to mine the transformative GPIPS data for new discoveries, and
to bring vital insight to other studies. The methods and approaches pioneered by
GPIPS will guide future large-scale and follow-up studies. During the first
three years of the survey, GPIPS and Mimir have had major impacts on the career
development of research students, comprising the capstone astronomical
experience for about 30 Boston University students to date, and enabling
visitors and collaborators to obtain new data for a wide variety of projects.
The team's suite of publically-available software tools and web sites make
access to, and science with, Mimir data easy and efficient. Over the next four
years, the team will leverage this base to higher levels of impact by developing
and serving out a series of webcasts and podcasts, both for the general public
on topics such as infrared astronomy, polarimetry, and magnetic fields, and for
the research community (the GPIPS data products, the Mimir instrument and
software). Finally, members of the team will work with the Boston University
Scientific Visualization Center to develop exportable tools and/or shows to view
and interact with the three-dimensional decomposition of the GPIPS data set and
its relationships to other tracers of the ISM.