* 0907889
* Two-Day Workshop: Studying Visual and Spatial Reasoning in Design Creativity
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2011
* John Gero, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2011
* USD 102,077.00

Proposal Number: IIS - 0907889 PI: John Gero Institution: George Mason
University

The Problem: Visual and spatial reasoning often play pivotal roles in design
creativity, most noticeably through sketching, diagrams, visualization and
visual imagery. There is research on visual and spatial reasoning in multiple
disciplines but very little is focused on design creativity. There is a need to
bring this research to bear onto design creativity to improve it.

The Proposal: This Workshop brings together the leading researchers from the
disciplines that carry out research into visual and spatial reasoning of
relevance to design creativity: design science, computer science, cognitive
science, and neuroscience

in order to define the state-of-the-art and to produce the opportunity for
transdisciplinary activity related to design creativity. The workshop format
allows a focus on discussion and groups work on research agendas and grand
challenges. Presentations are catalysts for discussion rather than the primary
focus. To improve international collaboration, the workshop is held in France.
One doctoral student from each area is also invited.

Intellectual Merit: Each of the four sciences studies visual and spatial
reasoning in isolation without a focus on design creativity. Bringing together
researchers from these different communities provides opportunities for
transdisciplinary research. Making designing the focus is expected to result in
knowledge about processes for studying visual and spatial reasoning that will
produce new knowledge about design creativity. One enduring output of the
workshop will be archival proceedings, expected to be published by Springer.

Broader Impact: Design creativity holds the key to transformational products and
processes. The outcomes of this workshop will form the basis of the development
of a research agenda for visual and spatial reasoning in design creativity and
provide the basis for an education agenda to improve the creativity of
designers. The aim is to develop international research collaborations. Studying
visual and spatial reasoning produces knowledge of design creativity. The
knowledge derived from studying design creativity has the potential to form the
foundations of new kinds of support tools for creative designing. Attention to a
diverse and inclusive group of discussants, attention to design for social
impact, and plans for a larger conference are also elements of the meeting.