* 0907491
* Multivariate Nonparametric Methodology Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* David Scott, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

The demands on statistical methodology have grown relentlessly as new
technologies for data collection appear. Many of the resulting datasets are
unusual by statistical standards: massive and highly nonlinear with
contamination. Sometimes the data come from a mechanism which is only partially
known. The tasks of estimation, testing, functional testing, pattern discovery,
feature extraction, visualization, and comparison require the statistician look
at each problem anew. Nonparametric methodology, which has been widely used in
one and two dimensions, is also appropriate in these higher dimensions.
Particular emphasis will be given to multivariate regression and density
estimation problems, and closely related applications such as clustering,
mixture estimation, pattern recognition, robust estimation, and dimension
reduction. The statistician's view of the scientific method is as a continuously
improving process of model building, data collection, estimation, criticism, and
refinement. However, many practicing statisticians are stymied by an inability
to repair poorly fitting models. Of particular interest in this research are
methods which provide critical diagnostic information as part of the model
estimation task. A focus of this research is a particular minimum-distance data-
based parametric estimation algorithm, which has been investigated for its
robustness properties. The algorithm can be applied to mixture models and spline
fitting. An incomplete density model may be fitted, a unique capability that
will be explored fully in the context of regression, image processing,
clustering, outlier detection, and density estimation. Nonparametric methodology
for functional data analysis will be devised and tested with novel data sources.
Other applications include adaptive wavelet thresholding, solution of the
mixture of regression problems, and application to models which apply to only a
subset of the data.

Research in data analysis and statistical modeling provides intellectual
challenges with deep applications in almost every field of natural and social
sciences and engineering. The field of nonparametric statistics has made a
significant contribution to the success of science with algorithms that are
hidden but critical even in the inner workings of cell phones. At a recent
National Research Council workshop, numerous scientists identified critical
statistical needs in their work with massive data sets: new dimension reduction
algorithms, specialized visualization tools for exploring massive data, better
clustering algorithms, and techniques for handling nonstationary data. Results
from this proposed research directly impact three of these four critical
opportunities. This program represents a comprehensive and long-term attack on a
host of important data analytic problems in multivariate estimation. Graduate
training is significant component of this project. The results will be of long-
term theoretical interest and will provide short-term solutions to real-world
problems.