* 0907241
* Adaptive Designs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jay Bartroff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 130,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will develop designs
for statistical experiments that adapt over time to incoming data -- so-called
"adaptive designs" -- and plans for analyzing data coming out of such
experiments for two general classes of problems: (I) optimal parameter
estimation, control, and design in multiperiod regression problems with
nonlinear models (e.g., generalized linear models), and (II) time-sequential
tests of multiple hypotheses. In Part I, recent computational advances known as
approximate dynamic programming will be harnessed that hold promise for
developing optimal or nearly-optimal estimation and control procedures in
nonlinear regression models. In Part II, recent methodological advances will be
used and extended to develop a unified approach to testing multiple hypotheses
over time or in stages in a statistically optimal way, with either strong (FWER)
or weak (FDR) error control. For both parts, the performance of the resulting
procedures will be studied analytically, assessed through extensive numerical
simulations, and applied to real data. Applications in economics, DNA microarray
data, psychometric testing, biomedical trials, and engineering control problems
will be addressed, and practical algorithms will be developed for real, on-line
implementation in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many statistical challenges
of great societal importance require adapting one's actions quickly and
intelligently as new information arrives over time. Some of these areas include
solar energy, robotics, automobile emissions, homeland security, and health
care. In this project the investigator will develop the statistical procedures
and algorithms that underlie some of the most challenging problems in these
areas. Part I of this project concerns regression problems, where the observer
can influence the settings under which statistical information is generated, and
how to design and change these settings over time in order to most efficiently
learn about unknown parameters and control the effects of the chosen settings.
Recent computational advances known as approximate dynamic programming hold the
potential to solve previously intractable problems of this form. Part II
concerns how to most efficiently combine statistical information from many
disparate sources over time in order to reach justified conclusions, and how to
avoid the multiple testing fallacy of false discoveries. The theory underlying
these problems will be studied to develop data analysis and computational
algorithms for real, on-line implementation, and software packages will be
developed to facilitate applications.