* 0907931
* Dynamics of aggregation and collapse in multidimensional swarming models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,001.00

This project develops detailed mathematical theory for aggregation models. Such
models involve pair-wise interaction potentials and arise in the context of
biological swarming models and control theory applications for coordinated
groups and consensus. These models also appear in other contexts such as
materials science applications including granular flow. The research in applied
differential equations involves rigorous analysis of nonlinear partial
differential equations, numerical simulation of continuum and discrete models,
and asymptotic analysis and modeling. Specific problems of interest include (a)
a detailed understanding of the dynamics of collapse in the case of kinematic
aggregations; (b) the role of fractional dissipation in such models; (c) the
discrete to continuum limit; and (d) analysis of scaling properties and
behaviors of discrete swarms in the limit of large numbers. The work also
involves related mathematical models for crime hotspots in residential
burglaries.

The design and analysis of cooperative control and algorithms for autonomous
agents is an active area of research with application to surveillance of
hazardous areas, perimeter patrol, and control of teams of autonomous vehicles.
Some ideas for such problems can come from modeling of biological groups that
provide excellent examples in nature of how many agents can interact seamlessly,
sometimes over large distances with relatively short range interactions. Many
well-known models for these groupings empirically exhibit a great deal of
complexity. This research program is fundamental to the understanding of these
problems.