* 0907179
* Local Moment and Heavy Fermion Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on heavy electron materials and local moment physics. The new concepts
required to understand these low-energy materials, will, in many cases scale up
in energy and temperature to describe related phenomenon in transition Metal
materials, such as copper and iron-based superconductors. Many of the key
questions in this area touch upon issues of fundamental importance, such as the
physics of quantum criticality, mechanisms of anisotropic superconductivity, and
the origins of non-Fermi liquid behavior. Motivated by the discovery of two new
and unusual heavy fermion superconductors, the PI will apply a new type of
large-N expansion for heavy electron superconductivity that he has recently
developed. Fresh insights in heavy electron quantum criticality and the
discovery of a Kondo spin liquid material inspire the PI to embark on a new set
of investigations into the phase diagram of the Kondo lattice. A magnetically
tuned critical end point in a multiferroic oxide has recently been discovered.
The PI will pursue a new research program to study field-tuned quantum
criticality in multiferroic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research into the
various aspects of "hard condensed matter physics" plays an essential driving
role in both the development of new physics concepts, and new ideas for
materials of the future. For example, the remarkable tendency of quantum
critical points to nucleate superconductivity and other new phases of matter is
of great interest to materials development; on the other hand, the new
universality classes of quantum phase transition are of great fundamental
interest and, like their classical predecessors in statistical mechanics, may
enjoy generalization and future application in the realm of cosmology and
particle physics. This is wonderful area for students to learn the advanced
methods of theoretical physics, while maintaining an intimate contact with
experimental physics and real materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is strongly
committed to diversity in physics, with a long record of support for women in
physics. Two women graduate students are currently working in his group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education on a class of materials known as heavy
electron materials. The interplay of electrons in itinerant quantum states and
quantum states localized around a rare-earth or actinide atom leads to an
unusual metallic state with properties that are consistent with the textbooks.
The properties of these materials are further complicated by the existence of
quantum phase transitions - phase transitions that occur at the absolute zero of
temperature but with a powerful influence that can be felt over a range of
temperature. The PI will build on and use a promising new method that he has
developed to gain insight into two recently discovered materials in this class
that are superconductors and into heavy electron materials more generally. The
PI will also study the superconducting states of these materials. The PI will
further explore the role quantum phase transitions play in newly discovered
multiferroic materials which are a promising class of materials for future
electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the superconducting
states and the unusual metallic states which give way to superconductivity
contributes to the intellectual foundations of materials research and
superconductivity. This knowledge may lead to harnessing the ability of
superconductors to carry electric current with no to very low power dissipation
in a practical way leading to significant energy savings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is strongly committed to diversity in physics, with
a long record of support for women in physics. Two women graduate students are
currently working in his group.