* 0907082
* High-Frequency Studies of Carbon and Boron Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daniel Prober, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This research program will develop
understanding of novel one-dimensional electrical conductors; the metallic
single-wall carbon nanotube, and the newly synthesized boron nanotubes. These
form an ideal laboratory for studying one-dimensional behavior of electrons. The
response of the nanotube to light will be measured, to determine how the
individual electrons act collectively, and in what ways this differs from the
behavior of macroscopic, three-dimensional conductors. This is important for
understanding the possible use of nanotubes as interconnecting wires in future
microcircuits. The broad range of research skills to be learned in
microfabrication, optics, materials science and cryogenics will prepare graduate
and undergraduate students for diverse career paths. Some of the advances in
scientific understanding due to this research will be incorporated into an
undergraduate seminar, Science of Modern Technology. In addition, visits to
local elementary schools will have demonstrations of some of the ideas of optics
and cryogenics that are used in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This research program
will develop understanding of novel one-dimensional electrical conductors; the
metallic single-wall carbon nanotube, and the newly synthesized boron nanotubes.
These form an ideal laboratory for studying one-dimensional electron physics.
Propagation of plasmons, and spin-charge separation will be studied using
measurements of the frequency-dependent absorption of power, in the far-infrared
range of wavelengths. The broad range of research skills to be learned in
microfabrication, optics, materials science and cryogenics will prepare graduate
and undergraduate students for diverse career paths. Some of the advances in
scientific understanding due to this research will be incorporated into an
undergraduate seminar, Science of Modern Technology. In addition, visits to
local elementary schools will have demonstrations of some of the ideas of optics
and cryogenics that are used in the research.