* 0907993
* Effects of RFID Technologies on Organizational Dynamics in Hospitals
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2008,04/30/2010
* Jill Fisher, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 04/30/2010
* USD 95,041.00

Introduction Hospitals are increasingly turning to information and communication
technologies to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their organizational
structures. The integration of these technologies often results in dramatic
changes in management, divisions of labor, and accountability. Radio frequency
identification (RFID) is an emerging technology that is rapidly becoming the
dominant information and communication technology for hospitals to track
inventory, identify patients, and manage personnel. RFID systems are seen as
valuable because of their ability to collect data in real-time. As a result,
these systems may have a valence toward surveillance, such that the location of
individuals is tracked and analyzed under the rubric of management paradigms
like "workflow management." This two-year project will explore effects of RFID
systems on organizational dynamics in hospitals. Research sites will include
three hospitals with fully functioning RFID systems in place. The two main
questions to be addressed in this research project are the following. (1) What
effects do RFID systems have upon organizational roles and relations? (2) What
are the surveillance potentials of RFID systems? The focus of these questions
includes documentable practices and policies as well as hospital staff's
perceptions of the changes brought by the RFID systems. Using qualitative
methods, the research will be conducted through observational studies at the
three hospital sites and a minimum of 90 semi-structured interviews with
hospital staff, including physicians, nurses, administrators, and information
technology staff.

Intellectual Merit This project will serve to provide a greater understanding of
the ways in which emerging technological systems affect organizational dynamics.
This project is theoretically valuable because it will contribute to scholarship
on new managerial cultures and the ways in which technologies shape and are
shaped by these trends. In addition to producing refereed articles, a co-
authored academic book will be generated from this project.

Broader Impacts This project will also provide a better understanding of RFID
technologies in the workplace. This project is empirically important because
there is currently little evaluation of RFID on organizational dynamics in
hospitals (or in other public institutions) in spite of the emphasis of the
federal government and technology companies to more broadly implement these
technologies. Furthermore, it is crucial to understand the ways in which the
privacy of employees and others may be compromised by these systems. This
project aims to provide recommendations to minimize the surveillance potential
of RFID technologies within hospitals.