* 0907523
* Nanograin BaTiO3 Ceramics for Dielectric, Ferroelectric  and Piezoelectric Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Every year 1,000 trillion new pieces of
multilayer ceramic capacitors enter the market inside the consumer, industrial
and military products, and as their sizes shrink their microstructure features
are projected to approach the nanomaterial scale within the next decade. This
project will focus on BaTiO3, the ceramic material used in these capacitors, to
determine the most important material parameters required to propel continued
advances into the next generations. The project will also provide rich
educational and research opportunities to engage students and educators in the
Philadelphia area and in the larger community. In particular, the University of
Puerto Rico-Humacao will benefit by gaining internet access to some measurement
instruments in the Penn laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate nanograin BaTiO3 ceramics for
possible dielectric, ferroelectric and piezoelectric applications. By varying
the grain size, grain boundary charge and crystal stability of the nanograin
ceramics, it will seek to engineer a tunable nanocomposite without apparent
compositional inhomogeneity. The composite effect will rely on charge/defect-
induced internal fields to smear structural transitions and clamp polarization,
creating stable dielectrics with temperature-independent dielectric responses.
Such possibility was not previously available in conventional ceramics because
until the advent of nanomaterials, the width of the space charge zone has been
much less than the grain size. The project will take advantage of a recent
breakthrough in sintering technology that allows densification without grain
growth, which avails nanograin BaTiO3 ceramics. Integrated research and
educational activities built around laboratory discoveries will train new
students in the field of nano electronic materials for future innovation and
development. &lt;br/&gt;