* 0907064
* Bayesian Optimal Sequential Design for Random Function Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Marco Ferreira, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 130,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator
develops computational methods for Bayesian optimal sequential design for the
estimation of random functions. Random function estimation, either in the
context of Bayesian nonparametric regression or in the analysis of
spatial/spatio-temporal processes, has become an ubiquitous tool in most areas
of science. While methods for the estimation of random functions are reasonably
well developed, optimal design for such problems is in its infancy. This
proposal presents a research program that develops a novel computational
framework for Bayesian optimal sequential design for random function estimation.
This computational framework is based on evolutionary Markov chain Monte Carlo
(EMCMC), which combines ideas of genetic or evolutionary algorithms with the
power of Markov chain Monte Carlo. This framework is able to consider general
models for the observations, such as generalized linear models and scale
mixtures of normals. In addition, this methodology easily accommodates multiple
covariates and general priors on the space of regression functions based on
basis functions such as splines and Gaussian kernels. Finally, this framework
allows optimality criteria with general utility functions that may include
competing objectives, such as for example minimization of costs, minimization of
the distance between true and estimated functions, and minimization of the
prediction error.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimation of random functions arises in
many application areas, such as for example environmental science, epidemiology,
climatology, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;An important example in engineering is
the statistical approximation of computer model output, e.g., approximation of
fluid flow simulators and rocket booster simulators. Usually, scientists want to
run such simulators for many different experimental conditions. However,
typically each run of a computer model is extremely expensive and time
consuming. An effective way to deal with these resource constraints is to run
the simulator for a relatively small number of experimental conditions and to
fit a statistical nonparametric model to approximate the output of the
simulator. The proposed computational methods allow Bayesian optimal choice of
experimental conditions in a sequential fashion, that is, the next experimental
conditions are chosen based on what has been learned from the previous
experimental conditions. Thus, the proposed methodology for sequential choice of
design points will result in huge improvements in cost and efficiency. Another
important application of the proposed Bayesian methodology is in dynamic
monitoring of spatio-temporal environmental processes. The statistical design
problem is to decide where to locate the several stations of a monitoring
network. In case some of the monitoring stations are mobile, the proposed
methodology leads to an optimally adaptive monitoring network which keeps costs
under control while maximizes learning.