* 0907673
* Introducing Science Faculty from Historically Black Colleges and Universities to Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Jones
* 05/31/2012
* USD 596,551.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This program is designed to acquaint more minority
students with the field of Materials Science and Engineering by introducing
faculty and educators from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU?s)
to materials science and engineering. The program to introduce these academics
to the materials discipline consists of coupling traditional and non-traditional
classes during the mornings with a combination of laboratory experiments and
visits to industrial materials plants during the afternoons in a Gordon
Conference style program setting. A typical day might begin with a traditional
lecture in the morning, followed by a group cooperative learning session with
computer involvement to develop computer assisted learning skills. Afternoons
will alternate between hands-on laboratory activities and industrial facility
visits. For example, within a few minutes by car of the University of Alabama
campus are Nucor Steel (metals), Radici Spandex (polymers) and Lafarge Cement
(ceramics). Approximately 30 faculty from the nation?s 114 HBCU?s will be
invited to participate in the program each year. To further develop a long-term
relationship with some of the institutions, a research component was developed.
This research component consists of inviting two former participants who
participated in one of the previous programs for a 6-10 week summer research
opportunity. The HBCU faculty will be teamed with a University of Alabama
faculty member to work on a materials-related research project. This program
will provide faculty members and educators from HBCU?s with a thorough
introduction to the materials science and engineering discipline and the
instruments needed to develop materials science based examples and/or
experiments to convey the importance of materials and their relationship to the
basic principles in mathematics and the physical sciences (e.g., physics,
chemistry, astronomy, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Although almost everything we encounter on a daily basis is
composed of either glass, ceramics, metals, polymers (plastics), or a composite
structure, the well established discipline of Materials Science and Engineering
is relatively unknown compared to other engineering disciplines. The field of
Materials Science and Engineering remains a hidden opportunity for many of
today?s students. This situation exists at many major universities which do not
have a focused materials department and even at some institutions where minor
materials activities exist within other departments. Only at those institutions
where strong materials departments exist are the students cognizant of the field
of materials and its career opportunities. At most Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU?s), the discipline of Materials Science and Engineering
is practically unknown at the undergraduate level. To address this void, a
program was developed at The University of Alabama by Drs. Viola L. Acoff and
Mark L. Weaver to introduce science faculty from HBCU?s to the field of
Materials Science and Engineering. The 3-week program consists of coupling
traditional and non-traditional classes during the mornings with a combination
of laboratory experiments and visits to industrial materials plants during the
afternoons. To further develop a long-term relationship with some of the
institutions, two former participants who participated in one of the previous
3-week programs will be invited back for a 6-10 week summer research
opportunity. The HBCU faculty will be teamed with a University of Alabama
faculty member to work on a materials-related research project. The attending
HBCU faculty will gain knowledge of materials, obtain an appreciation for the
materials discipline and leave with the ?tools? to familiarize their students
with the discipline of materials. This study has the potential to impact the
field of materials science by increasing the diversity of the
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;