* 0907370
* Multiscale Theory For Semicrystalline Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Scott Milner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
polymer crystallization.

The long-chain nature of polymer molecules dictates that polymeric crystals
adopt a chain-folded lamellar form, but the basic question of how the crystals
nucleate is ill understood. There is experimental evidence that polyethylene,
the most common semicrystalline polymer, actually nucleates via an intermediate
?rotator" mesophase. However, no theoretical basis yet exists to assess this
intriguing hypothesis, or to ascertain how widespread this phenomenon might be
in other polymers. Progress requires a theory of the mesophases, able to compute
not only their free energy relative to the melt and crystal phases, but also the
free energy of the interface between the melt and the mesophase or crystal.

An effective theory of the crystal-melt interface in semicrystalline polymers
would also predict the concentration of ?tie chains", which link together
adjacent crystalline lamellae and lead to the toughness and ductility of
plastics. Also, there is much current interest in the effect of flow on
crystallization kinetics and morphology. This is crucial in commercial use of
semicrystalline polymers, which are very sensitive to flow effects. Without a
good theory of quiescent crystallization, any effort to understand how flow
speeds up nucleation is severely handicapped.

The PI aims to develop the theoretical basis to understand the mesophases in
polyethylene. It will lead to predictions for bulk and surface free energies,
and it will determine whether nucleation in polyethylene can indeed occur via a
mesophase. Given the inherently multiscale nature of the problem, a
transformative synthesis of techniques will be employed: atomistic simulation of
ordered phases, novel use of ?solid-state simulations" to characterize mesophase
domain walls, mesoscopic discrete-spin simulation of partially ordered
mesophases, and a new adaptation of grafted chain ?brush" theory of the
interface between ordered polymer phases and adjacent melt. This unique
combination of strategies will lead to a better understanding of how polymer
crystals nucleate, and will bring us closer to achieving optimal properties of
these truly modern materials.

This intellectually rich problem of practical importance provides an excellent
opportunity for education, offering students and postdocs broad exposure to
theory, analytical methods, atomistic and mesoscale simulation. The PI is
developing an undergraduate course for Fall 2009 in Polymers and Complex Fluids,
which is well aligned with the multiscale approach of this proposal. The
Chemical Engineering Department has a strong record of minority and gender
representation among its graduate students, with about 30 percent women. The
College of Engineering has an active Women In Engineering Program and a
Multicultural Engineering Program. All simulations will be performed with open
source software, to remove any barrier to use by others.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education on how polymers crystallize.

Semicrystalline polymers, although relatively young, are the most ubiquitous
materials of the modern age. The mass of such materials now produced worldwide
each year exceeds the production of steel. Even so, their ultimate potential for
desirable mechanical and physical properties is as yet unfulfilled. This is
because, in contrast to the centuries-old field of metallurgy, the science base
for semicrystalline polymers is still very much a work in progress, with many
key results obtained only in the past few decades. Likewise, improved control of
polymer molecular structure through advances in catalysis has emerged only
relatively recently.

The PI will use theoretical techniques to explore a possible microscopic
mechanism for crystallization through an intermediate polymer phase.

This intellectually rich problem of practical importance provides an excellent
opportunity for education, offering students and postdocs broad exposure to
theory, analytical methods, atomistic and mesoscale simulation. The PI is
developing an undergraduate course for Fall 2009 in Polymers and Complex Fluids,
which is well aligned with the multiscale approach of this proposal. The
Chemical Engineering Department has a strong record of minority and gender
representation among its graduate students, with about 30 percent women. The
College of Engineering has an active Women In Engineering Program and a
Multicultural Engineering Program. All simulations will be performed with open
source software, to remove any barrier to use by others.

