* 0907777
* Singular limits, saturation, and defects in block copolymer morphology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Xiaofeng Ren, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 201,632.00

Ren&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0907777&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A diblock copolymer molecule is
a linear chain of an&lt;br/&gt;A-monomer block grafted covalently to a B-monomer
block. Because&lt;br/&gt;of the repulsion between the unlike monomers, the
different type&lt;br/&gt;sub-chains tend to segregate, but as they are
chemically bonded&lt;br/&gt;in chain molecules, segregation of sub-chains cannot
lead to a&lt;br/&gt;macroscopic phase separation. Only a local micro-
phase&lt;br/&gt;separation occurs: micro-domains rich in A monomers
and&lt;br/&gt;micro-domains rich in B monomers emerge as a result.
A&lt;br/&gt;nano-sized pattern formed from micro-domains is known as
a&lt;br/&gt;morphology phase. The investigator develops singular
limit&lt;br/&gt;methods to study morphology phases that concentrate on
points,&lt;br/&gt;curves, and surfaces in space, and that might not be found
by&lt;br/&gt;existing free energy methods. These methods reduce
complicated&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear, nonlocal, variational, and partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equation problems to simpler geometric problems. They
analyze&lt;br/&gt;the saturation phenomenon: a process of elongation,
deformation,&lt;br/&gt;and breaking off of a small number of large objects to
form a&lt;br/&gt;large number of small objects. They also explain defects
in&lt;br/&gt;morphological phases caused by local-nonlocal competition
or&lt;br/&gt;topological constraints. In the case of block copolymer
vesicles&lt;br/&gt;the investigator studies the bending rigidity in the free
energy. &lt;br/&gt;The singular limit techniques are extended to problems
without&lt;br/&gt;variational structures, such as the Gierer-Meinhardt system
for&lt;br/&gt;biological morphogenesis in development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Block copolymers are soft condensed materials that in&lt;br/&gt;contrast to
crystalline solids, are characterized by fluid-like&lt;br/&gt;disorder on the
molecular scale and a high degree of order on a&lt;br/&gt;longer length scale.
An almost unlimited number of molecular&lt;br/&gt;architectures can be designed
by modern nano-technologies to&lt;br/&gt;produce materials with particular
mechanical, electric, barrier,&lt;br/&gt;ionic and other physical properties.
Common box tapes use&lt;br/&gt;triblock copolymers to achieve pressure-sensitive
adhesion. &lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are blended with asphalt in road
construction to&lt;br/&gt;reduce pavement cracking and rutting at low and high
temperature&lt;br/&gt;extremes. In this project the investigator studies
pattern&lt;br/&gt;formations within block copolymers that are related to changes
in&lt;br/&gt;the morphology phase of the material, and hence to larger-
scale&lt;br/&gt;material properties. The project includes graduate students,
who&lt;br/&gt;develop skills and knowledge in both mathematics and
materials&lt;br/&gt;science. &lt;br/&gt;