* 0907901
* Globalization and Reproductive Tourism in the Arab World
* SBE,BCS
* 09/09/2008,12/31/2010
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2010
* USD 105,565.00

This three-year study examines the new global phenomenon of "reproductive
tourism," defined as travel in the pursuit of assisted reproductive technologies
(ARTs), usually from one country to another. Six factors promoting reproductive
tourism have been cited in the literature. These include religious prohibitions,
lack of expertise and supplies, safety, discrimination against certain
categories of individuals, shortages and waiting lists, and costs. However,
these causes of reproductive tourism remain conjectural, as this phenomenon has
never been studied empirically. Thus, the proposed study is the first of its
kind to investigate the new global phenomenon of reproductive tourism on an
empirical level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate and compare
reproductive tourism in two highly mobile, migrant communities in the Arab
world: 1) the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the current tourist capital of the
Middle East; and 2) "Arab Detroit," the largest Arab ethnic enclave in North
America and the so-called capital of Arab America. Both of these sites are home
to ART centers that cater primarily to Muslim populations. ART center clientele
include migrants who have settled in these communities for economic and
political reasons, only to discover that they are infertile, as well as
"reproductive tourists" who travel from distant countries with the intention of
receiving medical advice, the latest technologies, and, in some cases, donor
gametes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In each site, data will be collected to test four
major hypotheses concerning: 1) the causes of reproductive tourism; 2) Islamic
attitudes toward bodily commodification and human gamete donation; 3) arenas of
constraint on ART-seeking; and 4) gender and marital relations, as they affect
and are affected by reproductive tourism. These domains of inquiry are
important, given unique features of reproductive tourism in the Arab world: for
example, a Sunni Muslim ban on third-party gamete donation versus recent
encouragement of donor technologies in Shi'a Islam. In addition, the Arab Gulf
is a particularly interesting site of reproductive tourism, given its oil
wealth, large expatriate labor force, and high rates of arranged marriage,
consanguinity, and polygyny. This stands in contrast to Arab Detroit, where a
significant portion of the approximately 400,000 Arab residents:, including many
recent war refugees from Lebanon and Iraq, endure impoverished lives, yet
require reproductive health services.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is the
first of its kind to examine the growing global phenomenon of reproductive
tourism within the Arab world and also generally. As such, it will contribute to
multiple fields of study, including medical anthropology, the anthropology of
globalization, science and technology studies, gender studies, and Middle
Eastern studies in a post-September 11th, war-in-Iraq era. In addition, the
empirical findings of this research are of great importance to social policy,
given increasing calls for legislation of ARTs and reproductive tourism on a
global level. This study can provide insights into the experiences and concerns
of reproductive tourists themselves, thereby shedding light on a world of global
reproductive tourism that is burgeoning, but still shrouded in
mystery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;