* 0907832
* Analysis, Computation, and Application of Completions of Constrained Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Campbell, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Curry
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract: A differential algebraic equation (DAE) is an implicit system of
differential equations in state and control variables. An integer quantity
called the index is one measure of how different a DAE is from being an explicit
ordinary differential equation (ODE). Many problems are most naturally initially
modeled as a DAE particularly those that are analyzed and simulated using
computer generated mathematical models. DAEs occur in optimization when the
original problem is a DAE or because of the activation of constraints. Because
of DAEs importance, a variety of numerical techniques have been developed in
recent years to simulate and analyze DAEs although most of these methods only
work on specific classes of problems with special structure and low index.
Unfortunately many widely used software packages cannot accept DAE models, or if
they can accept them, the models must be index one or have special structure.
One way to address both the problem of general DAE integrators and wider use of
DAE models in current software, is to embed the DAE into an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) called a completion of the DAE. The idea of
embedding the DAE solutions into an ODE has been around for some time. However,
traditional approaches either left the new additional dynamics under determined
or again only worked for special classes of systems. A more general and
automated type of embedding, such as that to be investigated in the proposed
project, would greatly extend the applicability of many current software
packages. In this project the investigators and his colleagues and students will
work on the analysis, computation, and application of completions of general
DAEs. Analysis backed algorithms will be constructed to generate completions
with desired extra dynamics. The proposed research represents a major extension
and modification of this idea to general nonlinear DAEs and the development of
new results on controlling the nature of these additional dynamics. The obtained
results will be of considerable independent interest but the proposal will focus
on first applying the new results to simulation and control. The proposed
research will result in improved algorithms and new theoretical understanding of
numerical methods for differential algebraic equations and their use in control
and simulation.

Increasingly in many problems in science and industry the process or machine is
described in terms of what are called differential equations. This mathematical
model is then used to simulate the process on a computer and to predict what the
real system would do, to design more efficient processes, and to improve
performance. However, the problems of interest in science and engineering today
are becoming increasingly complex so that today mathematical models are often
formed by combining together several different mathematical models. A
mathematical model of a biotechnological system, for example, might include
equations describing fluid flow, chemical reactions, and mechanics. These
composite mathematical models are often very complex and are sometimes not in a
form that is ready to be solved with current computer software. It can then take
considerable human effort, and sometimes a loss of accuracy, to convert these
complex mathematical models to a form that can be readily used. The conversion
process not only takes time but can lead to errors. The investigators of this
project will develop theory backed mathematical procedures and algorithms that
will facilitate and automate the conversion of the original complex mathematical
models to models that can be used with existing software and algorithms. This
will reduce the time between model development and being able to use the model,
improve the accuracy of the models, reduce the introduction of errors, and
thereby speed up the design of industrial processes, and the analysis of many
physical systems. While the differential equations studied in this project occur
widely, in the testing of the algorithms the investigators will initially draw
primarily on problems from the mechanical engineering and aerospace communities
and the development of more efficient and reliable manufacturing processes.