* 0907395
* High Temperature Hydro Thermal Synthesis and Crystal Growth of Inorganic Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 379,047.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This new proposal outlines plans to exploit the hydrothermal
method to explore new categories of materials with particular emphasis on
extremely refractory oxides. The hydrothermal method employs water at extremely
high temperatures and pressures and has proven to be an excellent technique for
the preparation of a wide variety of inorganic materials as high quality single
crystals. Technology was developed at Clemson to do reactions at substantially
higher temperatures (750¢ªC) with more powerful and concentrated mineralizers
(e.g.>25M hydroxide or halide) than any previously work in these labs. These
conditions enable synthesis and good crystal growth on chemical systems
heretofore too inert or refractory to be otherwise accessible. The specific
categories of solids to be investigated are; 1) wide bandgap oxides,
specifically the s block metal borates and beryllates; 2) ultrarefractory oxides
like hafnates, thorates and yttrates; and 3) large single crystal ferromagnetic
oxides for neutron diffraction study. The fundamental reaction chemistry will be
systematically explored for each class of materials. Single crystals will be
targeted in all cases. Our crystal growth can be divided into three broad
regimes, namely crystals large enough for single crystal diffraction (0.3mm),
crystals large enough for single crystal magnetic and piezoelectric
characterization (1-2mm), and crystals large enough for optical device
characterization (1cm). Each of these size regimes will employ an appropriate
hydrothermal growth method. For example, for wide bandgap oxides to find use in
deep UV optical applications, single crystals of 1 cm/edge will be required for
characterization in prototype optical devices. In contrast, ferrimagnets
specifically grown for single crystal magnetic structures on the nearby Oak
Ridge Spallation Neutron Source will require single crystal 1-2 mm per edge.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This work will employ a relatively obscure technology to
grow single crystals of solids that are otherwise difficult to study. The solid
crystals will have applications in many advanced technologies, especially
lasers, advanced optics, magnetic materials and sensors. The field of crystal
growth has all but disappeared from university research programs in the United
States. This shortcoming has created a major gap in the skill set of onshore
materials science capabilities. There is substantial evidence that this
shortcoming is having a significant impact on national competitiveness in key
materials. Furthermore this shortcoming has a significant negative impact on the
students¡¯ research abilities. This is detrimental to scientific research and
discouraging to students. A rational and systematic ability to grow crystals of
sufficient size and quality for physical property evaluation leads to a dramatic
improvement in the breadth of student development. Often patents result from
this work and the resultant commercial application provides an important
perspective to the students who are much thus better prepared to make better
decisions about experimental design. Finally the technology is very ¡°green¡±,
which raises the awareness of the students to societal impact of their science.