* 0907197
* Phase Separation and Magnetism in Strained Films of Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Barrett Wells, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 12/31/2013
* USD 370,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a systematic study of
magnetism and charge inhomogeneity in nanoscale thin films of complex oxides,
with a goal of using the unique properties of films as a tool to uncover basic
materials physics. Over the last decades, studies of complex oxides have
uncovered rich behavior that allows for interesting properties but presents
great difficulties in understanding the basic controlling physics. An emerging
picture in the study of these materials is the ubiquitous presence of
inhomogeneity at several different length scales. There are several important
experimental degrees of freedom that can be exploited in the study of films:
strain, epitaxy, finite size effects, and the creation of artificial multilayer
lattices. We will use these parameters to better understand the interplay
between magnetism, charge ordering, and electronic phase separation. This work
will require significant development of our ability to control the oxygen
content in oxide films and to measure the oxygen that has been incorporated. It
will build the infrastructure for oxide film studies at the University of
Connecticut, further collaborations with NIST and Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and help train both students and Connecticut area high school
science teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of the
considerable technology that has been developed recently to control properties
of nanoscale films of functional oxide materials in order to better understand
the fundamental physics of these materials. Functional oxide materials have
surprising and extremely useful properties, but they are not well understood at
a basic level. Films the thickness of a few nanometers can be different from the
same material in bulk form for many reasons including a change in the typical
atom to atom distances, the extreme thinness of the film can induce effects from
quantum mechanics, and new properties can arise by layering films of different
compounds on top of each other. Each of these effects can serve as a control
parameter to test basic theories. This work will require significant development
of the ability to control and measure the amount of oxygen in the films. It will
build the infrastructure for nanoscale film studies at the University of
Connecticut, further collaborations with NIST and Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and help train students. At least one high school science teacher
will work with the group each summer to further her/his scientific training and
then be able to bring the research frontier back into the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;