* 0907652
* Dilute Nitride GaNAsP for High Efficiency Multiband Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Charles Tu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

Technical: This research project aims to improve the power conversion efficiency
of solar cells by investigating a multiband material, a semiconductor with an
intermediate band. Such a material has effectively three absorption bands and a
single junction could be equivalent to a more complicated, but high-efficiency,
three-junction solar cell. The growth and processing of such a material is a
major challenge, along with understanding and modeling of a multiband solar
cell. The emphasis of this project is on materials growth and processing of a
particular class of materials, dilute nitride GaNAsP, which has an intermediate
band so that electrons can be absorbed by below-bandgap photons, be excited to
the intermediate band, and on to the conduction band providing current. These
below-bandgap photo-excitations are in addition to the absorption of above-
bandgap photons to excite electrons from the valence band to the conduction band
directly. The PI, his students and collaborators at the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory will study fundamental aspects of the growth, processing and
characterization, with the aim toward greater understanding of fundamental
materials science and optimization of the multiband material for solar cell
applications. The approach includes fabrication and testing, in comparison with
single-band solar cells. Greater understanding of the physical properties of
such multiband semiconductors is expected as an outcome, advancing the field
generally, and the performance of solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. High-efficiency solar photovoltaic cells have
broad potential impact on economy and human life through more efficient
electrical energy generation. Compared to single-junction and multijunction
solar cells, the multiband solar cells investigated in this project could
provide significantly higher efficiency and lower cost. The research activities
will promote interdisciplinary training for students in growth and
characterization of novel compound semiconductors, prototype solar cell device
design, and fabrication. Undergraduate students will also participate in the
research project; they will be recruited from various sources, including the
McNair Program, which serves low-income students and/or underrepresented
minorities. The undergraduate students' activities will include advanced
characterizations, such as atomic force microscopy, and participation in various
undergraduate research conferences at UCSD. Additionally, the PI is the director
of the COSMOS (California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science)
residential summer program for 150 high school students. The results of this
research project can be incorporated into the curriculum and extend to the high
schools through the Teacher Fellow program of COSMOS.