* 0907477
* Carrier Dynamics and Charge Transport in Novel Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jie Shan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 382,500.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Electronic charge transport is one of
the most fundamental and central subjects in condensed matter physics. From a
technological standpoint, the electronics and optoelectronics industries depend
on a detailed understanding of, and the associated ability to control, charge
transport. Conventional conductivity measurements, however, are limited to
relatively low frequencies and samples for which satisfactory electrical
contacts can be produced. This individual investigator award supports a project
to pursue experiments that address previously intractable problems concerning
charge transport and carrier dynamics in organic photoconducting materials and
in nanometer-scaled materials. Using an experimental approach based on the
capabilities of lasers that are able to provide very fast pulses of light (i.e.
femtosecond pulsed lasers), measurements of the high-frequency conductivity of
the materials will be made, without the need for electrical contacts. The
scientific results will be of significance not only to the disciplines of
condensed-matter and materials physics, but also have the potential to impact
several important technologies such as organic electronic and optoelectronic
devices and solar cells. This project will support the education of a Ph.D.
student. The combination of basic research involving fundamental issues in
condensed matter physics with practical issues in experimental research provides
an ideal training ground for career paths from academia to high
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator award supports a project to investigate electronic
charge transport and carrier dynamics in an array of novel electronic materials
using the ultrafast optical method of terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. With
the new capabilities to be developed, the technique will permit sensitive
measurements of the complex conductivity of materials up to the mid-infrared
frequencies without the need of contacts and with femtosecond time resolution.
The research program will address problems in charge transport properties of
organic photoconductors and carrier multiplication in semiconductor
nanocrystals. This project will support the education of a Ph.D. student. The
combination of basic research involving fundamental issues in condensed matter
physics with practical issues in optics and lasers provides an ideal training
ground for career paths from academia to industry.