* 0907955
* The stability of hydraulic jumps: analysis, computation, and experiment
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rodolfo Rosales, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,001.00

The dynamics of hydraulic jumps is described by hyperbolic partial differential
equations with source terms due to frictional losses and channel-bed variations.
The analysis of hyperbolic systems has traditionally been focused on systems
without non-linear source terms, as the nonlinearities in the hyperbolic
operators themselves are rather intricate, and play an important role in the
nature of the solutions. Significantly less attention has been paid to the role
of nonlinear source terms such as those arising in the shallow-water equations
and in the reactive Euler equations. Such source terms are responsible for a
rich variety of phenomena, including the complex dynamical features of
detonation shock fronts. In this project, we investigate the role of the
nonlinear wave interactions arising from source terms in the shallow-water
system, which may be responsible for the formation of polygonal hydraulic jumps.

This project concerns the dynamics of peculiar flow structures that may emerge
from the circular hydraulic jump. When a vertical jet impinges on a flat solid
surface, the jet fluid spreads radially in a thinning film until reaching a
critical radius at which the film thickness increases dramatically in what is
termed a `hydraulic jump'. In certain parameter regimes, despite the
axisymmetric source conditions, striking asymmetric flows emerge, including
polygonal hydraulic jumps, the explanation for which remains elusive. Our
combined theoretical, numerical and experimental project will be focused towards
rationalizing these subtle flows by developing the mathematical analogy between
hydraulic jumps and detonation shock fronts. A new area of mathematical analysis
will be initiated and explored.

