* 0907025
* Pressure Tuned Quantum Phase Transitions in Model Itinerant Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Thomas Rosenbaum, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 369,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been enormous activity devoted
to quantum phase transitions in complicated and often disordered materials: rare
earth cuprates, heavy fermion materials, transition metal oxides and sulfides
Ideally, one would like to tune a simple, stoichiometric material to its quantum
critical point and directly measure the disappearance of its order parameter,
thereby isolating the key physical mechanisms. Cr, the elemental
antiferromagnet, offers an extraordinary opportunity to investigate the
fundamental question of how magnetism emerges in metals as its spin and charge
order is suppressed by pressure. Tuning the Mott-Hubbard metal-insulator
transition with pressure in NiS2 similarly permits experimental access to the
naked quantum singularity. Finally, direct measurements of the order parameters
in CeFe2, a material sitting on the knife edge between ferro- and
antiferromagnetism, should permit hard conclusions to be drawn about the
possible coexistence of different magnetic ground states, with the potential for
self-organization on the mesoscale. These model systems will inform the study of
magnetism, quantum phase transitions, and correlated materials in general. The
wide array of techniques, from x-ray scattering to magnetotransport, and the mix
of physics, chemistry and materials science concepts, should train students well
for careers in industry, the national laboratories, or academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnets form
the basis of modern technology, from computer storage to power generation, but
the important question of how magnetism originates is still largely unanswered.
By squeezing the elemental magnet chromium to 100,000 atmospheres at nearly
absolute zero temperature it is possible to reveal and study the very point
where magnetic order first emerges from quantum disorder. Similarly, it is
possible to explore the competition between different types of magnetic order,
where the tendency of spins - the quantum property of an electron that makes it
act like a little bar magnet inside a material - to line up parallel or
antiparallel can be manipulated on length scales from nanometers to millimeters.
Finally, this proposal will probe how magnetism can be coupled to the ability of
materials to conduct or fail to conduct electricity. The wide array of
techniques, from x-rays to electrical conduction, and the necessity to combine
concepts from physics, chemistry and materials science, should train students
well for careers in industry, the national laboratories, or academia. Bringing
research perspectives to education is another emphasis, both for the P.I. and
the graduate students in the laboratory. This includes public lectures, course
development for both science and non-science majors, mentoring for K-8 students
in the local schools, and outreach activities as part of a citywide program.