* 0907055
* Collaborative Research: Self-Assembly in Ultrathin Films of Bent-Core Molecules: Experiment, Simulations, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Elizabeth Mann, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 09/30/2015
* USD 446,200.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Surface adsorption will be used to create bent-core
layers on water via Langmuir techniques, as well as in free-standing films under
water, with orientational order over centimeter ranges. These nanometer-thick
ordered layers will be studied in situ, transferred to solid substrates
(Langmuir/Blodgett and Langmuir/Schaeffer layers), and then used to align bulk
bent-core mesophases. These systems will be analyzed with a multiscale approach,
in which macroscopic and mesoscopic experiments are correlated with realistic
molecular and mesoscopic simulations, where no one approach can cover the whole
range of length scales. BLM-like films formed underwater will be stabilized by
polymerization and tested as sensors for biological systems. The project will
aim to understand the physics underlying these processes, and their sensitivity
to small molecular changes and/or external stimuli. The knowledge gained will be
used to optimize the self-organization of these molecules for diverse
applications. The broader impacts of this project will include the enhanced
ability to control surface properties which may lead to improved devices such as
sensors, the training of students in a unique multidisciplinary environment, and
the development of interdisciplinary teaching materials. &lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Throughout both nature and technology, the sensitivity of
materials to external stimuli plays critical roles. For example, biological
systems make extensive use of this sensitivity in endo- and exocytosis, the
processes by which cells take in or expel materials. This sensitivity also lies
behind the success of liquid crystals in electro-optical devices and other
applications. &lt;br/&gt;This transformative project will use a combined
experimental/computational approach to investigate how the properties of bent-
core, banana-shaped molecules, are changed by interaction with a surface, and
how these changes can be exploited to produce ordered bent-core liquid crystal
materials for device applications, such as biosensors and smart biomaterials.
More complex, but synthetically controllable molecular structures allow a much
broader range of surface properties. Collaborations with international leaders
in bent-core synthesis, to implement necessary modifications of the molecular
structure of these complex molecules, plays an essential role in this project.
Students ranging from high school to graduate level will receive
interdisciplinary education in physics, chemistry, and engineering and be
exposed to industrial contacts through the unique environment of the Liquid
Crystal Institute at Kent State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;