* 0907336
* Crystal-Structure-Engineered Si Nanowires for Novel Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Qingkai Yu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2013
* USD 348,645.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Technical. The goals of this research are to
achieve greater understanding of synthesis and processing of new types of
crystalline silicon and silicon nanostructures, to characterize their basic
electronic and optical properties, and to explore their utility in prototype
devices. The silicon in common use is an indirect-bandgap semiconductor with a
diamond crystal structure. While there have been significant efforts in
searching for materials compatible with current silicon technology and/or
materials that could be integrated with silicon for improved performance, this
project explores the silicon wurtzite crystal structure; silicon quantum wells
(QWs) and superlattices (SLs) made of layers of wurtzite silicon and regular
diamond silicon will be studied. Stable wurtzite silicon was prepared 45 years
ago using high-pressure indentation. The results of previous experiments and
theoretical studies have supported the conclusion that wurtzite silicon has a
lower bandgap than diamond silicon, but an accurate knowledge of the wurtzite
silicon bandgap is still lacking because of difficulties in material preparation
and measurement. This project addresses basic material synthesis, processing,
and characterization, as well as prototype device realization. Wurtzite silicon
characteristics, such as bandgap and band offset with diamond silicon will be
obtained. The project will also utilize nanowires as a platform for the study of
new types of crystalline silicon and silicon heterostructures. Because of the
lower bandgap of wurtzite silicon and the intimate integration of wurtzite
silicon with diamond silicon, new silicon devices may have significantly
enhanced performance and functionality. The structure-modulated nanostructures,
silicon QWs and SLs, may provide new ways to achieve enhanced optical and
electronic properties of silicon and open up new opportunities in basic research
and device possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. Successful synthesis and demonstration
of the new nanostructures and prototype devices could revolutionize the silicon
industry to some degree. Results from this project will be disseminated through
publications, conference presentations, and the PI's Web site. Research results
will also be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses that the PI
teaches. New types of infrared solar cells based on wurtzite silicon are
expected to be one of the term projects for students (graduate students or
senior undergraduate students). One or two high school teachers are expected to
join the PI's research group during each summer session and to actively
participate in research. These teachers will be sponsored by Cullen College of
Engineering's Summer Research program for greater Houston high school math and
science teachers (http://www.egr.uh.edu/ret). The program is designed to include
12 bright teachers with enthusiasm for research that is subsequently shared with
their respective high school classes during the school year. Teachers will be
recruited from the Houston metro area, with at least one half of the
participants coming from HISD (the Houston Independent School District). The
recruitment plan will yield not only a diverse group of teacher participants but
will also impact ethnically and socio-economically diverse students in the
participants' high school courses; 38% of HISD students are African American,
58% are Hispanic, and 82% qualify for free or reduced lunch. Because of the
diversity of teachers, the training and experiences obtained by teachers is
expected to have a broad influence on a diverse body of students, especially
minority students. This project will also directly benefit K-12 education. The
Greater Houston area is among the largest and most diverse metropolitan areas in
the nation. This diversity is reflected in the student body of the Harmony
Science Academy, a charter school in Houston (http://hsahouston.org/) with which
the PI has established a partnership. Through this partnership, high school
students from the academy will spend after-school hours in the PI's lab, working
on projects related to nanotechnology and energy. Their research results will be
presented in the annual I-SWEEEP conference that will be held at the George R.
Brown Convention Center in Houston.