* 0907599
* Self-Assembled Collagen Networks of Predictable Topologies
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Martin Case, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2012
* USD 300,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907599 PI: Case, Martin ORG: University of
Vermont&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Self-Assembled Collagen Networks of
Predictable Topologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Fibrous collagen
is the most abundant mammalian protein. Fibers of collagen are processed in situ
as they form in vivo, and this processing introduces irreversible changes that
cannot be undone by any physical or chemical extraction process. Consequently, a
synthetic analog is extremely desirable as a route to obtaining useful
quantities of this versatile protein for materials or therapeutic applications.
This proposal presents a biologically inspired approach whereby collagen triple
helices self-assemble and are then guided to fibrillar oligomerization. The key
process is an energetically coupled stabilization of the triple helix with
concomitant setting of the staggered polypeptide register. The approach uses
metal-directed assembly to form two fundamental structures: capping trimers and
propagating trimers. The capping trimers are aligned by metal complex formation
at either the N-terminal or the C-terminal ends (N-cap and C-cap, respectively).
They present "sticky" connections at the other end, in which the terminal
residues are offset from each other. The propagating trimers are assembled by
metal complexation in the middle of the sequence, and present staggered
sequences at either end that are complementary to the N/C caps. Binding of the
N-cap and C-cap trimers to the appropriate ends of the propagating species,
rather than forming an N-Cap/C-Cap dimer, is driven by electrostatic
complementarity. It is possible consequently to access much larger procollagen
subunits than has hitherto been possible, and the assembly process itself is
subject to a much higher degree of control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS: There is currently no practical route to a synthetic collagen, and
success in the proposed research could have far reaching benefits for many
aspects of regenerative medicine. The PI has collaborations with the College of
Medicine at the University of Vermont (UVM) with groups working on spinal
reconstruction and blood clotting, both of which activities would benefit from
the availability of synthetic collagen. The project will support the work of one
graduate student in a highly interdisciplinary environment as well as 4 - 5
undergraduates per year. Funds are budgeted for support of the undergraduate
research students. As a participant in Project SEED of the American Chemical
Society, the PI will provide opportunities for economically disadvantaged high
school students to participate in a meaningful research project in his
laboratory during the summer months.