* 0907177
* Significance Based Procedures for Mining and Prediction of Large Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Nobel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 210,001.00

Exploratory methods play a critical role in the understanding of large data
sets, regardless of their origin, and are typically the first step in their
analysis. The investigator is studying the development and use of exploratory,
data-mining methods that identify patterns or regularities in high-dimensional
data. The specific focus of his research is the problem of identifying sample-
variable associations in large data sets that may arise from multiple
measurement technologies. In the typical case where the data from an experiment
are represented in the form of a rectangular matrix, sample-variable
associations correspond to distinguished submatrices of the data matrix. The
investigator is developing a statistically principled, significance-based
approach to the problem of finding large average submatrices of a data matrix,
using a simple iterative algorithm. The algorithm is applicable to real-valued
and categorical data matrices. In addition to the basic method, the investigator
is developing several extensions, including data-driven null models that
incorporate dependence between variables, data arising from the simultaneous
application of multiple measurement technologies, and application of the basic
method to prediction problems such as classification, regression and survival
analysis. In addition, the investigator is developing basic theory to support
the use of the algorithm, and to assess the structure of data matrices under the
different null models. The development and application of the methods is being
carried out in close collaboration with several groups of biomedical
researchers. In particular, the new data mining methodology is being
incorporated into software that is used by collaborating scientists to identify
and assess significant sample-variable associations in ongoing experiments
involving breast, brain and lung cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large data sets
are now common in many experimental areas of science, and in particular gene-
level studies of human diseases such as cancer. In such studies it is not
unusual to encounter experiments containing from hundreds to thousands of
samples, and tens of thousands to millions of measurements on each sample. Large
data sets are part of a trend away from traditional hypothesis-driven scientific
research towards data-driven research, in which researchers explore large data
sets for patterns or regularities that, in conjunction with subject matter
expertise, yield hypotheses that can be tested by more traditional means. The
investigator is studying an exploratory method that identifies statistically
significant associations between samples and variables in large data sets,
associations that can yield testable scientific hypotheses. The methods being
developed by the investigator are computationally efficient, and are based on
established statistical principles, in particular the notion of statistical
significance. The investigator is also studying ways in which the basic
exploratory method can be applied to data arising from multiple measurement
technologies, and application of the basic method to statistical problems such
as classification and survival analysis. These activities are being carried out
as part of a collaborative research program involving the sustained interactions
of faculty and students from the statistical, biological, and medical sciences.
The exploratory method developed by the investigator is being integrated into
the basic exploratory tools of the collaborating scientists, and is a component
in the analysis of several new, previously unanalyzed, data sets.