* 0907425
* Superconductivity and Other Quantum Orderings in the Lighter Elements
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Neil Ashcroft, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 379,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education
focused mainly on the light elements, including hydrogen under conditions of
high pressure and high temperature. The PI aims to elucidate quantum orderings,
both in hydrogen and in hydrogen alloyed with other light element systems. Of
increasing prominence in these systems is the enduringly fundamental and
pragmatic area of superconductivity, impelled by the recent and quite dramatic
discovery of superconductivity occurring in the metallic state of silane. That
this could be a possibility was already raised in research supported by the
previous grant and companion predictions that the hitherto 'simple' elements
would adopt structures of considerable complexity at similar conditions were
also swiftly borne out by experiment. It is remarkable that many of the elements
hitherto regarded as 'simple' are observed to take up structures at higher
densities even exhibiting incommensurabilities.

A major theme of the research is spurred by striking recent advances in
experimental high pressure physics. The PI aims to elucidate the physics of the
superconducting state, and particularly the role of electronic fluctuation in
multi-band and quasi-localized contexts. High temperature superconductivity has
long been predicted to occur in metallic phases of hydrogen and now more
recently in hydrogen dominant metallic alloys. Further development of the theory
for this class of system seems in order, especially to explore the possibility
of further orderings that might accompany sublattice melting. For pure hydrogen
itself, co-existence of superfluidity and superconductivity has been predicted
for liquid metallic (near) ground states, and extension of the theory now to the
mixed symmetry system embodied by liquid metallic deuterium is an interesting
avenue to pursue, again with an eye towards experimental realization. In
electronic terms all of these systems are highly inhomogeneous, as guaranteed by
the cusp theorem, and this work will continue the development of weighted
density and related approaches to the density functional viewpoint of the
associated electronic structures, and could help illuminate the physics of
transitions from the metallic state back to insulating or semiconducting.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award supports theoretical research and education in
condensed matter physics focused mainly on the light elements, including
hydrogen under extremes of pressure and temperature. A key feature of this work
is the prediction of key signatures that could be observed in experiments. While
hydrogen under enormous pressure exists in various places in our solar system
and elsewhere in the universe, recent advances in experimental high pressure
techniques suggest that the discovery of exciting new phases of matter with
potential technological applications is coming within grasp. Among the
possibilities are superconducting states that occur at high temperature in the
light elements under high pressure. The PI will continue and extend his
theoretical work to predict and explore new states of matter that may emerge in
the seemingly simplest elements. Hydrogen and hydrogen-dominant metallic alloys
under high pressure will be a particular focus of the work. This research may
have impact on other disciplines and will provide a training ground for future
scientists.