* 0907846
* SGER: Assessing Genetic Mechanisms of DNA Repair in Ancient Ice Microbes through Analytical Flow Cytometry, High-Speed Cell Sorting, and Single Cell Genomics
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Kay Bidle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 12/31/2011
* USD 194,608.00

Technological advances in analytical flow cytometry and cell sorting are rapidly
revolutionizing our understanding of microbial genetic diversity and its
relationship to function in widely varied environmental systems. The in situ
application of flow cytometry and high-speed sorting is now an indispensable
component for interrogation of the physiological state and activity of
subpopulations and assessment of the importance of specific genes to cell
function. We propose to apply emerging techniques in analytical flow cytometry,
high-speed cell sorting, and single-cell multiple displacement amplification
(MDA) to Antarctic ice samples ranging 100 Kyr to 8 Myr in order to assess the
relative proportion of viable vs. dead cells and to explore genetic strategies
of DNA repair in ancient ice microbes. Recovery of viable microbes within ice
exposed to cosmic radiation for ~8 Myr suggests that subpopulations of microbes
within ancient ice possess particularly efficient DNA repair mechanisms. Given
the strong influence of cosmic flux on DNA degradation in ancient ice samples
and evidence of effective DNA repair, we hypothesize that the degree of DNA
damage increases with time and that viable 8 Myr old bacteria possess
particularly effective and novel DNA repair mechanisms for which we can obtain
genetic signatures. The research goal is to obtain a library of genes used for
DNA repair by viable bacteria from the oldest ice on earth. Using analytical
techniques not previously applied to ancient ice microbes. Thus, the proposed
research is an 'exploratory' endeavor with potentially high risk. It is likely
that novel genetic capabilities will be discovered through our analyses, perhaps
providing key molecular insight into the survival of life over geological time,
and perhaps on other planets. Given the use of standard flow cytometry
instrumentation and the increasing affordability of genome analyses, our
research strategy is transferable to the scientific community and should offer
key advantages to the study of ice microbes. This project will allow for
continued professional development of a young PI and provide an opportunity
whereby researchers with different educational backgrounds (undergraduate
students, graduate students, technician, post-docs, and faculty) can interact
and develop.