* 0907645
* Workshop:  Second US-China NSF Workshop and Summer Institute of Bio- and Nano-Mechanics and Applications (UCWSI2009); Dalian University of Technology; China; July 2-7, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Zhen Chen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 01/31/2010
* USD 48,760.00

Bio- and Nano-mechanics and their applications are playing an increasingly
important role in the growth of the global economy. Based on the interplay
between bio- and nano-mechanics, the new generation of bio materials has unique
structure and properties, and could advance both science and engineering. To
promote the international collaboration among researchers, educators, students
and practicing engineers, the objective of this project is to organize the 2nd
US-China NSF Workshop and Summer Institute of Bio- and Nano-Mechanics and
Applications (UCWSI2009), to continuously exchange the research and educational
advances as well as technological innovations in this rapidly evolving area, and
to identify the future tasks. To meet the urgent need for the US students (who
have had no exposure to Asian culture) to get the real experience and to
leverage the financial support from the local organizing committee, the
UCWSI2009 will be held at Dalian University of Technology in China in summer
2009. The UCWSI2009 consists of a summer institute and workshop with sessions in
different areas of bio and nano mechanics and materials. In the summer
institute, comprehensive lectures including lab visits will be delivered to
young faculty and students by the leading experts in the field, while active
researchers will exchange recent results in the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCWSI2009 could promote the international
collaboration in research, education and development, and make an immediate
contribution to the progress of nano and bio science and engineering by
disseminating the new findings and integrating different team efforts among
active researchers, educators, students and practicing engineers. A special
effort will be made to invite participants from the groups underrepresented in
science and engineering. Thus, the UCWSI2009 would have an international impact
on developing complementary approaches that are mutually beneficial, and
accessible to the whole community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by OISE.