* 0907381
* GOALI: Low-Dimensional Plasmonic Semiconductor Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Gary Tompa, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 468,149.00

Technical: In this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) project, the growth and collective electronic excitation properties of
quasi-one-dimensional semiconductor materials are investigated. The vapor-phase
growth of multi-component, uniform- and tapered-diameter nanowires of group
III-V semiconducting materials uses the technique of metallorganic chemical
vapor disposition. The structural, electronic, and optical properties of the
nanowires are investigated using high-resolution electron microscopy, optical
excitation spectroscopies, resonant Raman scattering, and proximal
characterization methods. These studies are to elucidate how topological driven
strain, surface and interface structure, and band structure, and band bending
influence the presence and properties of collective electronic excitation within
semiconductor heterostructure materials systems. The research projects are
carried out collaboratively among students and faculty at Drexel University and
industrial scientists at Structured Materials Industries, Inc. (SMI). The
research goal of this project is to understand how multi-component group III-V
based semiconductor nanowire materials can be grown and processed in a manner
that they enable confinement and control of charge-density waves for the purpose
of tunable, resonant terahertz detection and emission. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical:
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials
science with high technological relevance. The fabrication of semiconductor
nanowires and study of their collective electronic excitations and their
response to electromagnetic waves would lead to applications in advancing the
state-of-the-art in the fast and sensitive detection of terahertz and charged-
particle radiation. This GOALI project provides opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to receive training and accrue experience over extended
stays in an industrial setting in areas highly relevant to their research and
career interests. The project will also include international collaboration with
scientists in Italy.