* 0907262
* Ultrafast Dynamics in Ferromagnetic Metals and Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jianming Cao, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award
supports a project with a goal of understanding the mechanisms that regulate
structural changes and transformations in solid materials by directly observing
the associated atomic motions and rearrangements in real time. With previous
support from the National Science Foundation, a tool was developed that has the
capability of probing structural dynamics at the time and length scales of
atomic motion. Using this novel technique, the project will investigate the role
of hot electrons generated by ultrafast laser heating in the magnetic and
structural behavior of magnetic materials. In addition the structural dynamics
of nanoparticles will be investigated. The results may have an impact on our
understanding of the behavior of technologically important materials. The
continued development of the technique may have an impact on studies in many
fields including physics, chemistry, and biology. This project will be carried
out by integrating research and education. The undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the project will acquire training and knowledge in the
forefronts of contemporary condensed matter physics and ultrafast science, which
will prepare them for careers in academe, industry, and national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand the physics that governs structural dynamics and the structure-
function correlation at the atomic time and length scales in ferromagnetic
metals and nanoparticles. A recently developed technique involving a direct and
real-time structural probe of femtosecond electron diffraction will be utilized.
The dynamical processes will be initiated by impulsive excitation using
femtosecond optical pulses, and their temporal evolution will be probed by
taking snapshots of diffraction patterns at different time points after the
excitation pulses. In the study, femtosecond time-resolved optical spectroscopy
measurements will also be used to gain a complete physical picture by probing
associated dynamics in the relevant degrees of freedom. Issues and questions to
be addressed in this project include (1) measurements of electronic Gruneisen
constants in transition and rare earth metals, and their correlation to the
magnetic ordering; (2) understanding the demagnetization dynamics by probing the
correlated structural dynamics, and gaining physical insights about how the
photo-deposited energy is transferred from charge to spin subsystem in sub-ps
timescale; (3) investigating the dynamics of electron-phonon coupling and
melting in metal nanoparticles, and their size dependence. This project will
integrate research and education to train graduate students for cutting-edge
techniques and modern methods in the forefront areas of contemporary condensed
matter physics and ultrafast science.