* 0907593
* Integrated Experimental and Simulation Studies of the Structure and Dissolution Mechanism of Bioactive Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jincheng Du, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2013
* USD 220,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907593 PI: Du, Jincheng ORG: University of North Texas

Title: Integrated Experimental and Simulation Studies of the Structure and
Dissolution Mechanism of Bioactive Glasses

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Combined atomistic simulations and experimental (X-ray and
neutron diffraction) studies will be carried out to obtain refined glass
structure models of inorganic bioactive glasses; such models are critical to a
better understanding of the bioactivities of these materials. (Bioactivity here
denotes the ability of these materials to bond to bone and ultimately to promote
bone growth and development, including osteoblast differentiation,
proliferation, viability, and mineralization.) The inherent complexity and the
lack of long-range order limit our understanding of the structure of multi-
component glasses that are important in fields such as biomedical applications.
Through development of innovative methodology and integration of experimental
and modeling studies, this project attacks two scientifically challenging
problems: the structure of the complex multi-component oxide glasses and the
dissolution mechanism of these glasses in an aqueous environment. Computer
simulation methods such as classical molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo
simulations have generated a wealth of information about glass structure, but
the results rely heavily on the quality of empirical potential models and
validation on experimental results is usually needed. On the other hand,
experimental methods such as neutron and X-ray diffraction, EXAFS, and infrared
and Raman spectroscopy can probe certain aspects of the structure of glasses but
are often limited to averaged short-range structures or mutually overlapping
structural information. The novelty of the proposed new method lies in
integrating classical or ab initio molecular dynamics simulations with the
reverse Monte Carlo algorithm based on scattering data in studying the structure
of glass materials, which will generate structural models that have more refined
short- and medium-range structures for complex multi-component systems such as
bioactive glasses. Based on these structural models, dissolution of bioactive
glasses will be studied using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations with input of
reaction energy barriers and reaction pathways from ab initio DFT calculations.
The structural models and dissolution mechanisms obtained can guide more
rational and systematic design of new glass compositions and processes for
biomedical applications. This project involves intensive training of graduate
and undergraduate students to master skills that combine multiscale materials
modeling with state-of-the-art material characterization techniques, and thus
prepares students for future careers that involve solving challenging materials
problems.

BROADER IMPACTS: Potential applications of refined bioactive glasses in
restoration and repair of bone represent an arena in which this research may
have an important broader impact. The PI describes a thoughtful commitment to
understanding how students learn and to providing the kinds of hands-on
experiences that implement this understanding. He has developed a new course in
Computational Materials Science based on a series of modules that develop
students' understanding of materials phenomena and the underlying mechanisms and
experimental methods. He uses multimedia to explain crystal structures through
three-dimensional visualization and manipulation, to illustrate crystal
dislocations using movies of atomic scale simulations, and to convey the
diffusion process through transition state theory and energy barrier
calculations. Another important way the PI involves students in advanced courses
is to use literature based instruction. Here he focuses on a group of classical
and seminal papers, dissecting them and digesting them through class
discussions, homework, and exams. This teaches the students how to use the
literature effectively to become qualified researchers. The PI also involves
undergraduates in his research lab, and the students who prepare the bioactive
glass samples will have the opportunity to visit Argonne to participate in the
scattering studies. A Materials Day organized by the PI for Dallas-Fort Worth
area high school teachers introduces the teachers to state of the art materials
processing, characterization, and modeling facilities available on his campus.
He also conducts outreach to Latino and Native American students in the Fort
Worth School District. He is currently guiding science projects for students in
the Texas Advanced Math and Science program, a two year residential early
college entrance program for selected high school students.