* 0907108
* Collaborative Research:  NanoDomain Structure and Multifunctional Properties of Polymer Derived Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Rishi Raj, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 532,598.00

0907108&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raj&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to develop an understanding of the
relationship between electronic structure and functional properties of polymer-
derived ceramics ? with emphasis on their particular and unprecedented
nanodomain structure. The open questions are addressed in a combined theoretical
and experimental study, with ab initio computations supporting experimental
measurements. This parallelism between theory and experiment is a cornerstone of
this proposed research program. Reaching the fundamental goals will make this
new class of compounds ?with their outstanding thermodynamic stability above
1500Â°C ? available to materials applications, including sensors and energy
storage in extreme and harsh environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;A central effort of the proposed computational approach is
to model the distinctive and only slowly emerging molecular network structure of
this multi-component amorphous polymer-derived ceramics. A two-step approach is
designed that first generates an approximate network structure based upon
experimental data and chemical intuition. Next, the structures are computed from
first-principles including ab initio molecular dynamic simulations. Electronic
and optical properties are interpreted and compared with experimental data,
yielding information about the atomistic structure and, recursively, giving
insight into the atomic arrangements at short and medium length scales. The
doctoral students in the program will work with Ludwig Maxmillian University in
Munich and at the University of Trento to achieve a remarkable breadth and depth
in their graduate education. Two undergraduates will obtain research experience
under this grant. &lt;br/&gt;