* 0907366
* FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES OF DEGENERATE QUANTUM GASES
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Tin-Lun Ho, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education at the interface of
condensed matter physics and atomic physics. The PI will address fundamental
issues in four major areas in quantum gases: (i) strongly interacting Fermi
gases, (ii) quantum gases in optical lattices, (iii) quantum gases with internal
degrees of freedom, and (iv) fast rotating quantum gases. These projects are
directly related to current experiments. At the same time, they explore new
directions.

The projects on Fermi gases will study universal properties of these systems,
and their generalization to non-zero rotations and two dimensions. The goal is
to develop new exact relations that will shed light on thermodynamic and
transport properties. The projects on lattice quantum gases address two very
important issues: how to reduce entropy substantially so as to reach the
strongly correlated regime efficiently, and to determine the phase diagram of
the system directly from experimental data. The projects of large spin quantum
gas will help us uncover new macroscopic quantum phenomena and to explore the
intrinsic dipolar effects in these systems. They will help design and engineer
special quantum spin states in these systems in the future. The study of fast
rotating quantum gases is aimed to realize quantum Hall states in ultra-cold
atoms.

These projects will provide training for students and postdoctoral researchers
in different areas, for example condensed matter physics, atomic physics, and
quantum optics.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education at
the interface of condensed matter physics and atomic physics. The PI will study
new quantum mechanical states of matter exhibited by atoms cooled to very low
temperature and trapped, for example by laser light. Rotating gases of ultracold
atoms will also be studied. Some states of matter of ultracold atom systems have
analogies with electronic states of matter that occur in complex materials and
in electrons in a high magnetic field that are confined to two dimensions in
semiconducting materials. The synergy among the studies of trapped ultracold
atoms and condensed matter systems may lead to more rapid advance on challenging
fundamental scientific problems. While ultracold atoms and electronic systems
are each interesting in their own right, understanding these systems in each
case has the potential to lead to future computing and device technologies.

This project also provides opportunities for advanced education and contributes
to the highly skilled scientific workforce of the 21st century.

