* 0907453
* Development of Multifunctional Polypeptide Amphiphiles as Drug Delivery Vehicles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,571.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of California Los Angeles is to develop and study multifunctional
amphiphilic block copolypeptides that can be assembled into vesicle and emulsion
vehicles containing functionality for intracellular drug delivery. The proposed
copolypeptide design, synthesis, development and testing, as well as the
functionality and versatility inherent in these polypeptides will be used to
create multifunctional vehicles with properties suitable for drug delivery
applications. The key challenge of this proposal is to design and prepare
polypeptide amphiphiles with added functions without adversely affecting other
functions or physical features, to obtain true multifunctional vesicle and
emulsion carriers. The knowledge gained from these studies will allow fine
tuning of carrier properties for downstream specific uses in encapsulation and
delivery of drugs. Students trained under this program will be valuable in the
industrial job force (both pharmaceutical and materials science areas) since
they will learn fundamentals of polymer synthesis using catalysis and self-
assembly, cell culture and intracellular trafficking of drug carriers, as well
as more applied areas of materials characterization and property evaluation. The
PIs will also continue their academic activities in developing curricula and
teaching in bioengineering for both graduates and undergraduates, and involve
concepts and laboratory methods.

The proposed design, synthesis, development and testing of copolypeptides are
expected to produce vesicles with enhanced and multifunctional properties for
drug delivery systems. These vesicles are expected to have adequate size, shape,
good cell uptake and stability, and cargo loading capacity for drug delivery.
The design and synthesis of improved drug delivery vehicles expected from these
studies are of broad importance for the pharmaceutical industry, and for human
health in general. The academic impact of the proposal is in developing
curricula and teaching tools for graduate and undergraduate students.