* 0907496
* Workshop:  Understanding Morality: Developing Interdisciplinary Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2014
* Steven Hitlin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2014
* USD 52,234.00

SES-0907496&lt;br/&gt;Steven Hitlin&lt;br/&gt;University of
Iowa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on increasing sociology's
participation in the social scientific study of a core human concern "morality"
and fostering and interdisciplinary research on the topic. Debates over right
and wrong, justice, values, propriety, and deviance are at the core of organized
social life. The scientific study of morality has recently received a number of
prominent treatments within popular discourse. These stories tend to focus on
evolutionary and psychological aspects of moral judgment. What is left out of
the coverage is a sociological understanding of morality. The workshop will
stimulate sociologists' participation in interdisciplinary efforts to understand
morality that currently do not reflect sociology's potential contribution.
Specifically, the workshop wil 1) assess both what is known and what gaps exist
in sociological knowledge on morality; 2) facilitate interaction and
collaboration among those studying morality, including across subfields; 3)
inform sociologists about relevant work from other disciplines; 4) stimulate
sociological research on morality; and 5) bring a sociological voice to public
discourse on morality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Potential broader impacts include developing a research agenda that
expands sociologists? participation in the study of morality; and fermenting
interdisciplinary collaborations to study the different aspects of morality that
will integrate research from psychology, neuroscience, religion, law, political
science, and economics. The workshop will produce a published report that will
lay out the state of current sociological and an agenda of future
interdisciplinary research and research on morality. A website will be created
that will house workshop and related papers and host an exchange of information
on the study of morality that will maintained after the workshop is over.