* 0907275
* Quantum Monte Carlo Simulations of Bose and Fermi Superfluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nandini Trivedi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 287,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award from the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program supports research and education in theoretical condensed matter, atomic,
and optical physics. The central core of the proposed effort will seek an
improved understanding of the phases, excitations, and phase transitions in
strongly correlated and disordered Bose and Fermi systems in cold atoms and
condensed matter contexts. Most of the research is concerned with bosons in
optical lattices and mapping the finite temperature phase diagram of the Bose-
Hubbard model, including issues related with thermometry, momentum distribution
function and spectral function near the superfluid (SF)-Mott quantum phase
transition using the largest quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations in a trap to-
date. The challenge of explaining the puzzles in the Fe-based superconductors
with their inherent complexity of multiple bands and intermediate strength
correlations will also be tackled.

The research program addresses questions of fundamental significance in
condensed matter physics. The proposed research program is strongly motivated by
current experiments and has the potential to guide future ones. Ultimately, the
goal is to establish new paradigms for strongly correlated systems with and
without disorder. Some of the major goals of the research include mapping the
first finite temperature phase diagram of a model showing a quantum phase
transition both theoretically and experimentally, providing a unified
understanding of novel superconductivity in cuprates and Fe-based arsenides with
an aim to enhancing the transition temperature, and developing a QMC code for
bosons in optical lattices with a confining potential using the worm algorithm
for system sizes that are comparable to cold atom experiments.

Both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to work on the proposed
projects, providing them with a solid grounding in basic condensed matter
physics. Women and minority students will be encouraged and specially mentored.
The proposal involves national and international collaborations, and involves
physicists as well as applied mathematicians, in an effort to generate large
scale simulation codes that are at the cutting edge of research today. The
different numerical techniques are applicable to diverse materials and systems
and beneficial to a larger community of scientists. A sequel to the 2007
Festival of Physics held at the Columbus Science Museum will be organized by the
PI. The previous Festival, with a theme centered around superconductivity and
over 2000 attendees ,was also organized by the PI, was attended by over 2000
people. It showcased a home-built levitated train, many demo carts, public
lectures by scientists, including the PI, and a choreographed superconducting
dance.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award from the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program supports
research and education in theoretical condensed matter, atomic, and optical
physics. The research program addresses questions of fundamental significance in
condensed matter physics, is strongly motivated by current experiments, and has
the potential to guide future experimental efforts. Ultimately, the goal is to
establish new paradigms for systems where the interactions of electrons need to
be included in the quantum mechanical description of systems with and without
disorder, with superconducting materials being a technologically important
example of this type of system.

Both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to work on the proposed
projects, providing them with a solid grounding in basic condensed matter
physics. Women and minority students will be encouraged and specially mentored.
The proposal involves national and international collaborations, and involves
physicists as well as applied mathematicians, in an effort to generate large
scale simulation codes that are at the cutting edge of research today. The
different numerical techniques are applicable to diverse materials and systems
and beneficial to a larger community of scientists. A sequel to the 2007
Festival of Physics held at the Columbus Science Museum will be organized by the
PI. The previous Festival, with a theme centered around superconductivity and
over 2000 attendees ,was also organized by the PI, was attended by over 2000
people. It showcased a home-built levitated train, many demo carts, public
lectures by scientists, including the PI, and a choreographed superconducting
dance.