* 0907752
* Dynamical aspects in nonautonomous and random differential equations and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Wenxian Shen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2013
* USD 203,183.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to study the dynamical
aspects in nonautonomous and random differential equations arising from a
variety of physical and biological problems. In particular, the investigator
will study (1) spectral theory for nonautonomous and random linear dispersal
evolution equations on bounded domains and its applications to evolution of
dispersals in ecology, Turing instability on growing domains, and nonlinear
Leslie type models for age-structured/size-structured population dynamics; (2)
spatial spread and front propagation dynamics in unbounded inhomogeneous and
random media arising from phase transition, nerve propagation, and population
genetics. The investigator and her collaborators have extended several classical
concepts and notions and established a number of general theories and techniques
for the study of the problems in this project and many other nonautonomous and
random differential equations. In addition to the established theories and
techniques, the investigator will continue to extend relevant classical concepts
and notions and to develop general theories and techniques for the study of the
problems in this project and other related nonautonomous and random differential
equations. The results of this project will enhance the understanding of the
dynamics of the systems under investigation, specially, will enhance the
understanding of the effects of the time/space dependence and randomness on the
dynamics of the underling problems, will provide theoretical and methodological
foundations for the further study of these systems and related ones, and will
bring closer several separate but related branches of mathematics, including
differential equations, topological dynamical systems, and metric dynamical
systems, and enrich each of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realistic
physical and biological systems are influenced by variations in the external
environment, and are often situated in anisotropic or inhomogeneous media. For
this reason, the study of such systems via models involving nonautonomous or
random or stochastic differential equations has been gaining more and more
attention. Due to a lack of general methodology and difficulties in generalizing
classical concepts and notions, there is still little understanding of many
important dynamical issues in these equations. The investigator will continue to
extend relevant classical concepts and notions and to develop new tools and
general theories to study the dynamics of these equations. The results of the
project will provide deep insight into the effect of the inhomogeneity and
randomness of the media on the dynamics of various applied problems including
phase transition, nerve propagation, population dynamics, and pattern formation.
It will provide graduate students and junior faculty members research training
in the area of nonautonomous and random differential equations. It will also
create opportunities to interact with students and scientists from other
disciplines and will lead to advance in technology.