* 0907070
* High-Dimensional Predictive Density Estimation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Xinyi Xu, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 113,851.00

This research concerns the development of a new methodology for predictive
analysis, which extracts information from historical and current data to predict
future trends and behavior patterns. The Bayesian approach is appealing for this
problem because it provides a complete predictive density that assigns
probabilities to every possible outcome, and it naturally incorporates the
uncertainty inherent in the parameter estimation and model selection processes.
The prior specification for Bayesian predictive procedures, however, becomes
challenging as the number of potential predictors grows, an all too common
problem as massive data sets are increasingly prevalent in many scientific
areas. In this project, the PI investigates the use of Bayesian techniques for
predictive density estimation and their frequentist properties, and then
exploits those properties to construct new families of priors that have
desirable risk properties, adapt to unknown data structures and also permit
tractable computation for large and complex data sets. These priors are
"minimally informative" in the sense that they allow input of subjective
information through the choice of prior center, yet utilize this information in
a very robust fashion. The resulting predictive estimators effectively combine
information from different dimensions and therefore improve overall prediction
performance. Applications in financial and social problems will be developed
using the new methodology.

Extracting information from massive data sets and exploiting it to make
predictions of future uncertain events are fundamental problems in both
statistics and the sciences. The proposed research provides not only powerful
theoretical tools, but also easily-implementable computing strategies for
predictive analysis. It can help researchers in various fields to better
identify risks and opportunities, and thus to optimize their decision making.
The methodological developments are motivated by a portfolio allocation problem
in finance and a missing data imputation problem in the social sciences. The
proposed procedures are applicable to many other scientific and technical areas,
such as genomics, climatology, medical sciences and public health, where large
data sets are collected and accurate predictive analysis is desirable. For
example, in health care service studies, predicting people's future health care
costs is an important topic given a high concentration of health care
expenditures among a relatively small percentage of the population. Using the
proposed methods, one may better exploit information in vast medical and
insurance databases to identify the individuals with high health risks and to
predict their future medical costs. To facilitate the use of these new methods,
the PI will implement the procedures and algorithms in R or Matlab, and make
this software available to the public along with the associated research
reports.