* 0907349
* Indirect Excitons
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Leonid Butov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2014
* USD 670,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award
supports a project directed towards experimental studies of fundamental optical
and electronic properties of structures made of thin layers of semiconductors. A
special design of the structures on a length scale of a billionth part of a
meter allows the creation of new entities called indirect excitons. The indirect
excitons are unique because they can be cooled down to ultralow temperatures.
Furthermore, the indirect excitons are also unique because they can be
electronically controlled like electrons in electronic devices and can shine
optical signals that electrons cannot do by themselves. The project is directed
towards increasing our understanding of the physics of ultracold indirect
excitons. In particular it will address the transport and optical properties of
the indirect excitons. The understanding gained through this research may lead
to the exciting possibility of developing advanced devices that make use of
electronic as well as optical properties, i.e. optoelectronic devices. The
students involved with this project will have the opportunity to perform
exploratory research on the cutting edge of contemporary physics. The potential
impact of the project is in development of knowledge in condensed matter
physics, increase of fundamental understanding of the optical and electronic
properties of materials, and in development of materials
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This
individual investigator award supports a project directed towards experimental
studies of ultracold gases of indirect excitons in coupled quantum well,
semiconductor structures. Excitons are composite bosons. Due to their long
lifetime and high cooling rate, the indirect excitons can be cooled below the
temperature of quantum degeneracy. Furthermore, the indirect excitons have a
built-in dipole moment and their energy can be controlled by an applied voltage.
This allows creating in-plane potential profiles for indirect excitons by the
voltage pattern. Studies will include exciton transport through various
potential profiles and as well as exciton pattern formation and spontaneous
coherence at ultralow temperatures. The research will be performed by students
and will be integrated with education. The potential impact of the project is in
development of knowledge in condensed matter physics, increase of fundamental
understanding of the optical and electronic phenomena of materials, and in
development of materials control.