* 0907325
* Structural Ordering and Vitrification of Multicomponent Metallic Liquids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Hongwei Sheng, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2013
* USD 315,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Many metallic liquids can be supercooled to a great extent without
crystallizing, and have a tendency to form metallic glasses with technological
importance. Fundamental understandings of the atomic arrangements in supercooled
metallic liquids have been lacking. In order to fill this knowledge gap, the
proposed project aims to use computational methods, coupled with synchrotron
x-ray scattering experiments, to reveal the details of atomic-level structural
evolution in multicomponent metallic liquids. This work will advance our
understanding of the structural underpinnings of the vitrification process of
supercooled metallic liquids. Specific research objectives in this proposal
include: (1) identifying different types of topological structural ordering in
supercooled liquids; (2) monitoring hierarchical structural ordering of
supercooled liquids, temporally and spatially; and (3) uncovering the
correlations between atomic packing schemes and the vitrification physics (i.e.,
dynamic slowing-down, liquid fragility, glass forming ability, etc.) of
supercooled liquids. To this end, the principal investigator will develop high-
fidelity interatomic potentials for a realistic system by fitting to extensive
first-principles calculations. Both ab initio molecular dynamics and large-scale
classical molecular dynamics will be performed to study the atomic-level
structure and dynamics of the supercooled multicomponent liquid. Theoretical
results will be validated within experimental capabilities. To further
complement theoretical investigations and address the issues of atomic-level
structure and glass forming ability, in situ high-pressure high-temperature
synchrotron x-ray scattering experiments are proposed to test the possibility of
controlling the glass forming ability and fragility of multicomponent metallic
systems by tuning atomic packing.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

What the internal structure looks like in complex metallic liquids remains
something of a mystery. The proposed project aims to use state-of-the-art
computational and experimental techniques to deal with this difficult topic.
Insight into the structural arrangement of supercooled metallic liquids will
provide much-needed information critical to understanding the formation of
metallic glasses. The knowledge gained will broaden our perspectives on this
state of matter, and should have an impact on existing theories about the
structure, formation and evolution of supercooled liquids and glasses. As an
integral part of the proposal, the training of graduate students will be carried
out through cutting-edge scientific research. The program involves the full
participation of graduate students, promotes the participation of local high-
school students, and produces new course development for a possibly new
materials curriculum. On a broader horizon, the proposed project promotes
collaborations between various institutions, including international
laboratories and universities. Its collaborative nature will provide students a
broader exposure to multidisciplinary scientific research modes, contributing to
an excellent preparation for a scientific career.