* 0907291
* Surfactant-Templated Polyurea-Nanoencapsulated Macroporous Silica Aerogel, a Potential New Biomaterial for Artificial Heart Valves
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Nicholas Leventis, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2013
* USD 425,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907291 PI: Yin, Wei ORG: Oklahoma
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Surfactant-Templated Polyurea-Nanoencapsulated
Macroporous Silica Aerogel: A Potential New Biomaterial for Artificial Heart
Valves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: Silica aerogels are mesoporous materials formed as wet silica gels and
dried by supercritical fluid extraction of the pore-filling gelation solvent.
They are lightweight with high porosity but typically have low mechanical
strength. Recently, Co-PI Leventis developed a method to nanoencapsulate 3D
silica nanostructures under a conformal polymer coating without clogging the
pores. This novel lightweight material, termed crosslinked aerogel (X-aerogel),
has a significantly improved mechanical strength and possesses surface chemistry
resembling biocompatible polyurethane. It is proposed here to develop this
material as a leaflet material for artificial heart valves, typically made now
of pyrolytic carbon. It is hypothesized that the lighter weight of X-aerogel
valve leaflets will lead to lower transvalvular pressures and reduced cavitation
in the blood. This hypothesis will be tested through the following specific
aims: (1) To determine the biocompatibility of X-aerogels towards plasma, blood
cells (especially platelets) and vascular endothelial cells. (2) To characterize
the mechanical behavior and chemical stability of X-aerogels under compressive,
tensile, shear, and bi-axial stress states; creep, relaxation, fracture, and
fatigue of the material will also be tested. (3) To manufacture an X-aerogel
monoleaflet heart valve and determine its hemodynamic performances in a flow
chamber with dynamic properties matching the in vivo circulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: In view of the prevalence of heart valve
defects requiring surgical valve replacement and the projected continuing need
for artificial heart valves, this materials development proposal has the
potential for significant clinical impact. The project is headed by a very
interdisciplinary team, and it provides excellent opportunities for training of
students across the boundaries of chemistry, materials science, and biomedical
engineering. Both graduate students and undergraduate students will be trained
on the project. Provisions have been made for visits by PIs and students between
the Oklahoma State and Missouri Rolla
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;