* 0907053
* RUI: Nonlinear Effects in Strongly Driven Magnetic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Robert Camley, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetics group at the
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, a predominantly undergarduate
instition, has recently developed a method which creates large magnetic fields
which oscillate about 10 billion times per second. This allows the study of many
magnetic materials in the so-called "nonlinear limit" where unique and useful
behavior can be found. For example, this can be used to amplify weak
electromagnetic waves in a material, or to pick out a real signal hidden in
noise. The work will have a number of broader impacts. It has important
implications in practical problems because of the special signal processing
devices that can be made using nonlinear motion. Furthermore, nonlinear effects
are important for ultrafast switching of small magnetic elements in magnetic
memory systems. In addition, the project will provide education and training for
all levels of students - high school students, undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers. Finally, the magnetics group in Colorado Springs
has an excellent record of involving underrepresented groups in research,
starting at the high school level, and this effort will be continued.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetics
group at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, a predominantly
undergarduate instition, has recently developed a method which creates large
oscillating magnetic fields, up to 500 Oe in comparison to the typical 0.1 Oe
found in standard ferromagnetic resonance. This allows the study of nonlinear
magnetic motion with large precession angles. Three fundamental research topics
will be studied: 1) Nonlinear effects in metallic ribbons of Fe and Py, 2)
Nonlinear effects in ultra-small elements of Fe and Py, and 3) Spectral analysis
of the spin waves involved in nonlinear processes. The experimental effort will
be supported by theoretical calculations. This work will have a number of
broader impacts. It has important implications in practical problems because,
for example, unique signal processing devices such as a signal to noise enhancer
can be made using the nonlinear behavior studied here. Furthermore, nonlinear
effects are significant for ultrafast switching of small magnetic elements in
magnetic memory systems. In addition, this project will provide education and
training for all levels of students - high school students, undergraduates,
graduate students and post-doctoral researchers. Finally, the magnetics group in
Colorado Springs has an excellent record of involving underrepresented groups in
research, starting at the high school level, and this effort will be continued.