* 0907384
* Structure and Mechanics of Self-Assembled Polymer Films at Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kenneth Shull, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

ARRA STATEMENT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A variety of useful
functional materials can be produced by adsorption of polymeric molecules,
nanoparticles, or a combination of these components to liquid/liquid or
liquid/solid interfaces. Applications of these materials require that they have
sufficient mechanical strength, which generally originates from their polymeric
component. Currently, many of the factors that control the detailed structure
and mechanical integrity of these materials are not well understood. This
project will develop the field of interfacial mechanics so that the
relationships between the processing parameters, structural features and
mechanical properties of polymer-based interfacial layers can be understood and
controlled. Successful completion of the proposed research will enable
interfacial structures to be engineered with the necessary mechanical strength.
The general approach involves application of the materials science paradigm that
has successfully led to the development of new bulk materials. Well defined
model systems will be utilized in conjunction with experimental techniques
developed specifically for the investigations of these types of interfacial
films. Three types of systems will be investigated: interfaces between
oppositely charged polyelectrolyte layers, interfacial assemblies formed by the
complexation of oppositely charged species at the interface between two aqueous
fluids, and materials undergoing self-assembly or self-organization while
confined to two dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research will result in the development of an
important new class of materials with applications in materials and health-
related areas. Graduate students will be trained in the relevant scientific
techniques in an important, emerging subfield of materials science. The work
will also foster international collaboration through joint projects with
colleagues in Mexico. An additional initiative entitled "Nature's Solutions to
Mechanical Problems" will provide a means for communicating important
fundamental concepts in mechanics to a very broad and diverse audience. A
primary goal of this portion of the project is to develop a bridge between the
scientific community, which is increasingly focused on understanding and
mimicking the mechanical behavior of biological systems, and the broader public
who are inherently interested in their natural surroundings but are not familiar
with the scientific literature in these areas. A secondary goal is to use these
examples to develop critical thinking skills, to communicate 'how we know what
we know', and to teach both scientists and non-scientists to distinguish between
claims that have a rational basis and those that do not. This effort is
leveraged by collaborations with local museums in the Chicago area, beginning
with the Chicago Botanic Garden and Shedd Aquarium. These institutions bring
expertise in reaching the public at the broadest and most general level.
Undergraduate students at Northwestern University and high school science
teachers in the Chicago area will be involved in this part of the effort under
the guidance of the PI. &lt;br/&gt;