* 0907365
* Collaborative Proposal: Low-Cost Substrates for III-V Photovoltaics by Self-Templated Selective Epitaxial Growth of Germanium on Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Talid Sinno, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,372.00

'This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).' Technical. This project addresses epitaxial growth of high
quality, single-crystalline Ge on Si substrates. The approach is selective
epitaxial growth (SEG) of Ge on Si by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) conducted in
a way so as to minimize the contact area/stress between the Ge overlayer and the
Si substrate. The idea is to employ a perforated interlayer, through which
epitaxially adhered Ge islands grow and subsequently coalesce to form a
continuous film. The SEG process is well established in concept but suffers from
defect formation during island coalescence, which is a topic addressed here from
both experimental and theory/simulation perspectives. The project involves
collaborative experimental and computational work that takes advantage of very
high resolution microscopy capabilities for direct connections between
experiments and atomistic simulations. Sequences of atomically resolved
experimental studies will be combined with large scale molecular dynamics and
kinetic Monte Carlo simulations based on state-of-the-art techniques. The aim is
to delineate various phenomenological components of the overall SEG process in
order to build a complete mechanistic picture. Goals include: (1) a
quantitatively predictive atomistic-scale understanding of self-templated SEG
and a way to optimize this capability, and (2) an analysis of several basic
atomistic processes that have broad importance in a variety of heteroepitaxy
applications beyond SEG. Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental
research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials science
having technological relevance. Lowering the cost barrier associated with Ge
substrates is a key element in making advanced III-V photovoltaics as an
economically viable option to generate electricity. This cost reduction may
transformatively enable much wider use of solar energy than what is possible
today. During the course of this collaborative effort, UNM will benefit from the
computational capability at Penn, while Penn will benefit from UNM?s
nanofabrication, growth, and analytic capabilities. The collaborative efforts
will include frequent visits by the principal investigators (PIs) and graduate
students to partner institutions. The research project also will offer an
interdisciplinary educational environment for mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students at each institution. In addition to research education,
the PIs will develop materials for a course in Experimental and Computational
Tools in Semiconductor Materials Science and Engineering, which will be taught
simultaneously at UNM and Penn. The PIs will utilize a number of outreach
programs at UNM and Penn to actively educate prospective students about
research-oriented educational opportunities. These outreach programs have
significant potential to improve the enrollment of minority students and women.
This project also enhances the NSF EPSCoR initiative in nanomaterials in New
Mexico.