* 0907273
* Design of Programmable, Self-Assembling Collagen Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vikas Nanda, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2013
* USD 404,997.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in NJ is to test the hypothesis that current
computational protein design methods are adaptable to the creation of novel
biomaterials based on fibrous proteins such as collagen. Natural collagens serve
as inspiration for biomaterials design, assuming a multitude of structural forms
ranging from thick fibrous bundles to mesh-like networks. The challenge is
approached in two stages: (1) develop a 'parts list' of peptide modules that
assemble into collagen triple-helices with programmable stability and
specificity; and (2) link these modules together to form higher-order structures
such as fibrils, networks or dendrimers. The amino acid sequences of three
peptides: A, B and C have been computationally designed to specifically assemble
into a triple-helix with 1:1:1 stoichiometry. Initial structural and
thermodynamic characterization of peptide mixtures indicates significant
progress towards this goal. Assays will be developed to precisely probe the mode
of association of peptide mixtures. Experimental outcomes will be used to revise
the computational design protocol. Connecting modules that orthogonally assemble
with flexible linkers may lead to higher-order assemblies such as fibrils,
meshes and dendrimers. A set of designs that combine orthogonal modules will be
constructed and tested for types of nanostructures formed. Insight from these
designs will improve the basic understanding of molecular forces in fibrous
protein folding and structure. It will also promote the discovery of new
collagen assemblies beyond those found in nature. A rational design framework
will be essential to advance the future development of sophisticated, functional
biomaterials for real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer
simulations are being used to design synthetic proteins with applications as
biosensors, therapeutics or novel enzymes. This study targets collagens - long,
rope-like proteins that provide most tissues in our body from bones to skin with
strength and flexibility. Using a software platform that incorporates basic
physical principles of protein structure and folding, novel collagen-like
peptides will be designed that self-assemble into nano-structures. The challenge
is approached in two stages: (1) develop a ?parts list? of peptide modules that
assemble into collagen triple-helices with programmable stability and
specificity, and (2) link these modules together to form higher-order structures
such as fibrils, networks or dendrimers. These compounds will be valuable as
tissue engineering substrates and biomaterials