* 0907085
* Protein and Metabolic Engineering for the Production of Biodegradable Plastics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Christopher Nomura, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2013
* USD 378,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Reseach to
State University of New York, College of Environmental Science and Forestry is
to study the improvements of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) monomer supply through
the application of in vitro evolutionary techniques to genes encoding microbial
fatty acid biosynthetic enzymes. PHAs are microbially produced, biobased, and
biodegradable polymers that have properties similar to petroleum-based polymers.
Substitution of petroleum-based plastics with PHAs could alleviate many of the
pollution problems associated with non-biodegradable plastics. PHA polyesters
can be divided into several classes with different physical properties based on
their monomer composition. Short-chain-length (SCL) PHAs consist of repeating
units with 3-5 carbons and have thermoplastic properties. Medium-chain-length
(MCL) PHAs consist of repeating units with 6-12 carbons and have elastomeric
properties. SCL-MCL PHAs consist of repeating units of 4-12 carbons and have a
wide range of physical properties dependent on their molar ratio of SCL to MCL
monomers. Currently, the ability to produce MCL and SCL-MCL PHA polymers from
unrelated carbon sources in recombinant organisms is limited due to low activity
of potential MCL monomer-supplying enzymes. There are two main objectives for
the proposed research: (1) Use of engineered bacteria harboring synthetic
metabolic pathways to efficiently produce SCL and MCL copolymers from unrelated
carbon sources; and (2) the alteration of the substrate specificity and specific
activity of enzymes for the supply of PHA monomers to produce novel copolymer
formulations. Enzyme engineering using random, error-prone PCR and rational
design based on known crystal structures of enzymes will be used for the
production of improved PHA monomer-supplying enzymes for the production of novel
biodegradable polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics are invaluable materials
that are used to produce many essential items in modern society. Most current
plastics are derived from petroleum, which is a limited resource. There are many
problems associated with petroleum-based plastics (pollution, waste disposal
problems, greenhouse gas emission, competitive fuel utilization, etc.), which
suggest that research in the area of biobased and biodegradable alternatives is
of paramount importance. Studies supported by this research will use bacteria as
?microbial factories? for the production of biodegradable plastics from
renewable, plant-based resources. By engineering proteins within the bacteria,
we will be able to produce higher quantities of biobased plastics and produce
new types of biobased plastics with improved material properties. The work will
yield new and detailed insights into how biodegradable plastics are produced in
cells. Completion of the proposed research could have dramatic impacts on
curtailing a variety of urban pollution issues caused by petroleum-based
plastics.&lt;br/&gt;