* 0907963
* Geometrically Based Kinetic Approach to Multi-scale Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Hailiang Liu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 170,000.00

This research project develops analytical and numerical tools to study multi-
scale wave dynamics in two application areas: semi-classical dynamics in
Schrodinger equations, and kinetic descriptions for polymer orientation
dynamics. For high frequency wave propagation problems, the project will
continue to develop effective geometrical partial-differential-equation models
to capture field statistics. We will further develop mathematical tools to
evaluate underlying physical observables and to reconstruct the original wave
field globally. Within this framework, semi-classical convergence beyond
caustics is to be established. For polymer orientation dynamics, we will study
the isotropic-nematic phase transition in presence of inertial forces, as well
as derivation and validation of kinetic models for polymers on manifolds. The
research employs novel approaches, such as geometric closure for kinetic
transport and kinetic models on tangent bundles, combined with traditional
methods, such as asymptotic and direct numerical methods.

Many physical problems have multiple temporal and spatial scales that pose
tremendous difficulties for mathematical analysis and numerical simulation. This
research project will have profound impact on fundamental understanding of high
frequency waves and polymer orientation dynamics. One of the objectives is to
accurately recover high frequency wave fields around caustics, which is
important in many applications such as in seismic imaging. Another objective is
to investigate the phase transitions in kinetic models of polymers on manifolds,
which can lead to a better understanding of phase segregation in polymeric
fluids. The theory under development will be applied to and driven by identified
practical applications, and the results of the project will not only increase
technical knowledge but will also produce a broader view of the subject. A third
objective of the project is to provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students involved in carrying out this research.