* 0907676
* Shear-Activated Molecular Glue
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ching-Hwa Kiang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907676 PI: Kiang, Ching-Hwa ORG: Rice University

Title: Title: Shear Activated Molecular Glue

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This research will focus on single-molecule manipulation
techniques to study multimeric materials that are activated by shear stress. The
structure-function relationships will be determined for the macromolecules and
biopolymers in their active form. In particular, the research will focus on the
activation of adhesion in von Willebrand factor (VWF), the largest multimeric
adhesion ligand circulating in blood, which is activated by shear stress to
function as a molecular glue to bind platelets. The objectives of the research
are to: (1) Characterize mechanical resistance to domain unfolding of VWF. The
PI will determine whether disufide bonds are responsible for the lateral
association, hence the fiber formation, of ultra large VWF and sheared VWF. The
focus here will be on the mechanical resistance of VWF unfolding to external
stretching force. (2) Quantify platelet binding kinetics. Through a single-
molecule AFM pulling experiment, the PI will determine the kinetic rate and free
energy of plasma VWF binding with glycoprotein (GP) Ib-alpha before and after
shear exposure and under flow conditions. These data will quantify activation of
the molecular glue by shear. (3) Investigate the viscoelastic and free energies
of mesoscopic VWF fibers. We will use thermal fluctuations and dynamically
imposed oscillations in the pulling schedule to measure the viscoelastic
properties and free energies of VWF, sheared VWF, and ultra large VWF.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed research will advance knowledge on the mechanism
of activation of VWF, a shear-activated molecular glue important in blood
clotting. The lessons learned from nature may help to derive strategies for
synthesis of functional smart biopolymers. For the broad society, understanding
the blood clotting mechanism, which plays an important role in the blood
interactions with biomaterials surfaces, may help people with synthetic devices
such as heart valve implants, people with bleeding disorders, and thrombic wound
treatment. Experimental findings will be incorporated into the PI?s new
undergraduate level course, Introduction to Biological Physics, and a graduate
level course, Topics in Biological Physics. Students and postdoctoral associates
will have the opportunity to use the state-of-the art instrument for biological
physics research. A computer program developed in this project will be used to
advance the usefulness of AFM instrumentation. Outreach activities include
serving as mentor for the Rice Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
program through the Rice Quantum Institute (RQI), for the Keck Undergraduate
Research Training Program (URTP) through the W. M. Keck Center for Computational
and Structural Biology, and for participants in the summer undergraduate
research program in HHMI Bionanotechnology at Rice University. Students are
recruited from physics, chemistry, mathematics and engineering disciplines that
have interests in moving into biologically-oriented research. In addition the PI
will serve as mentor for high school students from the Harmony Science Academy,
through a collaboration between the Rice Institute of Biosciences and
Bioengineering, and the predominantly Hispanic Science Academy of South Texas as
well as inner-city schools in Houston.

