* 0907934
* The Impact of Massive Stars and Clusters on the Interstellar Medium in the Galactic Center
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cornelia Lang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2013
* USD 330,846.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cornelia Lang (University of Iowa)
will carry out an observational program to study the impact of the young massive
stellar population on the interstellar medium in the central regions of the
Milky Way galaxy. The physical properties of this region are extreme compared to
the disk of our Galaxy. Over the last decade, near-infrared and X-ray
observations have revealed that massive stars have a significant effect on the
interstellar medium in this region, and that the magnetic field may also play a
dominant role. However, a detailed study of the interplay between these stellar
and interstellar components has not yet been synthesized from the growing canon
of high-resolution observations of the Galactic center (GC). A recent Paschen-
alpha GC survey carried out by the Hubble Space Telescope's Near-Infrared Camera
and Multi-Object Spectrometer and the first wide-field mosaic of the GC region
with the Very Large Array at 4.9 GHz, as well as data from the Spitzer Space
Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory surveys of the GC region, will be
used to (1) provide a thorough characterization of the massive stars within the
central 75 parsecs of the GC by identifying emission-line stars in the Paschen-
alpha and radio continuum, while in addition, radio observations can provide a
measurement of the stellar mass-loss rates and also track variability of these
objects and (2) combine high resolution Paschen-alpha, radio continuum, and mid-
infrared data to examine the impact of the massive stars on the interstellar
medium and quantify the "energy budget" for this region. In addition, Dr. Lang
will investigate the nature of the striking filamentation present on fine scales
in the ionized gas. The long term goal of this research program is to obtain a
clearer understanding of the physical processes in the unusual nuclear region of
galaxies, both ours and that of nearby systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
aspect of this program will be collaborating with traditionally under-
represented female physics and astronomy students. Dr. Lang plans to develop a
more substantial partnership between the University of Iowa's Women in Science
and Engineering (WISE) organization and the Department of Physics and Astronomy.
In collaborating with WISE, she plans to organize a series of regular activities
to foster mentorship and professional development of female students in science
across campus, including: an annual undergraduate poster session where graduate
students serve as judges, professional development workshops for graduate
students, and observing sessions and telescope tours for the general population
of WISE undergraduates who live together in a "Learning Community" dorm. In
addition to the students' acquiring fundamental skills through research
projects, these mentoring activities can play a large part in the development of
these young women into the next generation of successful scientific researchers
and teachers.