* 0907513
* Black-Scholes type options in terms of the last passage times
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Ju-Yi Yen, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2013
* USD 124,687.00

The study of the Black-Scholes type formula plays an important role in the
analysis of financial markets and instruments, for example in option pricing. It
is known that if the underlying asset price is a strict local martingale, then
pricing the Black-Scholes type formula becomes delicate and difficult to
analyze. For instance, if the underlying asset price is a "true" martingale,
then the European call price is a submartingale, hence the function is
increasing. On the other hand, if the underlying asset price is a strict local
martingale, then the European call price is not in general increasing. The
project develops techniques from probability theory to build a bridge between
mathematical models and financial markets. A first main direction of the project
uses the interpretation of the generalized Black-Scholes quantities in terms of
last passage times in the framework of Bessel processes in order to derive fine
properties of the call option process, as a function of maturity, written for
the strict local Bessel martingales. Concretely, the work aims to provide a
rigorous mathematical framework for understanding market bubbles. A second main
focus of the project investigates the enlargement filtration of the last passage
time in the Black-Scholes type formula, in particular, its "distance" from the
stopping time. In a financial context, an example of the improper use of
stopping time may be interpreted as using signals coming from available inside
information. &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop mathematical theory and tools
for detecting the presence of arbitrage trading in this setting which is also
related to market bubble phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, there has
been a series of market crashes and bubbles where mispricing takes place. In
economic terms, a bubble is defined as a deviation between the price of an asset
and its underlying values.&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, bubbles are phenomena for
which the discounted asset prices are strictly local martingale but not
martingale under the risk-free measure. In other words, if the discounted asset
price processes are strict local martingales, option prices no longer increase
in maturity and Merton's no early exercise theorem does not hold. Intuitively,
if a bubble exists, the asset price will increase initially, but a crash
is&lt;br/&gt;likely to take place in the future. It is well-known that
many&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated financial derivatives have been built on the
foundation of mathematical theories since the 1970s. As a consequence, such a
rapid increase of derivative markets necessitates proper communication between
financial analysts and mathematicians. A general goal of the project is to
develop a rigorous mathematical understanding of market bubbles and related
phenomena. The project is interdisciplinary in nature and will be integrated
into practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;