* 0907096
* Growth and Optical Properties of Nonpolar m-Plane GaN on Patterned Si and Sapphire Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Hadis Morkoc, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2014
* USD 507,973.00

Technical: This project addresses materials science synthesis/processing
research of m-plane GaN for use in GaN-based devices. GaN-based materials are
higly polar on c-plane which when strain is present or a compositional gradient
is introduced resulting in polarization charge. The ensuing Stark shift reduces
radiative recombination efficiency and can cause carrier leakage in light
emitting diodes (LEDs) reducing their efficiency. The research emphasis will be
on synthesis of epitaxial m-plane GaN and investigation of optical processes. An
accompanying aim is to explore growth of well-aligned, m-plane GaN films on
relatively low cost patterned sapphire and Si substrates to understand the
fundamentals of growth mechanisms involved. A basic investigation of non polar
m-plane GaN synthesis on inexpensive and readily available, but appropriately
patterned substrates will be carried out in conjunction with requisite
characterization to gain further understanding on radiative recombination
processes in such layers. The orientation and morphology of the films, as well
as extended and point defects will be investigated using structural, electrical,
and optical characterization techniques. The objective is to explore the science
underlying the synthesis of m-plane GaN on low-cost sapphire and Si substrates
with etched facets. Additionally, the enhancement of optical matrix elements,
p-type conductivity in m-plane oriented epitaxial layers, and basic
investigation of quantum confinement effects and their influence on the optical
efficiency in the absence of polarization fields will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical: This project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. The research outcomes could
pave the way for more efficient light emitters such as LEDs with acceptable
color rendering index and efficacy for solid state lighting. These
investigations have the potential to produce sufficiently bright light sources
for solid state lighting applications, as well as lasers and detectors for
consumer and military applications. The research is important in ensuring that
the US maintains its current status as a leader in the exploration and
implementation of technologies that will lead to energy savings and concomitant
environmental benefits. The project also integrates research and education. The
PIs have established a collaborative and interdisciplinary research environment
for graduate and undergraduate students from electrical engineering and physics
fields, and this project will provide graduate and undergraduate students
opportunities for valuable cross-disciplinary learning, for interactions with
international scientists, for development of industrial connections, in addition
to assisting their education and understanding of fundamentals of semiconductor
technology and physics. Students are also involved in the PIs' efforts toward
reduced green house gas emission by helping to achieve semiconductor based
efficient white light generation. Since VCU is a growing urban university with a
diverse student body (18% African American, 22% other minorities), the PIs
recruit from a relatively large pool of students from underrepresented groups.
Consequently, they have established minority students in their laboratories and
will continue to address diversity.