* 0907175
* Development of High Surface Area Crystalline Semiconductors for Visible Light Driven Photocatalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2012
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photocatalytic splitting of water into
H2 and O2 using semiconductor-based heterogeneous systems promises to be one of
the simplest and most economical methods for solar energy conversion and
storage. A major limitation to the practical application of these systems is the
lack of stable semiconductor photocatalysts that can carry out the water
splitting in the visible region of the solar spectrum with high conversion
efficiency. Much of current efforts to improve the efficiency of water
photolysis focus on dense bulk semiconductors, and those tend to offer poor
conversion efficiency because of their low surface area and significant charge
recombination as well as of other problems such as the wide band gaps in oxides
and the low photochemical stability of sulfides. Here, through compositional and
structural control to achieve band gap engineering, templating approach to
enhance surface area and catalytic performance, and systematic photocatalytic
and photophysical measurements, we aim to create a family of stable, efficient,
and visible light driven nanoporous photocatalysts for water splitting. These
photocatalysts will be multi-functional materials that integrate
semiconductivity, high crystallinity, and tunable porosity, and will have the
potential to overcome the main limitations of known semiconductor
photocatalysts. The key advantages offered by these materials include large
interfacial surface areas, short electron-hole diffusion lengths to the internal
interfaces, and multiple routes for band gap engineering. The proposed project
borders on various research areas. It will therefore provide excellent training
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses an important
energy and environmental issue: the use of renewable and non-polluting energy.
It aims to develop new multi-functional materials suitable for energy production
and storage such as conversion of renewable solar energy to hydrogen fuel that
is environmentally friendly. It will also provide a fundamental understanding
about important chemical and structural factors that govern photocatalytic
properties and processes. This will allow rational synthetic design and
optimization of advanced materials and processes for the hydrogen fuel
production. UC Riverside has a very diverse student population with a large
enrollment of minority students, and undergraduate research is strongly
encouraged at UCR and in the PI?s group. The project combines diversity in
materials synthesis and various characterization techniques and provides
excellent training opportunities for students. Their research experiences with
this project can have a major impact in these students? scientific career in
research areas that are of increasing importance to our society.&lt;br/&gt;