* 0907004
* Statistical Analysis of Jammed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Hernan Makse, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
jammed matter. The goal of this proposal is to develop the ensemble of volume
fluctuations to describe the statistical mechanics of jammed matter with an aim
of shedding light to the long-standing problem of characterizing the random
close packing and random loose packing of particles.

The PI will work to develop a theoretical statistical approach with the aim of
describing the jammed system with equations of state relating observables such
as entropy, coordination number, volume fraction, elastic moduli as well as the
probability distributions of volume and contacts. The PI will follow a
systematic route to classify jammed packings into a phase diagram of jamming,
from frictionless to frictional particles, from hard spheres to deformable
particles, from monodisperse to polydisperse, from spherical particles to
nonspherical convex particles such as ellipsoids, in an attempt to understand
the packing problem from a unifying perspective. We will also generalize our
studies of random close packing and random loose packing of particles to other
dimensions such as 2d, nd, and the mean-field limit of infinite dimension.

An important impact of the project will be to attract underrepresented students
to participate in the proposed research drawn from the excellent pool of
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students from physics and
engineering at CCNY.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
jamming. The phenomenon of jamming takes place in particulate systems when the
density of particles is increased to a point where all particles are in close
contact with one another and experience structural arrest. Once jammed, the
system is able to withstand an applied stress. Jammed systems have very
different properties, ranging from hard and rough granular materials, to
deformable and frictionless emulsion droplets, to colloidal suspensions.
Exploring the jamming transition for a variety of systems carries importance in
both industrial processes and understanding of the fundamental theory of this
type of structural arrest. The PI aims to develop a theoretical framework to
describe this phenomenon. The PI envisions creating a phase diagram or ?road
map? to concisely capture the conditions under which jamming occurs and the
states of granular materials.

There is a growing realization that the study of granular media offers
unexpected challenges in physics, having behavior unlike that of liquids or
solids. Generally, it is believed that the jamming transition shares many
features with the glass transition, taking place in liquids cooled down
sufficiently fast. Therefore, progress in the field of jammed matter will
advance the understanding of a variety of out of equilibrium phenomena.

From a practical perspective, granular matter and emulsions are widespread,
finding applications in the food industry, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and
geomorphology. Often, the handling of granular materials is based on empirical
methods due to a lack of understanding of these complex systems. A fundamental
basis for these systems would make it possible to develop new procedures and
reduce handling costs. An important impact of the project will be to attract
underrepresented students to participate in the proposed research drawn from the
excellent pool of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students from
physics and engineering at CCNY.

