* 0907708
* Analysis of Neuronal Spike Trains using Prototype Point Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Frederic Schoenberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,001.00

The investigator develops tools for the summary and description of datasets
involving catalogs of multiple realizations of point processes, using non-
parametric techniques involving point process prototypes. Particular attention
is paid to the case where each realization is a list of points in space and
time, and a major characteristic of this proposed research involves the
extension of prototypes and analyses based on metrics such as spike-time
distance from one-dimensional point processes to the case of repeated
realizations of point processes in higher dimensions. For such datasets,
prototypes represent a useful summary of the behavior of the typical realization
of the point process, and as such can be used to compare realizations from
distinct classes of point processes. The methods investigated are entirely non-
parametric, relying on minimal assumptons about the point processes being
studied. The investigators apply their techniques to the neuroscience problem of
summarizing and describing patterns in neuronal cell firings in conditioned and
unconditioned subjects responding to various stimuli and to the description of
typical spatial-temporal incidence of wildfires within seasons or years, as well
as the characterization of other point process datasets such as earthquake
catalogs. The methods developed in this proposal are useful for detecting and
summarizing patterns in data from a wide variety of applications where one
records repeated observations of phenomena that seem to occur at random times
and locations. Examples include the firings of neurons within the brain, global
earthquakes and their aftershocks, and the locations and times of wildfire
ignitions in Southern California. Prototype methods are incredibly useful for
the description of such catalogs and, in the context of earthquakes and
wildfires, can aid urban planners and emergency response personnel, structural
engineers and those interested in insurance in describing what to expect in a
typical realization. In the neuroscience setting, this project contributes to
the understanding of the brain and its properties, as the methods explored here
help to characterize the typical neuronal firing patterns among subjects
receiving different stimuli or different forms of conditioning.