* 0907890
* Testing Accretion Physics and Strong-Field Gravity by Imaging Accreting Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Abraham Loeb, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2014
* USD 540,396.00

AST-0907890 Loeb

The two largest black holes on the sky are in Sgr A* (at the center of our
Galaxy) and in the center of galaxy M87. Recent observations have demonstrated
that the apparent size of their horizons, tens of micro-arcseconds on the sky,
can be resolved by Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) at sub-millimeter
wavelengths. Imaging the silhouette of these black holes with existing
technology opens a new window for probing general relativity, accretion flow
physics, and the launching sites of relativistic outflows. This project will
study in detail these silhouettes against the background illumination by
surrounding gas. The primary goals are to examine the sensitivity of features in
the image to details of the accretion flow and of the jet physics, and to
separate features which provide generic tests of general relativity. The
simulations will use a general-relativistic code which incorporates ray-tracing,
gas dynamics, and the relevant plasma physics. The second phase will examine how
future observations could resolve the predicted images, in order to optimize the
observing strategy and get the most scientific output from a given observing
time.

Testing General Relativity in the strong field limit is of great importance for
fundamental physics, and black holes have long been known to attract a lot of
interest from the general public. The black hole silhouette images from this
work will be freely available to everyone via museums and the popular media
through popular-level articles and movies.