* 0907562
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Hierarchical Methods for Modeling Chromosomal Spatial Correlation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Guanghua Xiao, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 74,954.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Recently, many genomic studies have shown that significant chromosomal spatial
correlation exists in gene expression of many organisms. Ignoring such
correlation in statistical modeling can greatly reduce the efficiency of
estimation and the power of statistical inference. In this project, the
investigators develop a set of new Bayesian hierarchical models to account for
chromosomal spatial correlation in the following three areas of methodologies
and applications: (1) incorporating the spatial correlation associated with
linear chromosome structures into the analysis of gene expression data; (2)
quantifying and inferring chromosome folding structures in vivo using gene
expression data; (3) probing the global three dimensional structure of a
chromosome in vivo.

This study provides statistical tools to explore three dimensional (3D)
chromosome structures and directly addresses the important biological question
that how the 3D structures facilitate the coordination in gene transcription.
Not only can it generate new biological insights about spatial configuration of
chromosomes, but also it can greatly improve the understanding of the
relationship between the function and structure of chromosomes in living
organisms. It also has potential clinical significance; for example, it provides
tools to formally identify and compare chromosomal spatial patterns in gene
expression from tumor and normal samples, which can discover subtle but
coordinated changes in the tumor genome and lead to clinical insights on the
underlying regulatory mechanism of cancer. Besides scientific novelty and
significance, this research fosters intensive collaboration among researchers
from various fields including statistics, computational biology, experimental
biology and clinical cancer research, and promotes intellectual interactions
among participating institutions.