* 0907310
* Photophysical and Photomechanical Properties of Molecular Crystal Nanorods
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 420,000.00

Technical Summary. &lt;br/&gt;Photochemical reactions within molecular crystals
provide a way to transform light energy into nanoscale mechanical motion. The
development of nanoscale molecular crystal actuators requires knowledge about
how molecular-scale events combine to produce micron-scale motions and
deformations in crystalline nanostructures. Furthermore, there is much room for
material optimization and the development of tools to control the motion of
these nanostructures. Thus the proposed research has two main
goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) To determine the physical mechanisms that give rise to the
photomechanical response of molecular crystal nanorods. A variety of methods
will be used to characterize the structure and dynamics of the nanorods over a
range of lengthscales, from Angstroms to microns. The goal is to correlate the
dynamic properties of the nanorods (photochemical reaction rates, crystal
deformation rates, and force generation) with structural properties (crystal
packing and orientation within the rod, size and shape, and surface treatment).
These correlations will result in a more quantitative and predictive
understanding of how molecular-level photochemical events give rise to
microscopic motions.&lt;br/&gt;2) To develop improved, size-tunable nanoscale
actuators. Material parameters like reversibility (both light-induced and
thermally-induced), and photoinduced volume changes will be optimized. New
optical techniques for selective control of motion, like two-photon excitation,
will be investigated. Practical applications of these structures will also be
developed, with an emphasis on two devices: a simple linear actuator based on
rod expansion, and a synthetic analog to biological cilia based on reversible
nanorod bending. &lt;br/&gt;The combination of improved physical understanding
and improved materials should allow us to assess the ultimate utility of
molecular crystal nanostructures as photomechanical actuators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Machines that function on
lengthscales smaller than biological cells could lead to revolutionary advances
in fields like medicine and defense. But there are many questions that must be
answered before this goal can be achieved, including how to produce such
structures, how to provide them with power, and how to control their motion. In
the proposed research, templating methods are used to mass produce organic
nanorods. When exposed to light, the molecules within these rods undergo
photochemical reactions that change their structure. Because the molecules are
organized within a crystal, they move in concert to expand or bend the overall
nanostructure. The location and amount of the motion can be controlled by laser
exposure conditions. In this way, photons provide both the power source and
control mechanism for such photomechanical nanostructures. The research in this
proposal will assess whether these nanoscale machines can be used to manipulate
objects on nanometer to micron lengthscales. In addition, outreach programs
based on this research will be used to increase the participation of
underrepresented minorities in science. U.C. Riverside is a Hispanic Serving
Institution, with connections to the surrounding middle and high schools that
are more than 50% Hispanic. Experimental modules that permit direct
visualization of microscopic phenomena like Brownian motion and nanorod
photomechanics will be integrated into the curriculum of local schools to help
teach aspects of the California State Standards for science education in the 7th
and 8th grades. &lt;br/&gt;