* 0907146
* Dynamic Contact Networks in Granular Systems: New Insights into Fracture &amp;Segregation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Wolfgang Losert, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 345,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how and when particulate matter such as
sand or gravel will respond to stress and start to flow is an important problem
in a wide range of fields such as earthquake prediction, rock avalanche hazard
prediction, and civil engineering. This project will study the flow of granular
matter by looking at the networks of contact points between particles, and
examining how these networks change as the granular material flows. Other
approaches to understand granular flow focus on the motion of individual
particles or look at the system as a fluid-like continuum. The proposed research
will apply the tools of network theory, which will highlight the intermediate
scale ? ensembles of touching particles - and will thus provide a novel
perspective on granular flow. The project will focus on two key processes that
occur in granular materials, the breaking of the contact network during flow of
granular material, and the segregation of particles by size in such a granular
flow. The proposed research will train graduate students in state of the art
experimental and computational research and in mentoring of undergraduate and
high school students. The research team will also conduct public demonstrations
of their work, highlighting -on simple examples- flows of sand that possesses
fascinating, technologically important properties which are not yet fully
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to measure three dimensional granular flow fields
experimentally, and to utilize network theory to characterize the flow behavior.
Network theory metrics focus on the large scale structure of ensembles of linked
objects. Since granular matter derives its strength from a dense network of
particle contacts, network theory will provide a novel viewpoint relevant to
understanding granular materials properties. The focus will be on two key
granular flow processes ? fracture and segregation. The first goal is to
characterize the onset of fracture of a jammed granular material, i.e. the
formation of large scale structural rearrangements such as shear zones when
granular matter starts to flow. Understanding how and when granular matter will
fracture and start to flow is important to a wide range of fields such as
earthquake prediction, rock avalanche hazard prediction, and civil engineering.
The second goal is to characterize the particle rearrangements that lead to
segregation of a mixture of particle sizes during granular flows. Graduate
students will be trained in a unique combination of experimental tools (3D
imaging) and theoretical concepts (network theory), and will contribute to
mentoring of undergraduate students. The group has developed demonstrations that
highlight the most striking features of jamming and granular segregation, which
will be presented at public lectures and outreach events.