* 0907145
* Gapless Spin Liquids and Itinerant Non-Fermi-Liquids in Experiments and Models.  Phase Transitions in Gauge-Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Olexei Motrunich, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education to study fractionalized phases in spin, boson, and electron
systems in 2D that have many low-energy itinerant excitations. This research is
motivated by experiments on several recently discovered candidate spin-liquid
materials, and from observations of non-Fermi-liquid itinerant electron states
in strongly correlated materials such as the strange metal and pseudogap phases
in the cuprate high temperature superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;The field of quantum
magnetism has experienced a new era stimulated by the cuprates and by many
studies of magnetic insulators with competing interactions. Quantum spin systems
are prototypical examples of many-body physics; one of the conceptual
developments is the possibility of spin liquid phases. A recent breakthrough is
the appearance of several candidate experimental realizations which appear to be
gapless spin liquids where theory is less established. A proposed state for two
triangular lattice spin liquid materials has a Fermi surface of spinons, which
is a kind of ?spin metal". The PI aims to determine how well these materials can
be understood within the available theoretical frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;Having
learned about such unusual states in the magnetism context, the PI will apply
these ideas to understand itinerant non-Fermi-liquids of electrons. In the
cuprate context, one can ask whether charge degrees of freedom can be put back
into play and study the strange metal. Focusing on the itinerant charge sector,
and slave-particle approaches borrowed from spin-liquid studies enable the
construction of non-perturbative charge liquids. ?Bose metals.? The PI will
pursue the next step, a similar program for electronic systems bringing together
spin and charge sectors. &lt;br/&gt;An important thrust of this research is to
search for such ?spin metals," ?Bose metals," and electronic non-Fermi-liquids
in model systems and guide numerical studies. A promising approach is to build
up towards 2D using controlled DMRG studies of candidate models on quasi-1D
ladders combined with trial wavefunctions and gauge theory/bosonization
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also study phase transitions in statistical
mechanics models with matter fields coupled to gauge fields in 2+1D. These arise
as effective field theories for recently proposed unconventional quantum
critical points between competing phases in quantum magnets. Establishing the
nature of the transitions in such gauge theories will put further theoretical
developments on firmer ground. The PI will also study phases and phase
transitions in models with statistical interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education that aims to discover new magnetic states of matter, to understand
their implications for unusual metallic states that appear in high temperature
superconductors, and to understand exotic transformations that can occur among
them that lie outside the standard theory of phase transitions. This research is
motivated and stimulated by the discovery of new materials with unusual
properties that challenge conventional paradigms of condensed matter physics.
The emphasis of this research will be on developing theoretical concepts in the
context of laboratory and computer experiments on materials and
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is fundamental research that contributes to
the intellectual foundations of our understanding of materials and new states of
matter that exhibit properties and exotic phenomena that lie outside our current
understanding. This is an intellectual pursuit in its own right no less
fascinating than the study of the universe, but it may also lead to the
discovery of new phenomena and to new device technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;