* 0907378
* Effects of Point Defects on Dislocation Nucleation in Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* David Bahr, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 02/28/2013
* USD 281,910.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Traditional methods of strengthening materials often focus on increasing the
resistance to plastic deformation by decreasing dislocation mobility. In many of
the rapidly developing metallic materials that exhibit enhanced strengths, such
as multilayered metals and ultrafine grained metals, the limiting factor is
likely the creation and multiplication of dislocations, rather than the motion
of dislocations. While there is substantial work on this topic by many groups
around the world, most studies focus on pristine or extremely controlled
structures, whereas most engineering alloys are complex, multicomponent systems
that have prevalent defect structures. Exposure to radiation and existing non-
equilibrium processing is particularly likely to generate excess vacancies and
other point defects. This project will provide a fundamental study of the
nucleation of and operation of sources dislocations with a wide range defect
structures in metals using both experimental and computational studies. The team
will experimentally quantify the impact of vacancies, impurities, and grain
boundaries on dislocation nucleation and plasticity at extreme stresses in a
variety of metallic systems using indentation techniques to probe the onset of
plasticity. Point defect concentration will be assessed by positron porosimetry.
Nanoindentation studies will also be used to demonstrate the impact of existing
defects on the propagation of dislocations at the nm scale at high stresses, and
these results will be compared to computational simulations using both molecular
statics and dynamics. This coupling will develop stronger relationships between
computational models of incipient plasticity and experimental studies through
the development of multi-scale modeling techniques addressing both length and
time scales.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Of the many methods used by engineers and scientists to strengthen metallic
materials there is increased emphasis on developing nanoscale structures that
exhibit the -smaller is stronger- paradigm, where having a smaller length scale
in the material provides more resistance to deformation. This project will focus
on determining the fundamental effects of existing defects in metals on the
onset of plasticity. There will be an experimental component, wherein the onset
of plasticity is measured in a variety of metallic materials to quantify the
ultimate strength of the material. These results will be compared to
computational simulations developed to address both time and length scale issues
in modeling the onset of permanent deformation. The graduate students supported
will be partnered with a group of materials science and engineering
undergraduates that have developed an outreach kit of materials for junior high
students, and will gain experience in organizing teams of engineering students
and distributing the kits to dozens of underserved classrooms around the region.