* 0907150
* Strongly Correlated Nonequilibrium Transport Simulation in Complex Quantum Dot and Bulk Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Jong Han, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 284,158.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research
and education on quantum nonequilibrium effects in mesoscopic and nanosystems.
Based on the PI?s recent imaginary-time formulation of steady-state
nonequilibrium transport, complex quantum dot systems will be studied via
quantum Monte Carlo technique and other numerical many-body tools through the
Matsubara voltage method. The PI will apply this formalism to nonlinear
transport problems of complex quantum models which are currently difficult to
study through computation. Recent experiments on several molecular junctions
show a Kondo zero-bias anomaly accompanied by conductance oscillations at the
source-drain bias comparable to the Kondo energy scale. The oscillation has been
speculated to be from molecular vibrations. The PI will pursue an Anderson-
Holstein model to investigate the roles of non-Jahn-Teller and Jahn-Teller
electron-phonon coupling, and the on-site Coulomb interaction. The PI will study
strong correlation effects in spin-injection proposed for spintronics devices.
The nonequilibrium theory will be extended to the bulk limit using two different
implementations of the dynamical mean-field theory: effect of multiple-chemical
potentials in Fermi lattice and electric field driven transport of charged
particles using the Bloch oscillation basis.

The PI is actively involved in interdisciplinary research with the Electric
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering Departments, and also in outreach effort
of artistic representation of physics ideas in collaboration with the department
of visual studies.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
study mesoscopic systems and nanostructures, such as large molecules or
interconnected systems of large molecules, that are out of balance with their
surroundings due to, for example, the application of an electric field, and for
which quantum mechanics dominates. This research builds on methods developed by
the PI that will enable him to calculate how well these structures conduct
electricity and to explore new phenomena. Motivated by experiments, the PI will
apply his approach to determine how strong interactions among electrons, and
electrons and phonons affect the transport of electrons through the structures.

This research contributes to the broad fundamental understanding of the
phenomena that arise in the world around us. Conventional theories used to
develop semiconductor devices become increasingly inadequate to describe devices
now approaching the size molecules where the notion of a device and material
become increasingly blurred. This effort contributes to the intellectual
foundations for future technologies that would utilize molecules and nanoscale
structures to construct electronic devices as a strategy to sustain the
tremendous growth of the electronics industry encapsulated in ?Moore?s Law.?
This research project contributes to the general understanding of quantum
mechanical nonequilibrium behavior of mesoscale and nanoscale structures coupled
to open systems. The general problem of how quantum information is transported
and lost through coupling to the environment has impact on the emerging area of
quantum computing.

The PI is actively involved in interdisciplinary research with the Electric
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering Departments, and also in outreach effort
of artistic representation of physics ideas in collaboration with the department
of visual studies.

