* 0907067
* Cell-Responsive Biomaterials as Tissue Engineering Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Elizabeth Cosgriff-Hernandez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 05/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
the Texas Engineering Experiment Station (TAMU) is to develop a series of
collagen-mimetic polyurethanes that combine the strength and tunability of
synthetic elastomers with the cell-responsive degradation of native collagen.
Tissue engineering has emerged as a promising alternative for ligament
reconstruction when traditional transplants are unavailable or fail. Success of
ligament tissue engineering strategies depend upon 1) the construct retaining
sufficient mechanical properties to stabilize the joint throughout remodeling;
and 2) the new tissue receiving the appropriate level of load for directed
collagenous organization/alignment. It continues to be difficult to both predict
and tailor the non-specific hydrolysis of current synthetic biomaterials;
whereas, natural materials are limited by mass-production, variability, or lack
the tensile properties necessary for ligament applications. New biomaterials are
needed that can meet the complex design criteria necessary for ligament repair.
By yielding control of scaffold degradation to the cell, the scaffold will
degrade at a rate that best promotes tissue formation and organization. The
proposed studies will provide the synthetic routes and predictive structure-
property relationships necessary to use these biomaterials in tissue engineering
scaffolds. In addition, systematic study of these novel polyurethanes will be
carried out to delineate individual effects of degradation and mechanical load
on material properties. The ability to predict how the tensile properties of a
scaffold change during degradation and how these processes are influenced by
loading is critical in the rational design of ligament scaffolds. On a grander
scale, the structural models and methodology developed in this research will
also be applicable to other clinical specialties in which biodegradation shows
promise in improving patient care (e.g. cardiovascular tissue engineering,
biodegradable stents, fixation devices, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By this
award, the PI will study the synthetic routes and predictive structure-property
relationships necessary to use collagen-like polyurethanes that combine the
strength and tunability of synthetic polyurethane with the cell-responsive
degradation of native collagen. in tissue engineering scaffolds. The proposed
research will be used as an educational and training tool to (1) increase the
exposure to exciting biomedical research, and (2) prepare students to pursue
careers in science and engineering. In addition, the PI plan to broaden the
participation of undergraduate students by recruiting these students for summer
internships from Prairie View A&amp;M University, a Historically Black
University. The interdisciplinary and multi-scale nature of the proposed
research will provide a rigorous training ground to prepare both undergraduate
and graduate students for careers in academia, national laboratories, or
industry. The research program will be used to foster critical thinking and
equip students with state-of-the-art experimental skills in chemistry, polymer
science and engineering. In addition, reports, theses, manuscript drafting,
presentations at weekly group meetings, and opportunities to present at regional
and national meetings will foster effective communication skills. Finally, the
principles and results coming out of this research will be incorporated into
courses taught by the PI to educate students and encourage interest in
biomaterial research.&lt;br/&gt;