* 0907847
* Student Research Workshop in Computational Linguistics at the North American Association for Computational Linguistics and Human Language Technologies 2009 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2010
* USD 20,200.00

The NAACL HLT conference is the major international conference in North America
in the field of natural language processing. This project is to subsidize
travel, conference, and housing expenses of students selected to participate in
the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop which will be held during the conference
May 31-June 5, 2009 in Boulder, Colorado. The workshop consists of two tracks:
full paper presentations and poster presentations. All selected work has only
student primary authors. The full paper sessions are composed of paper
presentations followed by a discussion panel led by respected researchers in the
field. The workshop is organized and run by students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Student Research Workshop provides a valuable opportunity for the next
generation of natural language processing researchers to enter the computational
linguistics community. It allows the best students in the field to take their
first important step toward becoming professional computational linguists by
receiving critical feedback on their work from external experts, and by making
contacts with other students and senior researchers in their field. The students
who are involved in running and selecting papers for the workshop also gain
valuable opportunities for professional growth and interaction with the
researchers on the organizing committee of the main conference. The workshop
contributes to the maintenance and development of a skilled and diverse
computational linguistics and natural language processing research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;