* 0907671
* Protein-Protein Recognition Motifs Based on Solenoid Display
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrew Miranker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907671 PI: Miranker, Andrew ORG: Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Protein-Protein Recognition Motifs Based
on Solenoid Display&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of the proposed
research is to create a new archetype in protein design that will enable bottom-
up self-assembly of nanostructured devices and materials. The intent is to
create a library of asymmetric, heteromeric interactions mediated by parallel
beta-sheets. Many proteins display domains with parallel Ã¢-sheets on one or more
of their exterior surfaces. Successful design of such interfaces would therefore
result in a library of protein-protein interactions that can be transferred from
one topological arrangement to another. The sequence of research aims proposed
here is as follows: (1) Develop a library of pairs of short peptides (&lt; 10
residues) that form beta-sheet-rich amyloid fiber structures on mixing, but do
not otherwise self-associate. Generation and screening of candidate peptides
will be based in part on combinatorial peptide syntheses, and in part, on
examining emerging atomic structures of proven parallel beta-sheet amyloids,
e.g. the Abeta peptide from Alzheimer?s disease. (2) Amyloid derived sequences
will then be mapped onto the solvent exposed surface of a stably folded and
monomeric globular protein. The protein proposed to serve as initial scaffold
displays three symmetry related parallel beta-sheets on its surface. Symmetry is
capitalized upon to generate periodic structures that facilitate screening, and
serve as a novel system for generating self-assembling monolayers from a folded
and globular precursor. (3) Asymmetric variants of the scaffold used in (2) to
will be developed and used to present two or more alternative interaction motifs
on the protein surfaces. These designs will enable structural and thermodynamic
characterization of the interactions. An understanding of the geometries and
energies is essential for the correct prediction of the form, fidelity and
stability of higher order structures built from these 1-10nm sized starting
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Successful implementation of
the project will result in novel nanostructure design tools accessible to a wide
range of material scientists and macromolecular engineers. Student training on
this project is multidisciplinary, requiring a range of spectroscopic, imaging
and structure determination techniques. Undergraduate summer projects are
included in the project and will be open to students in all departments at Yale
participating in the Yale Institute for Nanotechnology. The project will enable
the straightforward and safe production of visually apparent amounts of
materials from nano-scaled interactions. It is envisaged that solenoid interface
domains will be able to produce useful demonstrations in a lecture setting, thus
offering opportunity for a greater public understanding of nano-technology. For
example, heteromeric interfaces formed by mixing of solenoids can be designed to
form structures with periodic, nano-scale changes in refractive index. Such
photonic materials are visually appealing and can be related to commonly
observed materials (e.g. opals). Thus, light interactions of the generated
materials in simple scattering experiments (and more sophisticated photonics)
will be demonstrable in lecture settings. The PI is involved in outreach to K-12
schools and will provide hands-on experience for elementary school students and
more advanced activities for upper grade students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;