* 0907862
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Reproductive Protein Evolution in the Ascidian Ciona intestinalis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Marie Nydam, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

The most widely accepted definition of a "species" is a group of organisms that
cannot successfully breed with other groups. When researchers want to study how
species are formed, they study breeding barriers. In marine animals that
reproduce by broadcast spawning, sperm and eggs are released into the water,
where fertilization occurs. For these species the most common breeding barriers
occur when a sperm tries to penetrate an egg: if the proteins on the surface of
the sperm don't match the proteins on the surface of the egg, the sperm cannot
fertilize the egg. This project identifies the sperm proteins important in
fertilization in a marine invertebrate. In addition, the researchers will
compare these proteins in two species that have breeding barriers between them,
to learn how the differences in the proteins contribute to the breeding
barriers. This research will provide fundamental information about the
fertilization process. The researchers will participate in a collaboration
between the Harrison laboratory and the Museum of the Earth at the
Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) beginning in Summer 2009. This
project includes developing an exhibit and brochure at the Museum of the Earth,
a docent training program, professional development for K-12 teachers, and
public lectures at the Museum. The themes to be presented, reproductive
isolation and species formation, are integral to the work outlined above. The
researchers will share their findings in a public lecture, exhibit materials and
professional development as a part of this collaboration.