* 0907139
* Molecular Dynamics of Oriented Elastomers and Crystalline Polymers Using Dielectric Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* James Runt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2012
* USD 354,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The focus of this project is the fundamental investigation of the molecular
dynamics of polymeric materials under uniaxial mechanical strain. Broadband
dielectric spectroscopy, a powerful but surprisingly underutilized technique,
will be used as the experimental probe of the dynamics over a broad range of
temperatures and frequencies. An understanding of molecular mobility of
polymeric materials in the deformed state is critical to their successful
application in films, oriented tapes, and fibers. Nevertheless, there have been
only a modest number of previous investigations of mechanical deformation on
polymer dynamics, and very few using broadband dielectric spectroscopy.

The overall objective of this study is to develop basic insight into the role of
uniaxial deformation on the dynamics of selected crosslinked and thermoplastic
elastomers, as well as selected semi-crystalline polymers. In order to do so in
a comprehensive fashion, it is critical that molecular orientation and
structural changes accompanying deformation be thoroughly characterized. For
elastomers, molecular level interpretations will be developed, in light of the
experimentally measured orientation function and any strain-induced
crystallization. To develop a detailed understanding of the observed relaxation
behavior of deformed semi-crystalline polymers, the significant microstructural
changes accompanying deformation must be characterized. Microstructural changes
and molecular orientation will be followed experimentally using a variety of
methods, including wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering techniques. NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project concerns the fundamental investigation of changes in molecular
mobility as polymer systems are deformed, of critical importance to the
production and successful industrial application of polymer films, coatings and
fibers. A powerful but surprisingly underutilized technique, broadband
dielectric spectroscopy, will be used to measure changes in molecular motions at
various degrees of stretching. Together with findings from other experimental
methods, molecular-level interpretations will be developed, facilitating the
tailoring of these materials for advanced applications.

The research program will create new learning opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as a post-doctoral fellow. Undergraduate
students will participate through a senior capstone project, as well as through
an NSF supported REU program at Penn State. All participants will continue to
engage in outreach activities, particularly those connected with Penn State?s
Women In Science and Engineering Institute grade 6 ? 12 educational experiences.

