* 0907495
* Drops, Bubbles and Wetting in Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Peter Taborek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2013
* USD 690,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Atoms near a solid surface experience a
long range attractive force. Long range forces between molecules are important
because they determine macroscopic properties of matter; such as what phase
(solid, liquid, gas, etc) is stable at a given temperature and the friction
between sliding surfaces. Long range forces also determine the shape of large
biologically important molecules such as proteins and DNA. This individual
investigator award supports project designed to measure long range forces in
some simple model systems using several complementary methods. One method is to
expose a solid to a gas and then weigh the amount of adsorbed gas on the surface
using a microbalance that can detect fractions of a single atomic layer. Atoms
adsorbed on a surface can be considered to be two dimensional matter. They
undergo phase transitions such as vaporization and freezing, which are very
similar to the familiar three dimensional counterparts. When the adsorbed atoms
are very light and weakly interacting (e.g. helium), quantum mechanical effects
become important and the adsorbed 2D liquid can also become a superfluid, which
means that it can flow forever without any driving force. Theory suggests that
for helium-4 on substrates of alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium, etc)
there are unusual competitions between the liquid-vapor transition and the
superfluid-normal fluid transition. This competition will be investigated using
both microbalances and reflection of polarized light. Another way to measure
surface forces is to use an atomic force microscope (AFM). The forces are
measured by monitoring the deflection of a micromachined silicon cantilever with
a laser when the cantilever is brought near the surface. Making these
measurements with a cantilever immersed in liquid helium is technically
challenging, and is one of the goals of this project. Students and post doctoral
associates involved with this project will have the opportunity to develop novel
instruments, and receive training in a broad spectrum of techniques including
cryogenics, high speed imaging, laser optics, and materials preparation. This
training will enable them to become productive members of the research
community, whether in academia, industrial or government
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports an individual investigator project with several aims in the
general area of fluids, predominately quantum fluids. Wetting and its
relationship to superfluid phase transitions when films of helium and helium
mixtures are adsorbed on weak and intermediate strength alkali metal and metal
oxide substrates will be studied and compared with theory. For another study,
low temperature atomic force microscope (AFM) techniques will be developed. The
AFM will be optimized to enable measurement of the distance dependence of
Casimir forces due to both fluctuations in the electromagnetic field and
fluctuations in the order parameter near the onset of superfluidity. Finally a
smaller project will investigate the pinch-off phenomena in drops and bubbles to
elucidate the connections between the phenomena in conventional viscous fluids
and non-Newtonian fluids. The computer code developed for the pinch-off studies
will be adapted to study the stability and breakup of multi-electron drops in
Helium. Furthermore the motion of superfluid droplets on non-wetting surfaces
will be studied. Students and post doctoral associates involved with this
project will have the opportunity to develop novel instruments, and receive
training in a broad spectrum of techniques including cryogenics, high speed
imaging, laser optics, and materials preparation. This training will enable them
to become productive members of the research community, whether in academia,
industrial or government laboratories.