* 0907580
* Polymer Ferroelectricity Confined in Nanospaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Lei Zhu, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2014
* USD 579,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This proposal?s objective is to understand the well-known relaxor ferroelectric
phenomenon from a viewpoint of nanoconfinement, and use this knowledge to
provide guidance for its future applications. Different from nanoconfined
ferroelectric ceramic particles, confined ferroelectric polymers may not exhibit
the so-called quantum confinement effect. Instead, their long chain nature and
conformational flexibility results in rich and competing ferroelectric
polymorphism, when the confinement size gradually decreases from micro- to nano-
scales and confinement geometry changes from one-dimensional to two-dimensional,
and finally to three-dimensional. In particular, the long-range cooperative
interactions among dipoles will be broken or weakened in otherwise normal
ferroelectric materials. Both chemical and physical confinement methods will be
employed in this project. If successful, this proposed research will contribute
to the advancement of fundamental polymer science and education in the field of
ferroelectric polymers; 1) Nanoconfined polymer ferroelectricity is a novel
concept which has seldom been studied in the polymer field before. 2) This
research will lead to new properties and applications for ferroelectric
polymers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Potential impacts of this project are three folds. First, confined polymer
ferroelectricity will have a broader impact on electrical energy storage
applications, such as high energy density capacitors. Second, through this
project, students at all levels, including the undergraduates, graduates, and
postdocs, will be well trained for emerging energy-related professional careers.
To reach this goal, the PI will recruit undergraduate and REU students,
especially underrepresented students, into his research lab. To expose them to
the nanoscience of ferroelectric and crystalline polymers, a graduate course,
Polymer Structure and Morphology, will be taught with new contents of results
from this proposed work. In addition, the PI will also focus on K-12 education
by establishing collaborations with local high school science teachers via
summer research projects. Interested high school students will also be recruited
to stimulate and strengthen their general interest in science and engineering.
Finally, research results will be broadly disseminated by collaborations with
national laboratories and industries, as well as by publications in quality
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at national and international meetings.