* 0907007
* Hybrid Ferromagnet/Semiconductor Nanodots and Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 382,000.00

Technical. This project addresses new understanding and progress in fabricating
novel nanodot and nanowire arrays of semiconductors and ferromagnets. The
approach involves a multi-step process using porous alumina templates, and is
being studied for precise control of nanopatterns and its use in fabrication of
novel nanoarrays. Synthesis and processing phenomena associated with the
fabrication of vertically heterostructured, ferromagnet/semiconductor
nanodevices based on MBE-grown III-V semiconductors and Heusler alloys will be
pursued. Nanowires of GaAs have been achieved via MBE using Au-catalyzed vapor-
liquid-solid (VLS) growth and will be further studied on this project for
growing arrays of hybrid nanowires composed of ferromagnetic (e.g., MnAs) and
semiconducting materials. A wide range of experimental tools and expertise will
be utilized for systematic investigations aimed at gaining greater fundamental
understanding of electrical, magnetic, and optical properties of nanostructured
materials and devices. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. There is potential that the research
could substantially impact the development of novel electronic devices such as
nonvolatile memories and nanowire electronic circuits. Development of novel
nanostructures could even open doors to new device designs never before
contemplated. Educating and training young people in the areas of electronic,
magnetic and optical nanostructures--areas which are crucial for future
applications in information technology is of primary importance to this project.
In addition to training students in diverse aspects of science and engineering,
this project couples with existing educational outreach to K-12 students, women,
and underrepresented groups through activities in programs already established
at Northeastern University with active participation by these PIs. Four to eight
undergraduates will contribute to the research through Northeastern's unique Co-
op program, and high school students will be involved in summer research
programs.