* 0907369
* Structural Evolution of Porous Coordination Polymers upon Chemical Exposure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Adam Matzger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2013
* USD 510,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The over-arching goal of this research
is to develop a detailed, molecular level understanding of an emerging class of
ultrahigh performance sorbents named Microporous Coordination Polymers (MCPs).
MCP sorbent performance derives from their high fractional volume (porosity) of
tiny, nanometer-sized pores resulting in exceedingly high specific surface
areas. An understanding of how these materials can adsorb such enormous amounts
of gases and the chemical/physical basis for selective uptake are the major
thrusts of the proposed research. In particular, the fundamental role of pore
size, pore architecture, and pore interconnectedness will be observed for the
first time during the actual processes of gas adsorption and solvent removal.
Enabling this unique viewpoint is the first use in MCPs of positron annihilation
lifetime spectroscopy, an antimatter probe of porous materials recently
developed to characterize microporous thin film dielectric insulators in
microelectronic devices. Adoption of this technique has the potential to
transform how researchers probe porosity in sorbents. Only by understanding how
changes on the microscale and nanoscale exert an effect on apparent porosity can
the best modes of exploiting existing MCPs be realized. Ultimately these results
will be of practical use to guide the synthesis of new materials. MCP?s are
expected to find broad application in energy research (gas storage) and
environmental research (gas purification) and since MCPs are now being
commercialized they are at the point where direct impact on society can and will
be felt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research brings together chemists and physicists in an effort to transform the
study of ultrahigh performance sorbents?the nanomaterials that are themselves
transforming the field of chemical separations. This unique collaboration seeks
to use powerful antimatter probe techniques recently developed to study newly
engineered porous insulators in microchips to provide unprecedented structural
characterization. These highly porous sorbents are expected to find broad
application in alternative energy (gas storage) and industrial processes (gas
purification) and since they are now beginning to be commercialized they are at
the point where direct impact on society will be felt. The impact of this
research is totally dependent on the successful interaction of chemists and
physicists. Graduate and undergraduate students will cross discipline boundaries
to learn in a broadly diverse and collaborative environment involving frequent
interaction with industry. For these reasons the potential for obtaining
transformative research results is high. However, this will only be possible if
the properties of the materials are sufficiently well understood to allow
widespread deployment in new more efficient processes. It is clear that sorbent
technology has not yet achieved this point, but the proposed research will do
much to enable reaching this goal.&lt;br/&gt;