* 0907614
* Size and Morphology Dependence of the Hamaker Constant for Noble Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Anatoliy Pinchuk, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2012
* USD 254,691.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The morphology and size dependence of the Hamaker
constants for gold and silver nanoparticles will be investigated theoretically
and experimentally using time resolved optical absorption spectroscopy applied
to the precipitation dynamics of the nanoparticles. The goal of this project is
to show experimentally and theoretically that the Hamaker constant is size and
morphology dependent for noble metal nanoparticles. Absorption spectroscopy will
be used to monitor the dynamics of the precipitation of noble nanoparticles as a
function of the salt concentration of the solution containing them. The kinetics
of precipitation will be used to calculate the Hamaker constant of the
nanoparticles of different size and morphology. The main hypothesis of the
project is that the Hamaker constant for small noble nanoparticles is size and
morphology dependent and this is the reason for the deviations in the reported
literature values of these constants for noble metals. The size dependence of
the Hamaker constant stems from the size effect for the Surface Plasmon
Resonance in noble metal nanoparticles, which might contribute significantly to
the Hamaker constant. The results of this project will establish a fundamental
relation between fluctuation-dissipation forces and collective electronic
excitations known as Surface Plasmon Resonances in metal nanoparticles and will
facilitate our capability to simulate interaction on the nanoscale and to model
the self-assembly of metal nanoparticles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Metal nanoparticles are the major components of
the bottom-up self-assembly fabrication process and play an increasingly
important role in the development of biochemical sensors, optical subwavelength
waveguides and nano-optics. Understanding the forces between metal nanoparticles
is a precondition for the fine and precise control of the self-assembly process.
This project will investigate the forces acting between nanoparticles in
solution and lead to better control over the self assembly process. The results
of this study will have a profound effect on the development of nanotechnology
in the area of self-assembly of nanoparticles and will have a significant
educational influence. Understanding the interaction potential between metal
nanoparticles is essential for the development of new and efficient
nanofabrication technologies. The rapid development of nanotechnology and
nanofabrication requires adequate training of undergraduate and graduate
students in order to keep up with the new trends and to match the growing needs
of these expanding sectors of research and economy. Undergraduate and graduate
students need to meet the challenges of this expansion with sufficient
background and training. This project will combine research and education
programs to properly prepare graduate and undergraduate students for this kind
of research in nanotechnology.