* 0907604
* Study of Multiferroic Tunnel Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2011
* USD 230,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Multiferroic tunnel
junction refers to a ferromagnetic tunnel junction using a ferroelectric
insulator barrier. Theoretical calculations have shown that the ferroelectric
polarization reversal will result in resistance switching behavior in a tunnel
junction. Furthermore, the interplay between the ferroelectric and ferromagnetic
layers can affect the electric polarization of the barrier, the electronic
structures and the magnetic properties at the interface, and the spin
polarization of the tunneling current. This type of junctions can thus display
new functionalities, such as quaternary or octal logic state, which can be
encoded by both magnetic and electric fields. It can also open up new ways to
potentially control spin polarization electrically. However, to preserve
ferroelectricity in a nanometer thick ferroelectric layer sandwiched between two
ferromagnetic layers is extremely challenging and reliable multiferroic
junctions have not been achieved previously. This individual investigator award
supports a research plan to fabricate and systematically study the multiferroic
tunnel junctions in manganite/Ba1-xSrxTiO3/manganite and
manganite/Ba1-xSrxTiO3/Co structures. The objective of the project is to first
establish the behaviors of such junctions under electric and magnetic fields,
and then to systematically study the manipulation of the different states by
both electric and magnetic fields. The project will provide both graduate and
undergraduate students, including women and underrepresented minorities, with a
stimulating environment for interdisciplinary experience in physics, materials
sciences, and device fabrication and testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Recent advances in
magnetic tunnel junctions have made it possible to use these devices in computer
read head, magnetic sensors, and non-volatile magnetic random access memories. A
tunnel junction consists of two metal layers and a nanometer thick insulator
layer or barrier in between. It was predicted theoretically that by using a very
thin ferroelectric insulator--a material with a spontaneous charge polarization
which can be switched by an electrical voltage--as the barrier, new
functionalities can be achieved. For example, it can display quaternary logic
states which can be encoded by both magnetic and electric fields, instead of the
binary states in the current magnetic tunnel junctions. This could be very
important for quantum information processing. The strong interaction between the
ferromagnetic layer and the ferroelectric layer can also lead to control of the
spin polarization electrically, which is a critical advance in achieving
functional spintronic devices, a new device concept that relies on the spin
polarized transport instead of the conventional electron transport. However, to
achieve charge polarization in a nanometer thick material is extremely
challenging and such junctions have not been made previously. This award
supports a research plan to fabricate and systematically study several such
junction structures using manganite as the electrode and Barium Strontium
titanate as an insulator. The goal of the project is to first fabricate the
junctions, and then to systematically study the junction properties and how to
manipulate the different states by using electrical and magnetic fields. The
project will provide both graduate and undergraduate students, including women
and underrepresented minorities, with a stimulating environment for
interdisciplinary experience in physics, materials sciences, and device
fabrication and testing.