* 0907616
* Integrated Research and Educational Activities in Diffusion Bonding of Metal Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Cavalli, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2013
* USD 335,990.00

TECHNICAL: This project advances fundamental understanding of diffusion bonding
in iron- and nickel-based alloys. Diffusion bonding could play a critical role
in the development of the next generation of metal alloys used in power plants
and turbines, as higher working temperatures will require careful control over
metal alloy composition and microstructure. In this research results of
experimental testing are integrated with the Ther-moCalc/DICTRA software
packages and user-created MATLAB algorithms to create modeling tools capable of
estimating the performance of diffusion-bonded joints. Increased demand for
energy conversion efficiency means that components like heat exchangers and
turbines must run hotter and last longer without a shutdown. A variety of
nickel- and iron-based alloys can meet these demands using carefully controlled
chemistry and processing. Fabrication and repair using these alloys demand
development of robust joining methods that preserve properties in the region of
the joint. Diffusion bonding is an excellent candidate for this purpose. The
research employs a combination of microstructural analysis, mechanical testing,
and numerical calculation to create tools that predict the properties of
diffusion-bonded joints.

NON-TECHNICAL: The educational structure of the program incorporates the current
best practices of engineering education including hands-on activities, peer
mentoring and practical applications of engineering theories. Undergraduate and
graduate researchers collaborate in the research activities. The integrated
research and educational objectives broaden access to engineering for students
that might not have otherwise considered it while also improving the skills and
expertise of those already enrolled. Educational activities including peer
mentoring, collaborative high school/undergraduate design projects, a summer
academy, and activities for underrepresented minorities. Native American
students participate in educational activities as part of a larger program
designed to attract and retain them in math, science and engineering. High
school students that his-torically have not pursued engineering in college are
targeted by a collaborative design project and summer academy. The program?s
experimental tests and results will be integrated into at least four upper-
division or graduate courses.