* 0907039
* Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Closed Interacting Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Anatoli Polkovnikov, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,568.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education focused on understanding fundamental
aspects of quantum many-particle dynamics and their experimental consequences. A
key goal is to develop a general formalism representing time evolution near
various classical limits, for example particle, wave, mixed, rotational, etc.,
and apply it to various non-equilibrium systems. This work should significantly
build on the PI's earlier work which proved the feasibility of this approach.
The PI aims to pursue the possibility of analyzing the crossover from classical
to quantum nonequilibrium behavior in various contexts. The PI intends to extend
this formalism to fermionic systems and open systems coupled to a thermal bath.
This representation of quantum dynamics will be contrasted with other existing
approaches like the Keldysh technique and phase space methods. The PI's
formalism together with other methods will be applied to specific problems of
fundamental interest, including: thermalization in closed systems, dynamics of
integrable and nonintegrable systems, formation of topological defects,
perturbation of time evolution by external measurements, and slow and fast
dynamics especially in low-dimensional systems. Special emphasis will be given
to those applications, which can be tested in experiments. The research should
lead to a better understanding of the role of the exponentially large Hilbert
space on many-particle dynamics, how this exponential complexity becomes less
and less relevant if one approaches the classical limit, and whether
integrability of the system qualitatively affects various aspects of the quantum
to classical crossover. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will also address other fundamental
problems, including the conditions of existence and violation of adiabatic
processes in closed systems. The PI will explore possibilities of using non-
linear dynamical probes in closed systems to detect quasi-particle statistics,
detect entanglement in low-dimensional systems, understand properties of
asymptotic ensembles and connect them to statistics of work fluctuations and
entropy generation. The role of nonintegrability, thermalization, and
dimensionality of the system, which all likely play the crucial role in slow
dynamics will be addressed. All major general theoretical results will be
supplemented by specific proposals to experimentally test them in condensed
matter, material, and cold atom systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will be
engaged in educational activities at the graduate level and higher to develop,
refine, and enhance courses in quantum mechanics, statistical physics, many-body
physics, and physics of cold atoms; contribute pedagogical review articles; and
participate in international schools on advanced topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education focused on understanding the dynamics of
quantum mechanical interacting many-particle systems. Examples of such systems
include electrons in materials and specialized semiconductor structures and
atoms cooled to very low temperatures and trapped by light. This research seeks
to develop a theory for these kinds of system. Part of the research focuses on
analyzing the dynamics of quantum systems using entirely the language of the
trajectories given by classical mechanics. This work highlights nontrivial
connections between quantum dynamics, classical dynamics, and statistical
physics. The PI also aims to advance understanding of driven quantum mechanical
interacting many-body systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the
dynamics of quantum mechanical many-body systems has broad consequences and
contributes to intellectual foundations that may lead to future
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop educational materials
intended for a broad audience of non-specialists and to actively participate in
domestic and international conferences, workshops, and schools.