* 0907353
* Physics of Nanoscale Epitaxial and Textured Spintronic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Technical Abstract

This award supports experimental research and education in the field of
spintronics. The project entails synthesis of epitaxial magnetic nanostructures
for systematic control of the transport and energy spectra of spin-polarized
current. The research will be directed toward the understanding of outstanding
issues in spintronics, which are both fundamental and essential to applications.
In particular, measurements of the single magnetic-domain-wall resistance in
single crystal half-metals will be carried out as well as the development of
nanostructures that will take advantage of the expected large domain-wall
resistance. The project also aims at investigating nanostructures with periodic
magnetic domain walls, and using itinerant spin currents to stimulate the
modified spin-wave excitations arising from this periodicity. Experimental
methods include variable-temperature magnetotransport studies, epitaxial
chemical vapor deposition, magnetron sputtering, and submicron lithography.
Students will be trained and they will acquire cutting edge skills in advanced
experimental techniques and materials processing. There will be efforts to
recruit students from underrepresented groups in science, including women and
minorities, to participate in this research.

Non-technical Abstract

Semiconductor technology is facing severe challenges in miniaturization. Future
electronics will likely rely on the fundamental attribute of electron spin.
Spintronics concerns itself with several, equally important issues, related to
highly spin-polarized solids and spin transport in microscopic systems. This
individual investigator award supports a project to harnesses the electron's
spin to create new electronics devices. In particular, measurements of the
magnetic-domain-wall resistance in half-metals will be carried out as well as
the development of nanostructures that will take advantage of the expected large
domain-wall resistance. The project also aims at investigating nanostructures
with periodic magnetic domain walls, and using itinerant spin currents to
stimulate the modified spin-wave excitations arising from this periodicity. The
primary impact of the activity will be the training of human resources. Students
will be trained and they will acquire cutting edge skills in advanced
experimental techniques and materials processing. There will be efforts to
recruit students from underrepresented groups in science, including women and
minorities, to participate in this research. This research will generate new
knowledge and data on novel spintronic nanostructures. New spintronic devices
will be invented and adapted to applications areas where existing solutions are
inadequate.