* 0907191
* Understanding the Atomic Structure and Electronic Properties of Zinc Oxide Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Xiaoqing Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 491,942.00

Technical. This project addresses structure, composition, chemical bonding, and
electronic properties of defects (dislocations and dopants), film/substrate
interfaces, and p-n junctions in un-doped and doped ZnO films. Specific tasks
are: (1) growth and characterization of ZnO thin films with different types of
dopants and p-n junctions; (2) atomic-scale characterization of structure and
electronic properties of interfaces; (3) in situ study of the stability and
response of crystal defects and interfaces to applied electric field using an
STM/TEM holder for TEM/STEM in combination with HRTEM and EELS. The crystal
defects and interfaces to be studied include dopants, dislocations, grain
boundaries, film/substrate interfaces, and p-n junctions. A TEM with spherical
aberration-corrected cold field emission gun will be utilized for these studies;
it provides sub-Ã… resolution for imaging and a very bright electron probe with
an energy spread of 0.3 eV for electron energy-loss spectroscopy. Extensive
characterization of the atomic structure and nanoscale electronic properties of
defects and interfaces will be emphasized. Understanding based on these results
is expected to allow subsequent development of p-type ZnO material, desirable
for electronic and optical devices--detectors, light-emitters, transparent thin
FETs or spin-based devices. &lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. The project includes multifac-eted
educational opportunities for students. Undergraduates will be incorporated into
this re-search via senior theses and REU experiences. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will become involved in multiple steps of the solution of
interdisciplinary research objectives. The PI will run hands-on workshops
(Microscopic World of Materials) each summer for gifted female and minority K-12
students at the University of Michigan through NASA's Summer High School
Apprenticeship Research Program. This interdisciplinary education will provide
students with a unique perspective expected to be helpful toward furthering
their interest in industry and academic research.