* 0907780
* Collaborative Proposal: Students' Attempts at Understanding the Unobservable: A Multi-Method Approach to Visualization Analysis and Design (Empirical Contextual Research Strand)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mary Jane Shultz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 277,363.00

Student comprehension of scientific concepts and principles presents a
particular challenge when the phenomena are not directly observable. This issue
has emerged as core to effective teaching and successful student learning in
chemistry. The goal is to identify whether students' individual differences
influence the effectiveness of visualizations for learning scientific concepts
as measured with process and product-based metrics of evaluation. The
investigators will also develop design principles for the use of visualizations
as instructional tools in chemistry and STEM fields more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central issues are: When and how students rely
on visualizations while trying to comprehend unobservable chemistry content;
whether reliance on visualizations varies as a function of student
characteristics; and whether usage patterns inform instructional interventions.
In a series of randomized, controlled experiments involving undergraduates at
four institutions, investigators will: (a) determine baseline chemical
knowledge, spatial ability, reasoning ability, and interest in learning; (b) use
eye tracking to characterize the moment-by-moment scan and fixation processes
that students rely on while viewing visualizations; (c) utilize concurrent
interview protocols to assess learning strategies and knowledge acquisition; and
(d) implement post-visualization tests to examine student memory for the
visualization content and application of knowledge.