* 0907985
* Research and Education in Physical Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Brenner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 545,914.00

Brenner&lt;br/&gt;DMS-00907985&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under
the American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
The investigator&lt;br/&gt;and his colleagues study a range of problems in
applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, focusing on the coupling of the analytical
methods&lt;br/&gt;to numerical computation, in the context of both research
and&lt;br/&gt;education. The proposed research projects address a range
of&lt;br/&gt;problems in engineering and science using a combination
of&lt;br/&gt;approximate analysis, computation, and experiments. The
specific&lt;br/&gt;projects include (1) a search for potentially unstable
singular&lt;br/&gt;solutions of the Euler equation, by focusing on initial
data&lt;br/&gt;consisting of vortex filaments; (2) questions in
microfluid&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, including developing novel methodologies for
creating&lt;br/&gt;thin polymeric fibers, and creating a biomimetic analogue of
a&lt;br/&gt;fungal spore shooter; (3) biological questions, primarily
aimed&lt;br/&gt;at using theory and data analysis to understand
morphological&lt;br/&gt;variation in Darwin's Finches. Educational activities
center&lt;br/&gt;around the general issue of how the concepts of
applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics should be taught, given the prevalence
of&lt;br/&gt;computation. Two specific initiatives are undertaken: The
first&lt;br/&gt;involves a wiki-based method for teaching applied mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;developing applied mathematics texts; the second involves
the&lt;br/&gt;development of materials for explaining to broad audiences
the&lt;br/&gt;ways in which mathematics is used and has been used to impact
our&lt;br/&gt;world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The activities of this project use
mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical ideas to study, and hopefully solve,
problems with&lt;br/&gt;broad impact on the world in which we live. One set of
topics&lt;br/&gt;involves basic unsolved questions about the nature of
fluid&lt;br/&gt;flows. Fluid flows occur throughout engineering and
the&lt;br/&gt;sciences, and understanding how to predict their properties
is&lt;br/&gt;critical for critical societal problems and needs, such
as&lt;br/&gt;energy, environment materials, and engineering. The
project&lt;br/&gt;develops methods for using fluid flows to create novel
materials&lt;br/&gt;and material processes. Another part of the project aims
to&lt;br/&gt;understand a fundamental question in biology, namely, what is
the&lt;br/&gt;logic behind which biological processes lead complex
organisms,&lt;br/&gt;such as ourselves, to develop and grow? This part of the
project&lt;br/&gt;is based on a discovery of the investigator and his
colleagues&lt;br/&gt;that quantitatively explains the morphological diversity
of&lt;br/&gt;Darwin's Finches, the classical example of adaptive radiation
--&lt;br/&gt;the process in which a single species gives rise to
multiple&lt;br/&gt;species that exploit different ecological niches.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator extends this work to other bird species and uses
the&lt;br/&gt;insights gained to create a mathematical framework
for&lt;br/&gt;understanding development more broadly. Finally, central to
the&lt;br/&gt;project is the educational mission of teaching
undergraduates,&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and postdoctoral fellows how to
effectively&lt;br/&gt;apply mathematics so that it can make a substantive
difference in&lt;br/&gt;our world. &lt;br/&gt;