* 0907251
* Spatially Resolved Quasiparticle Tunneling Spectroscopic Studies of Cuprate and Iron-Based High-Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/29/2012
* USD 250,000.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The pairing mechanism
for cuprate superconductivity remains elusive to date despite much progress
since 1986. Cuprate superconductors are doped anti-ferromagnetic Mott insulators
with strong electronic correlation. Depending on the doping level, the ground
state may consist of various competing orders besides superconductivity. The
existence of competing orders naturally leads to quantum criticality and quantum
fluctuations, which significantly affects the low-energy excitations and results
in numerous unconventional phenomena. Despite apparent effects associated with
competing orders, whether competing orders are relevant to superconductivity
remains unclear. One possible approach to addressing this issue is to compare
the cuprates with a new class of superconductors, the iron pnictides (with a
maximum transition temperature ~ 52 K). These iron pnictides exhibit interesting
similarities and contrasts to the cuprates. Therefore, parallel studies of both
systems may provide useful insights into the fundamental issue of pair formation
in superconductors. The technical approach will focus on investigating the
atomically resolved quasiparticle tunneling spectra of both cuprate- and iron-
based superconductors as functions of magnetic fields using a homemade high-
field cryogenic scanning tunneling microscope and the numerical tools
established in this group for data analysis and modeling. The objective is to
develop a comprehensive phenomenology for the low-energy excitations in both
systems, thereby finding the guiding principles for Cooper pairing in
unconventional superconductors. Additionally, the trainings required for
conducting the research involve advanced technologies and theoretical knowledge,
and are therefore effective for the education of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The discovery of high-
temperature superconductivity in a class of oxide materials known as cuprates in
1986 had simulated intense worldwide research efforts because of high
expectations for potentially a wide range of applications. Although much
progress has been made both scientifically and technologically, the physical
cause for the occurrence of high-temperature superconductivity remains unknown.
Moreover, the complexity of these materials makes applications of them far more
challenging than originally anticipated. In 2008 a class of new superconductors,
known as the iron pnictides (with a maximum transition temperature ~ 52 K), was
discovered. These new iron-based superconductors reveal interesting similarities
and contrasts to the cuprates. The primary thrust of this research project is to
conduct parallel studies and comparison of the physical properties of both
cuprate and iron-pnictide superconducting systems. The objective of these
studies is to provide insights into means of making superconductors with higher
transition temperatures and better physical properties, thereby advancing better
applications based on superconducting materials. Additionally, the training
required for conducting this research project involves a wide variety of
advanced technologies and theoretical knowledge, and are therefore effective for
the education of young researchers.