* 0907869
* Collaborative Proposal: Abstraction-Based Motion Programs for Complex, Interconnected Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2011
* USD 237,139.00

Proposal Number: 0820004/0819929&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Abstraction-Based
Motion Programs for Complex, Interconnected Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs:
Magnus Egerstedt and Todd Murphey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic approaches to
abstraction-based motion control of complex, physical systems are still largely
missing from the control-theoretic foundations of embedded system design.
Examples of high-degree of freedom physical systems include humanoids, multi-leg
robots, minimally-invasive surgical robotics, and cooperative systems. This work
aims at understanding how high-level motion program languages can be made to
form a basis for an effective software system for such complex, interconnected
mechanical systems. For this, novel tools and techniques are to be developed
along the following directions: 1) construction of motion description languages
based on optimal control techniques; 2) development of a novel, graph-based
representation of mechanical systems that allows for a compact representation of
mechanical systems for simulation and analysis; 3) automatic generation of
dynamically feasible motion primitives from empirical data; 4) development of an
experimental testbed based on autonomous marionette puppets that can execute the
developed motion programs--this testbed will also serve as a unique learning
environment for students in that it requires an understanding of highly
nonlinear dynamic systems, networking architectures for synchronization, hybrid
systems, and optimal control.&lt;br/&gt;