* 0907567
* Chitosan-Cellulose Ionic Complex for Oral Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Yong Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 07/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907567 PI: Roman, Maren ORG: Virginia Tech
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Chitosan-Cellulose Ionic Complex for Oral Drug
Delivery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: It is proposed to devise an
oral drug delivery system, based on two polysaccharides that are regulated by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and approved for oral administration. The
proposed system is an ionic complex of chitosan, a positively charged
polyelectrolyte, and cellulose nanocrystals, negatively charged, cylindrical
macroions. Chitosan will impart to the system bioadhesive and bioabsorption-
enhancing properties, whereas the cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) will bind poorly
soluble therapeutic molecules via surface complexation, thus preventing
undesirable crystallization, and control their release rate through desorption.
The long-term goal of the proposed research is a multifunctional oral delivery
system for therapeutic agents that provides zero-order (constant rate) release
while simultaneously enhancing the agent?s solubility and absorption and, thus,
bioavailability. The specific objectives are: (1) Develop a detailed
understanding of the factors governing the formation and properties of
chitosan?CNC complexes, (2) Characterize the molecular interactions of selected
model drugs with a cellulose surface, (3) Assess the drug loading and release
efficiencies of chitosan?CNC complexes, (4) Assess the safety of ingestion of
CNCs and chitosan?CNC complexes in vitro, (5) Assess the mucoadhesive properties
of chitosan?CNC complexes in vitro, and (6) Assess the permeability-enhancing
properties of chitosan?CNC complexes in vitro. The project will employ
physicochemical and microscopy methods to study the formation and properties of
the ionic complex and its interactions with and release of model drugs. Cell
culture studies will be used to assess the toxicity of the ionic complex to
human intestinal epithelial cells and the complexes effectiveness to enhance
drug permeability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The proposal is
inherently interdisciplinary, pairing a polymer chemist and molecular biologist.
It thus benefits from the intrinsic information exchange arising from such
collaborations. The proposed drug delivery system is highly versatile by reason
of its oral safety, biocompatibility, and environmental biodegradability. As a
result, the system could also be used for controlled release of functional
molecules in foodstuffs, cosmetics, agricultural applications, and applications
in the emerging field of functional textiles, to name a few. In addition to the
technological impact, three graduate students will be trained in the
interdisciplinary environment of the project and up to six undergraduate
students will be trained on the project by providing them with summer
undergraduate research experience. Undergraduate student participants, and
intramural funding to supplement the NSF funding committed to support
undergraduates, will be sought through the Virginia Tech Multicultural Academic
Opportunities Program and an existing Virginia Tech REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;