* 0907399
* Simulating Nonequilibrium Processes over Extended Time- and Length-scales using Parallel Accelerated Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jacques Amar, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research and
education on a long-standing obstacle to the understanding of condensed-phase
systems: many important processes occur on a time-scale that is not easily
accessible with conventional methods. In order to address this gap, a variety of
accelerated dynamics techniques including hyperdynamics, parallel replica
dynamics, and temperature-accelerated dynamics have been proposed. In
particular, temperature-accelerated dynamics has been quite successful in
extending the time-scales for simulations since it allows realistic simulations
of low temperature processes over timescales as long as seconds and even hours.
However, due to the fact that the computational work required for serial
temperature-accelerated dynamics scales as the number of atoms, N, cubed, this
technique can only be applied to extremely small systems. In order to address
this problem, the PI has recently developed a method for parallel temperature-
accelerated dynamics simulations or "parTAD," which is based on spatial
decomposition combined with the PI's synchronous sublattice algorithm, which
scales as log(N). Using this method, the PI has studied the low-temperature
growth of Cu/Cu (100) over extended length-scales in order to explain recent
observations of vacancy formation and compressive strain. The PI aims to use
parTAD to carry out parallel temperature-accelerated dynamics simulations of a
variety of non-equilibrium processes over extended time- and length-scales. In
addition, the PI plans to develop mew methods which will enable the temperature-
accelerated dynamics method to study processes at higher temperatures as well as
to study 3D systems and systems with long-range interactions. These include the
development of a method to locally adapt the high temperature parameter which
controls the "boost" in the accelerated-dynamics simulations in each processor
to optimize the efficiency for a given configuration, as well as to deal with
the "low-barrier" problem. To extend the possible size of events that can be
handled by simulations and also further enhance the efficiency of parTAD
simulations, the PI also aims to develop a hybrid approach to parTAD in which
spatial decomposition is coupled with medium scale parallel molecular dynamics
simulations and localized saddle-point searches. Using these methods the PI will
carry out parallel accelerated dynamics simulations to understand important non-
equilibrium processes which cannot be easily studied with lattice-based methods,
including: (1) Crystalline-to-amorphous transition in low-temperature
semiconductor growth (2) Early stages of growth of amorphous Si on SiO2
substrates (3) Ordering, intermixing and defect formation in submonolayer and
multilayer Fe/Cu(100), Cu/Ni(100), and Co/Cu(111) growth (4) Radiation damage
and defect mobility in MgO

The work will provide opportunities for educational and outreach activities with
broad national, international, and societal impact. Some of the methods and
results developed from this project will also be incorporated in a joint
undergraduate-graduate course on Computational Physics taught by the PI at the
University of Toledo along with a graduate course on Thin-Films and Surface
Physics in which students will learn about new theoretical advances and state-
of-the-art implementation and empirical evaluation techniques. New algorithms
that are developed contribute to the cyberinfrastructure of the broader
materials research community.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational research and education
to develop and apply algorithms and software to simulate processes on time
scales that are important to the underlying science but out of the range of
conventional simulation methods. For example, molecular dynamics is generally
limited to nanoseconds because of the small time-step required for the
integration of the equations of motion. However, important infrequent events
often take place on a time scale of microseconds, seconds, or even hours.
Examples include the evolution of the surface morphology during crystal or film
growth, the diffusion of point defects in solids, and the migration of grain
boundaries during plastic strain. The PI aims to build on research performed
under previous NSF funding to develop new simulation tools that can access
longer time scales, higher temperatures, and larger systems. With the PI's
existing and enhanced tools he will tackle specific materials problems involving
how semiconductor materials grow and the morphology of new layers, how growing
materials layers can intermix with the material upon which they are grown, and
how imperfections in the arrangement of atoms near surfaces move and their
affect on the growth process. The PI will also apply the new methods to
materials growth and the dynamics of materials after irradiation. These studies
will be carried out in close connection with specific experiments and will
enhance our understanding of materials growth.

The work will provide opportunities for educational and outreach activities with
broad national, international, and societal impact. Some of the methods and
results developed from this project will also be incorporated in a joint
undergraduate-graduate course on Computational Physics taught by the PI at the
University of Toledo along with a graduate course on Thin-Films and Surface
Physics in which students will learn about new theoretical advances and state-
of-the-art implementation and empirical evaluation techniques. New algorithms
that are developed contribute to the cyberinfrastructure of the broader
materials research community.