* 0907038
* RUI: Core Size Effects on Flux-Flow Resistivity: Collaborative Project to Launch a Program Exploring Flux Dynamics in Weak-Pinning Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Albert Gapud, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 186,000.00

Abstract, non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The US is in
dire need to modernize its aging electric power grid, a fact underscored
recently by the widespread power outage in the Northeast in August 2003. Also,
the conducting materials used in the present grid release waste heat to the
environment, worth billions of dollars annually in electricity that never
reaches its users. This is due to the dissipative resistance in conventional
conductors. Superconductors, on the other hand, conduct electricity with zero
dissipation. Thus, scientists and engineers throughout the US and around the
world are actively developing superconducting lines for grid modernization,
which has made the understanding of the electromagnetic properties of
superconducting compounds a major research priority. Of these, one critical set
of mechanisms is in how magnetic fields penetrate the interior of
technologically relevant superconductors under various conditions. Such
penetration occurs in the form of vortices ? discrete quanta of magnetic flux
which also interact with each other. The motion of these vortices greatly
affects the current-carrying capability of superconductors; thus the nature of
vortex dynamics has been widely investigated. The interest in the present
project is in how the internal structure or cores of these vortices affect their
free motion ? something rarely studied, since free motion is achieved under
technically challenging conditions achieved only by this group and few others.
The project is also designed to be run by undergraduate students, thus preparing
them for careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract,
technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The dynamics of magnetic flux
quanta (also known as vortices, flux lines, or fluxons) ? by which an external
magnetic field begins to penetrate the interior of technologically relevant type
II superconductors ? continues to be a research priority in understanding and
applying these materials, most notably high-temperature cuprates. A particular
aspect being explored by various groups is the nature of the non-superconducting
cores of these flux quanta, which is still not completely understood but is
already known to affect the interactions between flux quanta and thus the nature
of phase transitions in ?flux matter? under various conditions. One rarely
studied aspect of flux cores which this project is uniquely poised to explore is
the effect of cores particularly on the field dependence of flux flow
resistivity, which is the DC-driven dissipation associated with the free flux
flow (FFF) phase, a highly ordered dynamic phase wherein the elasticity of the
flux matter overcomes disorder-inducing pinning and thermal fluctuations.
Complementing the DC transport measurements are magnetization, heat capacity,
and NMR on the same samples ? via present and future collaborations. All this is
to be performed on already available, high-quality, crystals of at least four
different materials to explore compound-dependent subtleties. The ultimate goal
is to provide a uniquely comprehensive view into the nature of the flux core.
The project is also designed to provide research experience to physics
undergraduates in preparation for graduate studies and beyond; therefore
students are to be actively involved.