* 0907090
* Microstructural Engineering of Shape Memory Thin Films and Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ainissa Ramirez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 405,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials like NiTi, which have the unique ability
of ?remembering? their original shape when heated, can be used as actuators.
These materials undergo a martensitic phase transformation from one
crystallographic structure to another and provide large actuation forces.
Despite these interesting properties the integration of shape memory alloys in
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) is limited because the details of the
phase transformation that activates the shape changes is very sensitive to
microstructural details. For example a small increase in grain size
significantly changes the actuation force and the transformation temperature. In
addition, the mechanical behavior of NiTi in thin-film form differs from the
bulk and is a largely unexplored research topic. Objectives of this program are
to evaluate the effects of grain structure, grain size and grain-size
distributions on phase transformation temperatures, hysteresis behavior,
actuation properties, and mechanical properties. Accordingly, we will explore
the crystallization behavior of NiTi thin films and nanostructures; and broaden
the understanding of thin film mechanical properties by examining materials that
exhibit elastic nonlinearities. Structure-property relationships will be studied
by observing microstructural development using in situ transmission electron
microscopy. Evolution of the and grain structure will be evaluated using the
Johnson?Mehl?Avrami?Kolmogorov theory. The resulting actuation properties of the
engineered microstructures will be studied with wafer curvature methods and
MEMS-based cantilevers; and the transformation temperature changes will be
investigated with differential scanning calorimetry. The dependence of
mechanical properties on microstructure will be examined with nanoindentation.
This study will provide novel observations of the behavior of thin film shape
memory materials, and provide guidance for their adoption into
MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
of the link between phase transformations, microstructure, and mechanical
properties will be studied in thin films by observing a new class of materials
that undergo a martensitic (i.e. displacive) transformation. From this work, we
will improve the fundamental understanding of thin-film shape memory alloys and
learn how to control their properties in a predictable way, thereby illuminating
the role of microstructure on the thermodynamics of martensitic transformations.
This ability to control properties will benefit the MEMS community and enable
future devices. Additionally, these materials provide a model to hone the
ability to tailor microstructures and will benefit other research pursuits in
amorphous silicon, amorphous carbon, and metallic glasses. This program?s
broader impact consists of stimulating the interest in science for a range of
individuals from the training of graduate students to the encouragement of
school children. A revamped introductory materials science class that includes
hands-on demonstrations and real-world examples will cultivate engineers with
strong materials backgrounds. A compilation of classroom demonstrations
disseminated on the web will serve a wider learning community. This educational
program also provides informal opportunities to change the perception of science
via a lecture series that showcases diverse scientists and presents enjoyable
science events. The aim is to encourage all students, particularly students of
color and girls, to consider science as a career. It furnishes richer
connections to science for school children, their teachers, and their parents
and is a simple model that can be extended within and between universities. By
leveraging a partnership with the NISE network, this program will have large
dissemination channels. Leaving no student behind, this program seeks to capture
the attention of non-science majors in a liberal-arts environment by using them
as demonstrators to teach science in a compelling way.