* 0907679
* Positron Spectroscopy of Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Weiss, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ new
experimental and theoretical methods to obtain unique information about surfaces
that can be used to develop improved materials for use in solar energy
conversion, hydrogen generation and energy storage. The new surface analytic
methods will make use of the gamma-ray signals arising from the annihilation of
positrons (the antimatter equivalent of the electron) with electrons in atoms in
the topmost atomic layer of the materials studies. Because the gamma-rays can
easily penetrate through gases and solids it will be possible to probe chemical
interactions at both external and internal surfaces of porous materials, rough
technical surfaces, and granular materials. Experiments carried out using the
new spectroscopies combined with theoretical modeling of positron annihilation
processes can be expected to yield critical new knowledge about the interaction
of atoms and molecules with surfaces that cannot be obtained using other methods
and that will have broad scientific and industrial impact. This project will
provide extensive opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
design, build and implement new experimental and theoretical resources and to
employ these resources in cutting edge research giving them invaluable research
training in areas of great technological and scientific importance. This award
receives support from the Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Chemistry, and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, and Environmental
Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ experiments utilizing a beam of
low energy positrons in combination with first principles calculations in
studies aimed at understanding fundamental interactions of positrons with
surfaces and at the development of new methods for surface analysis using
element specific information obtained from annihilation gamma spectra. The new
spectroscopies will yield surface specific chemical information with top atomic
layer specificity. The penetrating nature of the gamma rays will make it
possible to probe internal surfaces in porous materials, rough technical
surfaces, and granular materials. The new spectroscopies will be combined with
first principles theoretical modeling of annihilation probabilities on nano-
structured surfaces to study important questions in catalysis and photo-
catalysis including charge transfer at the surface of nanostructures and the
nature of active sites in catalytic and photo-catalytic systems. This project is
anticipated to lead to the development of important new in-situ methods of
surface analysis and to yield critical new knowledge about the interaction of
atoms and molecules with surfaces. The project will provide training for Ph.D.
and undergraduate students at the forefront of research in surface and interface
science. This award receives support from the Division of Materials Research,
the Division of Chemistry, and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, and
Environmental Transport Systems.