* 0907612
* Synthesis and Crystal Growth of Dilute Magnetic Semiconductors and Frustrated Magnets
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Glen Kowach, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2011
* USD 249,999.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The synthesis and crystal growth of novel materials will focus on dilute
magnetic semiconductors and frustrated magnets with the preparation of these
materials as powders, single crystals, and thin films. The powders will yield
information on the extent of solid solution formation; diffusion or ion
implantation of transition metals into single crystal substrates will allow for
compositional mapping of ferromagnetism; flux growth of single crystals will
provide a route to synthesize materials for characterization by neutron
scattering; and thin film deposition at low temperatures will permit the study
of compositions which typically demonstrate phase separation. The two classes of
materials to be investigated, dilute magnetic semiconductors and frustrated
magnets, are chosen due to the intense interest in spintronic applications and
multiferroic behavior, respectively. Semiconductor crystal lattices will be
substituted with various first row transition metal magnetic ions including
vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt and nickel. The transition metal
substitution will have concentrations around five atomic percent such that there
is negligible direct interaction between magnetic ions (dilute). These dilute
magnetic semiconductor materials demonstrate long range magnetic coupling
(ferromagnetism) due to interaction with electronic carriers in the
semiconductor. Based on theories of carrier-induced ferromagnetism, several
variables, including the bandgap energy, carrier density and exchange coupling
strength, affect the ferromagnetic Curie temperature. Therefore, ternary
phosphide, arsenide, selenide and telluride materials are predicted to be strong
candidate host lattices for carrier-mediated ferromagnetism. For the frustrated
magnetic materials, the growth of single crystals from high temperature fluxes
will be explored for the following compounds: ACr2S4, where A= Zn, Cd or Hg, in
order to study the magnetic properties (and possible structural properties in
the case of CdCr2S4) which depend on the interplay between the nearest and next
nearest neighbor Cr interactions and Cs2Cu3ZrF12 to investigate strong
geometrical frustration which leads to unusual magnetic phenomena.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The discovery and understanding of dilute magnetic semiconductors and frustrated
magnets can advance the microelectronics and photonics industries, possibly
leading to new devices based on spintronics. In addition, the members of the
research group, which consists of high school students, undergraduate and
graduate students, and postdoctoral associates will receive research training in
the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Due to
the demographics at The City College of New York (CCNY) of the City University
of New York (CUNY), many female students and students from underrepresented
ethnic groups will be trained in research. Multi-group meetings involving the
chemistry and physics departments at CCNY will promote internal collaboration; a
symposium for solid state chemistry in the New York City area will initiate
communication and dissemination of results; and magnetic materials will be
shared with other laboratories within the United States and around the world to
pursue the understanding of the magnetic interactions. To further supplement the
science and educational aspects, the local public will be introduced to crystal
chemistry on open house days, science fairs and campus visitations by local high
school groups.

