* 0907839
* New Constraints on Feedback from a Comprehensive Study of Galactic Winds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christy Tremonti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 374,774.00

AST-0907839 Tremonti

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The influence of massive stars and accreting black holes on the surrounding
interstellar medium, termed 'feedback', has been regarded as an important
ingredient of galaxy evolution since the 1970s. Feedback regulates star
formation by heating cold clouds which would otherwise form stars, and by
inserting kinetic energy which can drive gas out of the galaxy disk, and
possibly completely out of the potential well. Although some form of feedback is
included in all modern numerical simulations, understanding of the complex
interplay between the baryonic constituents of galaxies is still woefully
incomplete. However, some of the best empirical constraints come from the study
of galactic-scale gaseous outflows, or 'galactic winds'. This project will
support a thesis student for the most ambitious and comprehensive study of
galactic winds to date, detecting outflows both by direct imaging of extra-
planar ionized gas in a sample of edge-on disk galaxies, and through absorption-
line spectroscopy of nearly face-on galaxies. The study will map the dependence
of observables on key physical properties of the host galaxies, such as stellar
mass, star formation rate, star formation surface density, black hole mass,
active galactic nucleus luminosity, and local environment. Spectral and spatial
information will be combined to infer the wind energetics and the mass outflow
rates. These data will supply critical information on the efficiency of
feedback, and new benchmarks for numerical models of galaxy evolution. The
impressively deep images of outflows in the H-alpha light of ionized hydrogen
will provide a focal point for public outreach, and will be used in public talks
to demonstrate the physics behind a 'pretty picture'.