* 0907368
* Integrated Production and Surface Modification of Biodegradable Nanoparticles by MEMS-Electrosprays for Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Alessandro Gomez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2011
* USD 387,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907368 PI: Gomez, Alessandro ORG: Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Integrated Production and Surface
Modification of Biodegradable Nanoparticles by MEMS-Electrosprays for Drug
Delivery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Surface modification of drug-
loaded biodegradable nanoparticles is a prerequisite for attachment of specific
ligands of interest for targeted drug delivery or for attachment of protective
molecules that shield the particles during in vivo transit. The PI?s laboratory
has pioneered electrospray drying methods for the production of uniform
nanoparticles of biologically active agents and polymers. It is now possible to
generate thousands of parallel electrosprays using microfabrication, with a
packing density as large as 10,000 electroprays per square centimeter. As a
result the controlled synthesis of nanoparticles at acceptable flow rates for
applications is now feasible. The co-PI?s laboratory is focused on surface
modification of these materials and their application to enable targeted drug
and protein delivery as therapeutics for cancer and autoimmune disease. Here the
combination of expertise will be focused on the development and testing of novel
drug-loaded, ligand-coated nanoparticulate formulation for long-circulating,
nanoparticle drug delivery. The proposed work aims to demonstrate a new
fabrication process for the construction of uniformly coated drug delivery
vehicles using twin-fluid, multiplexed electrosprays. Specifically, the PIs
propose to demonstrate: (1) the production of uniform nanoparticles by an
electrospray drying method with the overall size of 100-200 nm to facilitate
cellular internalization; (2) control over drug loading and incorporation of
high density coatings of targeting ligands by a twin-fluid electrospray; (3)
high production rates of this formulation by parallelizing thousands of
electrosprays by microfabrication; and (4) the efficacy of this novel synthesis
methodology both in vitro and in vivo. Because the strength of the approach lies
in a novel fabrication scheme for coating and high throughput production of
drug-loaded nanoparticles, this approach lends itself to wide use in many basic
and preclinical settings requiring a reproducible, robust technique for the
synthesis of surface-modified drug delivery
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The two PIs are committed to
graduate and undergraduate education, and will use this research project as a
forum for advanced interdisciplinary training of students. The successful
completion of the proposed research would open up huge opportunities in areas
that can benefit from the unique advantage of the ES, namely, the ability to
produce uniform droplets/particles over a wide range of sizes, including
nanometric dimensions. Potential applications range from the controlled and/or
targeted release of drugs, to the synthesis of ceramic nanoparticles, quantum
dots and thin films. Results will be disseminated by the PI and his
collaborators at technical meetings and in peer-reviewed articles. In addition
to the anticipated impact of the proposed research in a broad range of
technologies, there will be a spillover in teaching and outreach activities. The
PI has been working with New Haven School teachers, as a seminar leader in the
Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute (YNHTI). He gave a series of lectures on
?Energy, Engines and the Environment,? on the basis of which 12 teachers
developed curricular units for classes ranging from kindergarten to high school.
The model of the YNHTI has been very successful and has been exported to other
inner cities across the country, as documented in http://www.yale.edu/ynhti/. He
has pursued a variety of new educational initiative at the undergraduate level
and has expanded his current program to involved 5 undergraduate science and
engineering students in various research projects. In addition, the PIs intend
to broaden this experience by organizing a 10-week Summer Outreach Program for
undergraduate students entering their senior year. The program will bring
together undergraduates from various institutions to participate in specific
research projects covering the range of interests of the PIs. &lt;br/&gt;