* 0907357
* Probing Cooper Pair Insulator to Superconductor Transitions in Amorphous Films
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2009,02/28/2014
* James Valles, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 02/28/2014
* USD 407,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT?****&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of experiments
on materials patterned with nano-meter scale features that exhibit exotic
electrical properties when cooled to near the absolute zero of temperature. The
materials consist of films of the element Bi that have been perforated with a
nano-meter scale honeycomb array of holes. Without the holes, these films become
"superconducting" through a process in which the electrons form pairs, called
Cooper pairs that are able to move through the Bi without friction. With the
holes, these films can form into the opposite state: an electrical insulator.
This insulator, surprisingly, also contains Cooper pairs. The goal of this
project is to characterize this state with the objectives of determining the
factors that prevent the Cooper pairs from superconducting. Experiments on films
patterned with varying hole geometries will determine which geometrical
characteristics produce the novel state. In addition, techniques to weaken the
Cooper pairs will be employed to test the hypothesis that the Cooper pairing is
essential to the formation of the insulator state. Results from this project
will enhance our understanding of superconductivity and in particular, the
behavior of some high temperature superconductors. In addition, these
investigations provide intensive training for graduate and undergraduate
students in high technology, research techniques and forefront physics issues
and thus, help build the nation?s technological workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT?****&lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of experiments at dilution refrigerator temperatures on ultrathin films
of superconducting materials, patterned with a nano-meter scale honeycomb array
of holes. The goal is to characterize a recently discovered, novel insulating
state of these films. This state contains Cooper pairs, the primary constituents
of superconductors, but the Cooper pairs are localized. The objectives are to
determine the factors responsible for the Cooper pair localization. The
patterned films are created by depositing Bi onto anodized aluminum oxide
templates that are perforated by deep holes. Investigations of films patterned
with holes of varying radii and spacing will be performed to determine the
geometrical factors influencing the Cooper pair localization. Also,
investigations of how the insulating state responds to the introduction of
magnetic impurities that can weaken and destroy Cooper pairing will be
performed, thereby testing whether the Cooper pairing is essential to the
formation of the insulating state These results are expected to impact
investigations of other systems near the quantum superconductor to insulator
transition and high temperature superconducting materials that exhibit states
with finite resistance, such as the pseudo-gap state in under-doped cuprates,
which might contain Cooper pairs. The project and its activities also serve as
the PhD research training for two graduate students at Brown. It immerses them
in frontier issues in condensed matter physics and helps them develop technical
expertise that will make them attractive to industry or academia.