* 0907706
* Dynamics in Patterned Magnetic Nanostructures: Spin-Wave Excitations and Propagation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kristen Buchanan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2013
* USD 324,800.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Patterned magnetic
nanostructures exhibit vastly different properties compared to their bulk
counterparts, including altered dynamic excitations. This project will explore
magnetization dynamics in magnetic nanostructures, focusing on phenomena
associated with the dynamics of magnetic vortices and antivortices, as well as,
the generation and propagation of spin waves in nanopatterned magnetic systems.
This will include the study of the generation of spin-wave bursts by vortex and
anti-vortex dynamic core reversal and spin-wave propagation and filtering
processes in magnetic nanowires. Combined experimental and numerical
investigations will be used to explore and understand these processes. In
additional to being of fundamental interest, magnetic nanostructures hold great
potential for future information storage applications, non-volatile memory, and
for spintronics applications that show promise for energy-efficient processing
of information. The involvement and training of students at the undergraduate
and graduate levels will play a vital role in this research. Students will
participate in all aspects of the program, including the construction of new
experimental set-ups. The project will also involve an outreach component
related to the development of nanoscience and nanomagnetism resources for
teachers and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Reducing the size of a magnetic
material down to sub-micrometer or nanometer dimensions changes the energetics
of the system and leads to vastly different magnetic landscapes and dynamic
excitations that are important for a wide range of present and future
technologies. As experimental capabilities for fabricating and investigating
structure on the nanoscale continue to improve, there is a wealth of phenomena
predicted by numerical models waiting to be explored. This project will explore
the magnetization dynamics of magnetic nanostructures. In particular, the
project will examine phenomena associated with the dynamics of magnetic vortices
and antivortices, as well as, the generation and propagation of spin waves in
nanopatterned magnetic systems. Spin waves are propagating disturbances in the
ordering of a magnetic material. The project will use combined numerical and
experimental investigations to explore and understand these processes. In
additional to being of fundamental interest, magnetic nanostructures hold great
potential for future information storage applications, non-volatile memory for
?instant-on? computers, and for spintronics applications, that is, for devices
that utilize the spin of the electron rather than just its charge, which hold
promise for future energy-efficient processing of information. The involvement
and training of students at the undergraduate and graduate levels will play a
vital role in this research. Students will participate in all aspects of the
program, including the construction of new experimental set-ups. The project
will also involve an outreach component related to the development of
nanoscience and nanomagnetism resources for teachers and the general public.