* 0907710
* Statistical Inferences for Deterministic Dynamic Models Containing both Constant and Time-varying Parameters with Applications to Infectious Diseases
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jianwei Chen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor J. Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 89,472.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Deterministic dynamic models have become very popular in modeling human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) dynamics, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis,
tumor cell kinetics, and genetic networks. Current statistical methods for
estimating unknown dynamic parameters in deterministic dynamic models from noisy
data require intensive computation. This research develops new and efficient
statistical estimation, inference methods and computational algorithms for
deterministic dynamic models containing both constant and time-varying
parameters. Three estimation procedures including kernel smoothing,
discretization and spline methods are being investigated to solve challenging
statistical problems in deterministic dynamic models. The investigator is
focusing on the following three aims: (i) methodological and theoretical
development of the semiparametric and nonparametric approach to the time-varying
coefficient partially linear dynamic model and the time-varying coefficient
dynamic model; (ii) modeling of HIV/Cell dynamics via these estimation
techniques; (iii) efficient semiparametric and nonparametric estimation and
algorithms in the partially linear dynamic system and the time-varying
coefficient dynamic system. Asymptotic theory and simulation studies are being
implemented to investigate the properties of the proposed methods, hypothesis
testing procedures and adaptive bandwidth selection. The new procedures are
being applied to AIDS clinical data. In addition to developing a number of
innovative semiparametric and nonparametric techniques and useful deterministic
dynamic models, this research also provides new insights into nonparametric
inference. The new techniques being developed are statistically interesting
beyond their direct applications to infectious diseases and will have
significant impact on statistical thinking, methodological development, and
theoretical studies. Modeling dynamic systems for infectious diseases is
critical for understanding pathogenesis of infection and providing guidance in
the development of treatment strategies. It is of concern not only to
researchers but also to decision makers developing plans for public health. The
investigator's research provides valuable modeling diagnostic tools for
biomedical researchers and practitioners to analyze and interpret clinical data
with improved accuracy via dynamic models. The new statistical dynamic models
and estimation techniques being developed will also be applicable to problems in
engineering and for econometrics. The educational component of this research
expands opportunities for students to learn about modern statistical modeling
techniques and their applications in infectious diseases.