* 0907475
* Effects of Polarization Fields and Surface Charge Layers on p-Type Conductivity in In(Ga)N
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Mathias Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 12/31/2012
* USD 231,857.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Technical: This project seeks to solve two key issues of
InGaN materials. First, how do lattice strain, composition, internal
polarization fields, surface polarity, defect, and dopant incorporation
influence p-type conductivity in InGaN? Second, what is the cause of the
intrinsic surface electron layer in InN? This layer obscures the bulk free
charge carrier properties in contact-based electrical measurements, in the
extreme case concealing p-type conductivity. The experimental approach of this
project comprises InGaN thin film analysis with variation of spontaneous and
piezoelectric fields, surface orientation, composition, surface defects, and
dopant incorporation. It employs a newly developed optical Hall-effect
technique, which permits noncontact, noninvasive charge carrier profiling and
tackles the present challenges in p-conductivity research on InGaN. The success
of the project may also open a door to answer the open questions about the
surface charges in InAs. Non-technical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
The success of the project is expected to have impacts on the further
advancement of optoelectronics, solid state lighting, and solar cells. The
project provides training of graduate and postdoctoral students. The PI and his
students participate in education outreach activities for solar energy use in
remote areas of Nebraska. The PI is also active in the professional societies
and organizes several symposia on ellipsometry in scientific conferences.