* 0907690
* Matter Adsorbed on Nanoscale Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Oscar Vilches, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2013
* USD 432,500.00

Technical Abstract

This project will measure the properties and phases of matter in the form of a
single layer of atoms or simple molecules deposited on one, two, or bundled
single-walled carbon nanotubes. With already designed, constructed and tested
very sensitive one- and two-suspended nanotube mechanical oscillators vibrating
in the upper megahertz range to act as extremely sensitive mass balances (at the
level of a few atoms), this project will measure mass adsorption isotherms using
atoms from the He isotopes to Xe, and the interesting molecules of hydrogen,
nitrogen and oxygen. Due to the pristine surface and very low mass of the
suspended nanotubes, this project will map accurately phase boundaries, measure
critical and tri-critical parameters of two-dimensional (2d) matter, study 2d to
one-dimensional (1d) crossover behavior as a function of temperature and
adsorbed mass, obtain excellent values of heats of adsorption for both classical
and quantum mechanical monolayers, and study the effect of surface adsorbates on
the electronic properties of the substrate, which may lead to the fabrication of
new ultra sensitive matter specific detectors. For those systems of interest,
this project will measure the crystalline structure and the phonon spectrum of
the adsorbates through an international collaboration using the facilities in
Grenoble, France. Graduate and undergraduate students participating are being
trained in contemporary electronic, thermodynamic, scanning and scattering
measurement techniques, all applicable to nanotechnology.

Non Technical Abstract.

Films of atoms or molecules just one layer thick (said to be "two-dimensional")
condense and solidify at lower temperatures than regular "three-dimensional"
matter. Lines of atoms (the extreme "one-dimensional" case) are expected not to
condense or solidify even all the way down to absolute zero of temperature. To
explore this fascinating limit, this project will measure the properties of
matter in the form of a single layer of atoms or simple molecules confined to
the surface of one or two individual single-walled carbon nanotubes. With
nanotube mechanical oscillators which we have already designed, constructed and
tested acting as extremely sensitive mass balances (which can detect just a few
atoms on the surface), this project will measure mass deposition at many
different temperatures, with atoms ranging from the isotopes of helium (low
mass) to xenon (large mass), and the molecular forms of hydrogen, nitrogen and
oxygen which are of great practical interest. This project also will study their
effect on the electrons moving in the nanotubes, which may lead to new, more
sensitive and gas-specific detectors. For certain systems this project will also
measure the arrangement and the vibrational spectrum of the adsorbates through
an international collaboration using facilities in Grenoble, France.This project
involves graduate and undergraduate students who are being trained in
contemporary electronic, thermodynamic, scanning and scattering measurement
techniques applicable to nanotechnology, over a wide range of temperatures.