* 0907234
* Manganese-Doping During Germanium Quantum Dot Self-Assembly for Spintronics Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 569,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Technical: This project, funded by the Electronic and
Photonic Materials (EPM) Program in DMR and by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry (ASC) Program in CHE, investigates the fundamental mechanisms
controlling metastable manganese incorporation during germanium quantum dot
self-assembly via heteroepitaxy on silicon. The project includes a comprehensive
study of the fundamental growth, incorporation, clustering, and reaction
processes in the magnetic doping of Ge with substitutional Mn. Surface chemistry
tools, including scanning tunneling microscopy and low energy electron
microscopy, are used to gain an atomic scale and mesoscale understanding of the
doping of Mn into Ge dots. Magnetic measurements are employed to investigate the
correlation between Mn incorporation and magnetic properties of quantum dots.
These studies are hierarchical, evaluating fundamental transport on relevant
strained and unstrained surfaces, using that knowledge to guide optimized
incorporation studies through careful control of kinetic parameters, and then
feeding back with structural, chemical, and magnetic analysis. Non-technical:
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials and
chemical sciences with technological relevance. The success of this project is
likely to have impacts on the advancement of the emerging area of spintronics
and related fields such as quantum computing. Graduate and undergraduate
students are trained in an interdisciplinary environment that includes materials
science and chemistry. In addition, the PI and co-PI organize a NanoDays event,
which is open to the public with multiple interactions including demonstrations
both onsite and in local elementary schools, lab tours, and multimedia
presentations.