* 0907542
* Polar, Ionic and Reactive Liquid Crystalline Materials for Electrooptical, Battery, and Sensor Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Piotr Kaszynski, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2013
* USD 483,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is a
continuation of the current NSF award and involves the design, synthesis, and
study of liquid crystalline materials that are uniquely suited to address
fundamental questions and applied problems in the field of liquid crystals. The
proposed materials are nematic liquid crystals containing boron clusters, a
class of compounds that displays unusual steric and electronic properties.
Because these materials have the potential to meet technological needs in modern
society, the project has two related goals: the development of new materials for
applications in flat panel displays and new liquid crystalline electrolytes for
rechargeable Li+ ion batteries. The project involves the molecular design of new
materials aided by quantum-mechanical calculations, inorganic/organic synthetic
methods, structure-property relationship studies, electrooptical
characterization and ion mobility investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary program is
directed at the development of new advanced molecular materials for addressing
fundamental questions in the field of liquid crystals and for applications in
flat panel displays and rechargeable batteries. The design involves unique
organic-inorganic hybrid molecules, which will be synthesized and investigated
using a broad array of modern research tools. The proposed work will affect a
number of areas of science and engineering, and is expected to impact LCD and
energy storage technologies. It will provide excellent opportunities for the
involved personnel (undergraduate and graduate students and also postdoctoral
workers) to obtain broad training in modern materials chemistry through domestic
and international collaborations, which include the LCD industry (e.g. Vision in
Colorado). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;