* 0907650
* Asteroid Satellites and Spins
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Alan Harris, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2010
* USD 219,253.00

AST-0907650 Warner

Measuring the changes in light from an asteroid over time (lightcurve
observations) is one of the more important and productive research projects for
those with modest instruments, that is, small (0.3m to 1.0m) telescopes with
high-end commercial CCD cameras. While the instrumentation may be humble, the
contribution to science is anything but, because from such observations it is
possible to determine the rotation rate of an asteroid, its taxonomic class
based on multi-color photometry, its absolute magnitude (and thus its
approximate size), the surface light scattering properties, and sometimes even
an initial indication of its shape and spin axis orientation. Knowledge of these
characteristics is critical to new theories regarding the development and
evolution of the asteroids within our Solar System and, to some degree, of
systems beyond our Sun. To date, this project has generated hundreds of
lightcurves and nearly a dozen shape models, and has also discovered eight new
binary asteroids, six within the inner main belt where tidal encounters can not
be easily used to explain binary formation. This research is critical for
understanding two effects of the thermal re-radiation of sunlight by asteroids:
the Yarkovsky effect changes the size of an asteroid's orbit, and the YORP
effect (Yarkovsky-O'Keefe-Radzievskii-Paddack) is responsible for aligning the
spin axes within asteroid families.

This program is coordinated with other programs through a regular article in the
Minor Planet Bulletin, email alert services, a web site (CALL, the Collaborative
Asteroid Lightcurve Link), responses to "target of opportunity" observing
requests, and the asteroid Lightcurve Database (LCDB). These activities enhance
both the intellectual value and the broader impact of this work. This study
engages a large number of students and faculty at educational institutions
around the world, as well as the general public ('backyard astronomers') in
critical astronomical research. In an effort to expand the pool of qualified
observers, this project includes a series of photometry workshops to provide
both theory and hands-on skills to help possible future participants to
contribute.