* 0907185
* Collaborative Research:  New MCMC-enabled Bayesian Methods for Complex Data and Computer Models Applied in Astronomy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Xiao-Li Meng, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2013
* USD 378,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The California-Boston AstroStatistics Collaboration is developing a new model-
based strategy for statistical inference that embeds computer models into
multilevel models that explicitly account for complexities of both astronomical
sources and the data generation mechanisms inherent in new high-tech telescopes.
The resulting highly structured models must be fully utilized in order to learn
about the underlying astronomical and physical processes. This strategy requires
state-of-the-art scientific computation, advanced methods for statistical
inference, and careful model checking procedures. The Collaboration has a track
record using these methods to solve outstanding data-analytic problems in
astronomy. In addition, the PIs (van Dyk, Meng, and Yu) have substantial
research experience in developing the methods that the Collaboration will
extend, employ, and publicize: inferential and efficient computational methods
under highly-structured models that involve multiple levels of latent variables
and incomplete data. Such models are ideally suited to account for the many
physical and instrumental filters of the data generation mechanism in high-
energy astrophysics. The five astronomers (Chiang, Connors, Kashyap, Kelly, and
Siemiginowska) all have expertise on the instrumentation and science of high-
energy and/or optical astronomy, and, all have collaborated with statisticians
in efforts to develop appropriate methods to address scientific questions. The
collaboration specifically aims to develop a mixture of parametrized and
flexible multi-scale models that can be combined with complex computer-models to
describe spectral, spatial, and timing data, either marginally or jointly. The
models are developed in a fully Bayesian framework that allows us to incorporate
external information, provide coherent estimates of uncertainty, and calibrate
statistical comparisons of proposed underlying physical models. These methods
require the Collaboration to develop new sophisticated statistical computing
techniques for Monte Carlo exploration of complex and often multi-modal
posterior distributions.

In recent years, technological advances have dramatically increased the quality
and quantity of data available to astronomers. Newly launched or soon-to-be
launched space-based telescopes are tailored to data-collection challenges
associated with specific scientific goals. These instruments provide massive new
surveys resulting in new catalogs containing terabytes of data, high resolution
spectrography and imaging across the electromagnetic spectrum, and incredibly
detailed movies of dynamic and explosive processes in the solar atmosphere. The
spectrum of new instruments is helping scientists make impressive strides in our
understanding of the physical universe, but at the same time generating massive
data analysis challenges for scientists who study the resulting data. The
complexity of the instruments, the complexity of the astronomical sources, and
the complexity of the scientific questions leads to many subtle inference
problem that require sophisticated statistical tools. For example, data are
partially missing, are subject to varying measurement errors, and are
contaminated with irrelevant artifacts. Scientists wish to draw conclusions as
to the physical environment and structure of the source, the processes and laws
which govern the birth and death of planets, stars, and galaxies, and ultimately
the structure and evolution of the universe. Sophisticated astrophysics-based
computer-models are used along with complex mathematical models to predict the
data observed from astronomical sources and populations of sources. The
California-Boston AstroStatistics Collaboration aims to tackle outstanding
statistical problems generated in astrophysics by establishing frameworks for
the analysis of complex data using state-of-the-art statistical, astronomical,
and computer models. In so doing the Collaboration will not only develop new
methods for astronomy but will also use these problems as a spring board in the
development of new general statistical methods, especially in signal processing,
multilevel modeling, computer modeling, and computational statistics.