* 0907669
* The Generalized Cluster Expansion: A Tool for Representing Structure-Property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Axel van de Walle, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2013
* USD 306,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Structure-
property relationships have long guided materials discovery and improved our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying diverse physical phenomena. This
award supports developing a set of theoretical and computational tools to
determine and efficiently represent the relationship between the atomic
structure of a compound and a given material property. The starting point is the
cluster expansion formalism, which can express the relationship between a scalar
material property and a crystalline alloy?s atomic configuration. This project
generalizes this formalism to tensor-valued and nonuniform/nonisotropic material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting generalized cluster expansion
coupled with first-principles calculations will be applied in three general
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Phase field modeling: the generalized cluster
expansion can encode the relationship between various phase fields representing
the state of order of an alloy and tensorial properties, such as elastic
constants or lattice parameters that enter the mesoscopic equation of motion of
the simulated system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Automated discovery of atomistic
mechanisms: An illustrative application is the determination of the atomic-level
origins of specific features in the phonon spectrum through the use of
environment-dependent force constants tensors. Here, each term in the
generalized cluster expansion would provide independent geometrical insight
regarding the mechanisms at work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Materials discovery
and/or optimization: The generalized cluster expansion will be used to
demonstrate an efficient computational combinatorial screening of a large number
of candidate superlattices in search of one with the desired combination of
properties relevant for device design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software tools
developed in this project will be included within the Alloy Theoretic Automated
Toolkit, a widely used software package that the PI has made available on the
world-wide web. This project will promote integration of research and education
as well as diversity in science by contributing to the Materials Partnership
Program established by Caltech?s Center for the Science and Engineering of
Materials which recruits undergraduates from California State University, Los
Angeles in collaborative research projects with
Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research that will develop new
computational algorithms and tools for determining the relationship between the
structure of a specific, possibly candidate, material and its properties. The PI
will extend an existing approach to enable inclusion of a larger set of
materials properties that enhance the power and utility of the method. The
research effort contributes to the effort to discover new materials with desired
properties using computation and starting only with the identity of the
constituent atoms. This research may lead to the discovery of new materials with
desired properties for technological applications, or optimizing the properties
of existing materials or materials structures. New materials for optoelectronic
devices are a specific focus of this project. Software tools developed in this
project will be made available to the broader materials research community and
will contribute to its cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;