* 0907951
* The Dynamics of Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Neal Katz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2014
* USD 387,665.00

Dr Weinberg and his group will examine how galaxies evolve over billions of
years, by the collective interactions between their disk, spheroid, and dark-
matter halo. The main force acting on these large scales is the mutual
gravitational pull of the stars and the dark matter. Galaxies are believed to
form by the merger of many smaller units; during this time, gravitational forces
vary wildly. Galaxies seen early in cosmic history often have very large bars;
the group will explore how these large bars could be produced in this early
violent phase. They will then examine how, in the quieter later life of the
galaxy, such large bars could shrink to become the shorter and faster-rotating
bars seen today. They will also investigate how the disk of stars could become
warped and thickened, and how the central bulge might be built up, slowly over
cosmic history. In this investigation they will use a combination of
perturbation theory, direct integration of stellar orbits, and N-body
simulations of several types. To study how gas in the disk affects the galaxy's
development, they will combine their N-body code with a code to follow gas
dynamics, and will implement a multiple time step algorithm that should increase
the simulation throughput by 30 times. The result will be detailed predictions
for the motions of stars and gas in present-day galaxies.

This award will support a graduate student, and the group will offer research
projects to undergraduates, including those in their institution's computer
animation group. These students will be trained in numerical and visualization
techniques. The group will distribute test suites and tools for their simulation
codes, together with reference solutions, to enable other researchers in the
field to compare the detailed results of their own codes on the same test
problems. They will also produce visualizations and other outreach material from
their computations.