* 0907773
* The mathematics and mechanics of elastic growth; with biological and biomedical applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Alain Goriely, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 472,701.00

Goriely&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0907773&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The theme of the project is
the study of growth, structure,&lt;br/&gt;and function in physiological and
biological systems through the&lt;br/&gt;use and development of exact elasticity
theory and the associated&lt;br/&gt;methods of applied mathematics. The project
divides into&lt;br/&gt;specific but interconnected lines: the mathematical
development&lt;br/&gt;of a theory of elastic growth in soft materials; the long-
time&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of growth; the linear and nonlinear stability
analysis&lt;br/&gt;of growing elastic systems with application to morphogenesis
and&lt;br/&gt;pattern formation; the problem of cavitation and void-opening
in&lt;br/&gt;growth; and the study of reduced theories. The
Principal&lt;br/&gt;Investigators study elastic growth within the framework of
exact&lt;br/&gt;elasticity theory, where growth is modeled through
the&lt;br/&gt;multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient.
The&lt;br/&gt;mechanical consequences of growth, its long-time dynamics,
and&lt;br/&gt;its potential to either generate instabilities through changes
in&lt;br/&gt;geometry and stresses, or to act as a regulatory mechanism,
are&lt;br/&gt;examined. Furthermore, a study of growing tissues is carried
out&lt;br/&gt;through the development and application of the techniques
of&lt;br/&gt;weakly nonlinear analysis. The development of reduced
theories&lt;br/&gt;for rods, membranes, plates, and shells for growing
structures is&lt;br/&gt;also undertaken. Various applications in biology and
physiology&lt;br/&gt;are studied; in particular the ideas of growth are applied
to&lt;br/&gt;bacterial and fungal systems, stems, leaves, arteries, and
blood&lt;br/&gt;vessels. The various theoretical analyses and specific models
of&lt;br/&gt;growth are carried out through the use and extension of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;analysis techniques developed by the Principal
Investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Growth is a fundamental scientific problem
of great&lt;br/&gt;complexity coupling biological, chemical, and physical
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop mathematical tools
to&lt;br/&gt;understand and model a variety of problems related to
growth,&lt;br/&gt;including plant and microbial morphogenesis, the stability
of&lt;br/&gt;arteries, the development of aneurysms, and the regular
and&lt;br/&gt;abnormal functions of organs such as the heart, the
esophagus,&lt;br/&gt;and the trachea. Despite the great biological diversity of
these&lt;br/&gt;systems, they share common features that can be modeled
through&lt;br/&gt;the use of similar mathematical tools. These models help
the&lt;br/&gt;scientific community to understand the intimate coupling
between&lt;br/&gt;mechanics and biology in growth processes and to predict
better&lt;br/&gt;the response of many biological and physiological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;