* 0907642
* Catalyzed Nucleation and Growth of Semiconductor Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Wei Cai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 736,317.00

Technical. This project addresses locally catalyzed nucleation and growth of
semiconductor nanowires (NWs); the approach combines simulation and modeling
with in situ and ex situ ex-periments. The closely coupled computational and
experimental approach should help to gain fundamental understanding of
mechanisms of NW structure evolution and how they can be con-trolled. Atomistic
modeling and controlled experiments on NW nucleation and growth kinetics will be
carried out so as to provide direct comparisons. The following questions related
to metal-catalyzed NW synthesis will be addressed: Q1. What is the mechanism of
NW nucleation on dif-ferent substrates and how does it relate to the observed
deep sub-eutectic nucleation reported in some catalyst-NW systems? Q2. What
mechanisms control normal NW growth and result in growth abnormalities (e.g.
kinking)? Q3. What is the mechanism of the termination of NW growth (catalyst
nanoparticle solidification)? Using the Si/Ge NW system as a test bed, in situ
and ex situ measurements during CVD growth at controlled temperature and
pressure conditions will be compared with numerical predictions, validating and
guiding the development of compu-tational methods to overcome time scale
challenges in the modeling of nucleation events. The latter is a well known
major limit to the range of applicability of atomistic simulations to date. The
new understanding gained is expected to benefit the broader field of atomistic
modeling due to the common occurrence of nucleation events in physical, chemical
and biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of elec-tronic/photonic materials
science having technological relevance. This basic research, being con-ducted
within the context of worldwide efforts among academic and industrial labs to
use semi-conductor NWs in new devices, is expected to have strong technological
impact. Results ob-tained through this project on NW synthesis may have impact
on the development of these and other emerging technologies. The prospect of new
science and technology breakthroughs enabled by semiconductor NWs attracts
strong interest in such research among undergrads, graduate stu-dents, and
faculty. The PIs plan to leverage this 'excitement' and build on it in their
education and outreach activities. Specific initiatives will be pursued in: 1)
science education outreach to under-represented minorities through a
collaboration with a high school science teacher; 2) un-dergraduate experiences
in both computational and experimental components of the proposed re-search; and
3) undergraduate and graduate course module development based on research find-
ings.