* 0907245
* Statistical Physics of Systems of Grains, Fibres and Sheets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Narayanan Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** How do loose grains pack into a sand pile? How do
long strands arrange into springy, elastic, fibrous matter? How is it that a
flimsy piece of paper becomes rigid when crushed into a ball that is mostly
empty space? This individual investigator award supports a project to develop
techniques for imaging the interior of such structures with a view to
understanding the architecture that leads to the mechanical properties that
define each of these classes of materials. Model laboratory systems will be used
to enable our understanding of the behavior of their more complex counterparts
in the physical, technological and biological world. The intellectual challenge
in understanding these systems is that unlike conventional phases of matter
these so-called nonequilibrium systems are defined not just by their present
state but by the history to which they have been subjected. Undergraduates from
UMass and other colleges in the area will lead exploratory work on new projects
while graduate students will work on more long-term projects using techniques
that include a battery of modern experimental tools. All students will be
exposed to research questions of fundamental importance in nonequilibrium
statistical physics in the context of everyday materials.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The focus of this individual investigator award is
the understanding of the structure, response, and stability of systems in which
the constituent elements are macroscopic grains, fibres, or elastic sheets. The
project seeks to identify general principles governing phase behaviour,
fluctuations, bulk response and structure of such far-from-equilibrium systems.
An experimental determination of packing and spatial configuration of model
systems in each of these classes is indispensable in developing an understanding
of their counterparts in the physical, technological and biological world. These
systems are nonthermal, and their structure is a consequence of not just their
constituents and their interactions but also their history of preparation. In
the cases of fibres and sheets, the deformability of these elastic elements
raises interesting geometrical issues. These issues are compounded by the
material challenges of long-term plastic flow and of hysteretic frictional
interactions. Undergraduates from UMass and other colleges in the area will lead
exploratory work on new projects while graduate students will work on more long-
term projects using techniques that include high-speed video imaging, confocal
microscopy, light scattering, acoustic and mechanical response techniques, and
x-ray tomography.