* 0907658
* Pursuit-Evasion Games with Complex Systems in Complex Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2008,09/30/2010
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 09/30/2010
* USD 103,220.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Success in the proposed research plan requires
progress in two fundamental issues. First, new models&lt;br/&gt;and
computational tools that shed light onto the structure of the information
available in distributed sensing&lt;br/&gt;and decision making tasks must be
developed. Second, algorithms which exploit these structures to
design&lt;br/&gt;efficient pursuit-evasion strategies must be designed. These
algorithms provide robust and provable solutions to many SAN applications such
as tracking. To ensure the practical applicability of these results, they will
be adapted for two applications (tracking and surveillance) which can be modeled
as pursuit-evasion games and implemented on a sensor-actuator
network.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Due to numerous applications of
pursuit-evasion games, the results of this project are of interest to
a&lt;br/&gt;number of communities including control theory, economics and game
theory in addition to the algorithms&lt;br/&gt;community. Progress in pursuit-
evasion games will help in bringing these communities closer and will
lead&lt;br/&gt;to a richer cross-pollination of ideas. To facilitate this, the
output of this research will be disseminated as a&lt;br/&gt;monograph. The
results of this project are also directly applicable to a number of automation
tasks involving&lt;br/&gt;sensor-actuator networks and therefore, they will
participate in the formation of the next generation of&lt;br/&gt;automation
technologies through progress in distributed sensing, and decision making. In
particular, their&lt;br/&gt;utility will be demonstrated on a prototype system
for monitoring the elderly through a collaboration with&lt;br/&gt;Northeast
Health, located in the Samaritan Hospital (Troy, NY) which specializes in remote
care technologies.&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of this project to the integration
of research and education will be twofold: First, the&lt;br/&gt;experimental
pursuit-evasion game setup will be utilized to attract minority and female
students from local&lt;br/&gt;primary and secondary schools to new outreach
programs. Half of the student population in schools adjacent&lt;br/&gt;to
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's campus (Troy Public High School, Troy Middle
School and Public&lt;br/&gt;School 14) are under-represented minorities. The
outreach programs will include pursuit-evasion games&lt;br/&gt;where the
students will play against the experimental SAN setup. Solutions to simple
pursuit-evasion games&lt;br/&gt;will stimulate the students' interests in
science and mathematics. Second, a new graduate course
titled&lt;br/&gt;"Pursuit-Evasion Games with Sensor Actuator Networks" will be
developed. In this course, students will&lt;br/&gt;gain theoretical background
and skills in distributed sensing, control, optimization and game theory;
and&lt;br/&gt;apply these skills by testing their algorithms on the experimental
setup.