* 0907572
* Mineralized Electrospun Chitosan Nanofibers as Bone Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Peter Lelkes, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 315,297.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907572 PI: Wegst, Ulrike ORG: Drexel University

Title: Mineralized Electrospun Chitosan Nanofibers as Bone Scaffolds

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The overall aim of the proposal is to test the hypothesis
that by mineralizing chitosan fibers, we can create a ceramic-based bone
substitute material that combines the strength and stiffness of the ceramic
phase with an increased toughness through fiber reinforcement. The intention is
to provide materials for optimal repair of craniofacial and orthopedic skeletal
defects, which would otherwise require a bone graft from a second surgical site.
To test this hypothesis the following research aims are proposed: Aim 1: To
investigate a combinatorial approach on bulk films of chitosan, chitin, and a
blend of the two to determine the critical parameters for mineralization. Aim 2:
To optimize mineralization of chitosan and chitin fiber mats. Aim 3: To test the
mechanical properties of individual non-mineralized and mineralized chitosan
fibers. Aim 4: To test cytocompatibility of the novel mineralized chitosan and
chitin films and fibers, by assessing adhesion, spreading (morphology), and
proliferation of human osteoblasts and evaluating their functional, osteogenic
differentiation. More specifically it is proposed to create a 3-D mineralized
fiber composite using chitosan and chitin fibers, and hydroxyapatite (HA,
Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2), tri-calcium-phosphate (beta-TCP, Ca3(PO4) 2), or calcium
carbonate (CaCO3) minerals to create a mineralized fiber composite that is
strong, stiff and tough enough to substitute for natural bone. The choice of
chitin and chitosan as a fiber material is due to their exceptional mechanical
properties and biocompatibility. The advantage of chitosan is its availability,
versatility and ease in processing. Its disadvantage for hard tissue
applications is that it swells when exposed to moisture and forms mechanically
instable hydrogels. Chitosan fibers can be highly crosslinked and as a result
are chemically and mechanically stable and better suited for hard tissue
applications. The three minerals, HA, beta-TCP and CaCO3 were chosen for this
proposal because they have already successfully been used as
osteogenic/osteoinductive biomaterials.

BROADER IMPACTS: There are several benefits of this research to society that
result from the development of bone substitute materials which mimic the natural
material so well that it is fully integrated into the natural bone. The better
property match of biomaterial to bone means that the implant can be better
integrated into natural tissue, resulting in a higher implant. Research results
will be disseminated broadly through campus-wide seminar series, at national and
international conferences, in publications in high quality peer-reviewed
journals to enhance scientific and technological understanding. Teaching,
training and learning will happen through new courses at both the graduate and
undergraduate level. Every attempt will be made to involve minorities in the
research, teaching, and outreach activities. The PIs will promote the active
recruitment and training of women and underrepresented minorities engineers
through collaboration with existing Drexel programs: Drexel STAR (Students
Tackling Advanced Research) undergraduate students, SEED Program (Summer
Engineering Experience @ Drexel) for high school students, REU (Research
Experience for Undergraduates), and RET (Research Experience for Teachers) high
school teachers. Further work will be to work with the Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (AMP) to actively recruit future lab personnel. As part
of this project, new instrumentation for materials synthesis, micromechanical
testing in a controlled environment, and biocompatibility testing will be
established at Drexel. Additionally, in situ mechanical testing in SEM and FIB
will greatly add to the central characterization facility of the Materials
Science and Engineering Department at Drexel University. New experimental
facilities for material testing, characterization and synthesis will be
designed, built and used.