* 0907117
* Collaborative Research:  NanoDomain Structure and Multifunctional Properties of Polymer Derived Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Peter Kroll, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 281,547.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
develop an understanding of the relationship between electronic structure and
functional properties of polymer-derived ceramics ? with emphasis on their
particular and unprecedented nanodomain structure. The open questions are
addressed in a combined theoretical and experimental study, with ab-initio
computations supporting experimental measurements. This parallelism between
theory and experiment is a cornerstone of this proposed research program.
Reaching the fundamental goals will make this new class of compounds ? with
their outstanding thermodynamic stability above 1500Â°C ? available to materials
applications, including sensors and energy storage in extreme and harsh
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;A central
effort of the proposed computational approach is to model the distinctive and
only slowly emerging molecular network structure of this multi-component
amorphous polymer-derived ceramics. A two-step approach is designed that first
generates an approximate network structure based upon experimental data and
chemical intuition. Next, the structures are computed from first-principles
including ab?initio molecular dynamic simulations. Electronic and optical
properties are interpreted and compared with experimental data, yielding
information about the atomistic structure and, recursively, giving insight into
the atomic arrangements at short and medium length scales.