* 0907385
* GOALI/FRG: The Oxidation of Silicon Carbide and Structure-Defects-Mobility Relations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* John Williams, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,556,399.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Silicon-based electronic devices are the main
component in virtually all microelectronic applications, e.g., computers and
computer chips that are everywhere in cars, appliances, etc. For high-power and
high-temperature uses, however, e.g., on-engine chips, power grid controls, etc.
Si-based electronics are either inefficient or not usable at all. Silicon
carbide is the most promising alternative, but, despite major advances in the
last decade, including breakthroughs by the present team, difficult technical
problems remain to be resolved. The proposed research addresses these issues
with a mix of experimental and theoretical techniques. At the heart of the
difficulties is the interface between silicon carbide and its native oxide,
namely silicon dioxide, and the impact of the oxidation process on the
underlying crystalline material. The expected results will be relevant to the
broader field of the oxidation of diverse materials. Educational outreach
projects will highlight to high school teachers and students the special needs
of high-power, high-temperature electronics and the impact of research advances
in important applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Silicon carbide is a promising alternative to Si for high-
temperature, high-power electronics because of its larger energy gap and heat-
conduction coefficient, but also because its native oxide is silicon dioxide.
The SiC/SiO2 interface, however, is more complex that the Si/SiO2 interface,
which is at the heart of Si-based electronics. The main problem is that
oxidation releases C atoms, some of which are stuck at the interface as defects.
Despite major advances in passivating defects at the SiC/SiO2 by N and H,
including breakthroughs by the present team, electron mobility remains lower
than desirable for applications. Recent evidence points to subtle changes in the
underlying SiC substrate. The proposed research will combine state-of-the-art
microscopy, electrical measurements, and theory to elucidate the oxidation
process at the atomic scale, identify the origins of undesirable effects and
defects, and identify new design specifications to improve carrier mobilities.
Extensive education outreach will make advances accessible to high schools and
the community. &lt;br/&gt;