* 0907266
* Optical and Magnetic Spectroscopy of Carbon-Based Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* James Kikkawa, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2012
* USD 315,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This individual investigator award supports a
research project that aims to deepen our understanding of carbon networks, a
class of emerging materials with potential to create revolutionary
multifunctional electronics. Carbon networks, including graphene and carbon
nanotubes, are predicted to have fascinating electronic, optical and magnetic
properties, where small changes in atomic arrangements can dramatically alter
their behavior. As progress in this field moves forward, researchers need
increasingly creative tools to study the electronic properties of carbon
nanomaterials. This work leverages methods pioneered by the PI to use magnetism
as a non-invasive probe of electronic properties. As an example, disorder in
planar networks of carbon is currently of great interest because such regions
appear to couple to light and may also be useful in 'steering' electrons around
in carbon devices. Dramatic changes in magnetic properties induced by disorder
(caused by oxygen bonding to the network) have already been observed and provide
an incisive tool for relating disorder to changes in the electronic landscape of
these materials. This research will involve graduate students in collaborative
work that will help them chart successful interdisciplinary careers. Support for
this project will enable an expansion of outreach activities at an NSF funded
Shared Equipment Facility (SEF), providing additional remote experiments and
recruitment of new users.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This individual investigator project will study
fundamental optical and magnetic properties of materials derived from hexagonal
networks of carbon, including graphene, graphene oxide, and carbon nanotubes.
Much of this research exploits important connections between orbital
diamagnetism and local optical and transport properties. Specifically, the
former provides a complementary probe of single-particle electronics that can
often clarify the latter. In graphene oxide, changes in orbital diamagnetism
will quantify aromatic network disruption that may hold a key to bandgap
engineering and optical emission in that material. In the case of carbon
nanotubes, a battery of highly purified samples will be used to understand how
diamagnetism in carbon nanotubes depends on symmetry and atomic structure. For
graphene, the possibility of magnetic anomalies that arise from quantum
criticality at the Dirac point will be investigated. In addition, a unique
collection of purified carbon nanotube samples will be used to provide a
definitive map of carbon nanotube dark exciton energies as a function of atomic
structure. This research will involve graduate students in collaborative work
that will help them chart successful careers. Support for this project will
enable an expansion of outreach activities at an NSF funded Shared Equipment
Facility (SEF), providing additional remote experiments and recruitment of new
users.