* 0907724
* Thermodynamics of Amorphous and Nanocrystalline Si and Si:H Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2014
* Frances Hellman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 11/30/2014
* USD 406,500.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT For over 40 years, it has been known that the low
temperature properties, such as thermal conductivity and specific heat, of
glasses and amorphous materials differ dramatically from their crystalline
counterparts and show a surprising universality for a wide range of materials.
The Tunneling Level Systems (TLS) model can successfully describe this behavior
below 1K but the physical mechanism that gives rise to the TLS has yet to be
identified. Amorphous silicon is a unique system in that silicon?s tetrahedral
bonding is predicted to preclude the presence of TLS yet the density of these
states is found to vary by orders of magnitude; from the densities typically
found in glasses to almost undetectable levels. Light soaking can increase the
density of TLS and the presence of TLS has been linked to the decrease in
efficiency of amorphous silicon solar cells over time. In this project, we will
use the unique ability to tune the density of TLS in amorphous silicon, both by
preparation conditions and light soaking, to systematically probe the origin of
the thermodynamic universality. In particular, we will measure the low
temperature specific heat and thermal conductivity and look for correlations to
changes in the local bonding in the amorphous matrix. Identifying the mechanism
that gives rise to the TLS has a direct impact on quantum information processing
where the TLS give rise to decoherence in qubits and also to the use of
amorphous silicon as a low cost photovoltaic material.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT This project will investigate the thermodynamic properties of
amorphous vapor deposited films. Amorphous materials exhibit a characteristic
set of thermodynamic behaviors that differ substantially from their crystalline
counterparts. This universal behavior includes: low temperature properties
(below ~1K) that are explained by the model of tunneling level states (TLS);
higher temperature properties which include excess heat capacity C (well above
what is calculated from sound velocity), a ?boson peak?, and a plateau in
thermal conductivity k. The focus will be on a-Si and a-Si:H films where changes
in growth conditions and H content are known to reduce the density of TLS that
give rise to these universal properties at low temperature. Dangling bond
passivation with H will be probed via FTIR and these results will be coupled
with EXAFS and XANES measurements to see how the local structural order of the
amorphous matrix correlates to any changes in the specific heat. Specific heat
measurements will be made with a MEMS based nanocalorimeter that is specifically
designed for thin films. Comparisons between as deposited, light soaked, and
annealed films will be made to further our understanding of the mechanisms that
give rise to the light induced degradation of the efficiency of a-Si
photovoltaic devices known as the Staebler-Wronski Effect. The project will
provide research training and education for two graduate students and an
estimated 5-6 undergraduates, including exposure to the national laboratories
through the PI's collaborations with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

