* 0907883
* Building a SE2004 Community of Software Engineering Educators
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2009,08/31/2009
* Ann Sobel, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,164.00

Software Engineering (34)

This project supports running a one-day workshop for leading software
engineering educators. This workshop, held at the 2009 ACM SIGCSE conference,
brings together academicians interested in software engineering education (SEE)
to share integration experiences, aid in solving integration issues, and provide
direction on how to use SE2004 effectively. The participants in the workshop
have been chosen for their interest in SEE as well as representing a wide
variety of institutions across the country. The venue of the 2009 ACM SIGCSE
conference was chosen due to the high potential that workshop participants will
already be attending SIGCSE. The goal of the workshop is to build this new
community of SE educators and carry it forward by supporting the continued
sharing of SE2004 experiences.

The intellectual merit of creating this SEE community rests on the promotion and
application of SE2004 in practice. While the construction of SE2004 was
performed by academicians who were most experienced in the area of SEE, few
partial implementations actually exist. Both the IEEE-CS and the ACM have
endorsed these curriculum recommendations and the existence of this community
provides direction and support in attempts to follow them.

The broader impacts of forming such a community are self-evident in that all the
institutions involved in this community learn from the experiences of others
when integrating SE2004 topics/courses in their curriculum. Specifically, this
community allows other institutions to benefit from successful integration as
well as to avoid known mistakes. To this end, the community continues long after
the workshop through web support for the purpose of disseminating institutions'
individual experiences.