* 0907561
* GOALI: Micromechanics Experiments and Modeling of Shape Memory Response in Ni-Ti Based Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Peter Anderson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys are materials with remarkable
properties that stem from a martensitic transformation. One of the fundamental
aspects of shape memory and pseudoelastic behavior that is not well understood
is how the matrix accommodates the large strain associated with the
transformation. Theoretically, accommodation may be achieved either by matrix
plasticity or by inducing other transformation variants. This three-year GOALI
proposal will develop new, fundamental insight into the pseudoelastic shape
memory behavior of several Ni-Ti based alloys, including a ternary Ni-Cu-Ti, in
collaboration with GM Research. The focus will be on alloys that undergo
different martensite transformations and exhibit disparate functional fatigue
properties. The approach is to meld innovative micron-scale mechanical tests and
advanced microstructural characterization with analytic and novel
microstructure-based modeling. Uniaxial deformation of focused-ion-beam-machined
microcrystals will be used to probe the static and cyclic response as a function
of matrix crystal orientation, and in order to directly measure the mechanical
response (stress, strain, work output) for individual variants. Post-mortem
characterization using transmission electron microscopy of the remnant
substructure will be coupled with analytic modeling of the possible
transformations. This approach will also yield directly the relative conditions
for martensite transformation versus matrix plasticity over a range of component
sizes. A new microstructure-based finite element approach will be developed that
explicitly tracks local, discrete phase transformations coupled with rate-
dependent crystal plasticity. For the first time, this will enable the treatment
of size effects and the generation of local plasticity associated with
transformations?a crucial step to understand and enhance pseudoelastic and shape
memory response. The proposed effort integrates advanced characterization at The
Ohio State University and the GM Research center with new experimental
techniques at two DOE labs ? high temperature nanoindentation/pillar testing at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory and in situ pillar testing at the National Center
for Electron Microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are materials with remarkable
properties that include the ability to bend and stretch to large extent under an
applied load, then spring back to their original shape when the load is removed.
In addition, SMAs can change shape when heated, after which they may either
maintain their newly acquired shape or return to their original shape after
cooling back down to room temperature. The automotive industry has recognized
the phenomenal potential of SMAs since they are remarkably simple actuation
devices compared with conventional motorized actuators. For instance, they could
be used as small, ?solid-state? motors that could be used to reconfigure a wide
range of components, greatly reducing the complexity of such systems. However,
commercially available SMA materials are not presently operated at their full
potential due to degradation in their shape-changing capabilities after
experiencing many temperature or stress cycles (?functional fatigue?). This
program is designed to develop a fundamental understanding of the materials
science aspects associated with this degradation process, as well as the
development of modeling capabilities to predict and improve the functional
fatigue performance for automotive, medical and other applications. A vigorous
program of interchange between OSU and GM will stimulate efficient transfer of
knowledge and will provide ample mechanisms for experiencing both academic and
industrial environments. In an exciting outreach effort, we will develop a high
school inquiry-based teaching module about shape memory alloys and their
applications. Several mechanisms insuring insertion of this module into local
high schools have also been defined.