* 0907470
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics and Microrheology of Biomimetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2013
* USD 315,826.00

Proposal:0907212/0907470 PI Name:Levine, Alexander/Dennin,
Michael&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Mechanics and
Microrheology of &lt;br/&gt;Biomimetic Materials &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California-Los Angeles/University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research in support of the collaborative efforts by
University of California Los Angeles and University of California Irvine is to
study the interaction between the nonequilibrium dynamics of molecular motors
and the elastic nonlinearities of filamentous actin (F-actin) and determine the
collective mechanical properties of the network, with coordinated
experimental/theoretical approaches to address each of these challenges. The
cytoskeleton of living cells is built primarily from cross-linked F-actin that,
in living cells, is generically tensed by molecular motors such as myosin. The
mechanical properties of this filament network have been shown to have a complex
dependence on the state of activity of these molecular motors, and depend on a
combination of the mechanics of the individual filaments, their network
structure, and the non-equilibrium steady-state of the network. Understanding in
detail how the mechanics of this network can be controlled by its internal
stress state (imposed by the endogenous molecular motors) will enable us to
better understand how cells control their mechanics and morphology, develop an
understanding how cells sense and exert forces on their surroundings. To date,
this field has focused on relating the equilibrium collective (non-)linear
response properties of a material to the molecular structure of its
constituents. With this award, F-actin networks associated with the air/water
interface of a Langmuir monolayer will be studied. These 2D networks will then
be tensed by molecular motors, and studied using both macro-and microrheology to
elucidate the underlying relationship of network architecture (observed through
fluorescent labeling of some of the filaments) and non-equilibrium stress state
to its collective mechanics. The (quasi-) two-dimensional nature of the network
allows for the direct observation of the local network structure, strain state,
and provides a way to rapid in situ chemical modification of the system.
Experiments on these biopolymer networks could provide insight about the active
control of the nonequilibrium steady-state of biopolymer networks that allow the
creation of a gel having reversibly tunable mechanical properties. Understanding
this prototypical cytoskeletal biopolymer network may allow the development of
novel biomimetic active materials with addressable mechanics. Teaching and
training of graduate and undergraduate students in experimental and theoretical
aspects of biophysics of soft materials, and developing a web site for the
interpretation of microrheology are other parts of this award. &lt;br/&gt;Human
cells are pervaded by a stiff biopolymer network that acts, much like the
skeleton of our bodies, to maintain cellular shape and to allow the cell to
exert forces on its environment through the action of molecular motors acting on
this cytoskeleton. Recent advances have made it possible to deconstruct and then
rebuild the principal structural elements of the cytoskeleton in the laboratory.
With this award, the mechanical properties of this biopolymer network are
measured, and will explore the relationship between network structure, molecular
motor activity and large scale mechanics in these protein filament networks. The
principal importance of this work is &lt;br/&gt;that these studies would provide
better understanding how cells use molecular motors to exert forces on their
environment and how the activity of these motors can modify the stiffness of the
network in a reversible way. This understanding will help to elucidate
fundamental design principles by which one may build artificial active materials
that use nanomachines (i.e. molecular motors) to actively control their
mechanical properties. Students, both graduate and undergraduate, will be
trained in research activities that are related to biopolymer networks and their
reversibly tunable mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;