* 0907285
* Speckle Evolution and Modes in Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2013
* USD 377,000.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** We explore and control our environment and stay
in touch with one another via waves such as light, sound, quantum mechanical
electron waves, and microwave radiation. Such waves flow freely through empty
space or ordered structures but are impeded by scattering in the pervasive
disorder of the world around us. Waves transmitted through disordered samples
fluctuate wildly in space due to the scattering. They produce a unique random
speckle pattern of intensity, which is a unique fingerprint of the random
sample. Nevertheless, there are common elements in the transport for any kind of
wave. Microwave and optical measurements demonstrate that each statistical
property of transport can be characterized by a single parameter and all such
parameters are simply related. The value of these parameters reflects the
changing spatial extent of the wave in a transition between freely diffusing and
localized waves trapped by disorder within the sample. This award supports a
project that will use microwave and optical measurements to obtain the speckle
pattern of radiation for different frequencies. The patterns will be analyzed to
find the underlying modes of oscillation of the wave, which are akin to the
fundamental vibrations of a violin string, as well as the allowed channels for
transmission through opaque samples. Approaching the study of wave propagation
from different perspectives will lead to a more complete understanding of wave
propagation with applications to telecommunications, nano-electronics, photonics
and imaging. In addition the microwave and optical measurements will be carried
out by high school students, undergraduates and graduate students, and by a
postdoctoral fellow. Thus, this project will provide a stimulating training
ground for young researchers.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** The nature of wave propagation in disordered samples
reflects the spatial and spectral variation of the modes within the medium. When
modes are spectrally isolated, the intensity inside the sample is exponentially
peaked. However, modes that overlap spectrally may extend throughout the sample.
But the wave in the interior of a random sample is hidden from view. This award
supports a project that will attempt to overcome this limitation by using
microwave and optical measurements of the transformation of transmitted speckle
patterns with frequency shift to reveal both the underlying electromagnetic
modes and the transmission channels of random systems in the transition from
localized to diffusive transport. Analysis of the speckle patterns will enable
the calculation of all transmission properties of the waves through the random
media. If successful, problems such as the dynamics of localized waves or the
statistics of speckle evolution, which have eluded a full theoretical analysis
because they involve occasionally overlapping modes, will be resolved. The
eigenchannels of the transmission matrix and associated transmission
coefficients will be found. This will give an alternate description of the
localization transition and will facilitate strategies that will allow for
strong transmission of properly phased light though opaque samples. This work
will strengthen the CUNY Photonic Center established to enhance the
technological base of the New York metropolitan area. Students from local high
schools and undergraduates, as well as graduate students and more senior
researchers will be actively engaged in the laboratory. Their careers will be
fostered by research, which combines microwave and optical techniques to probe a
diverse set of problems of fundamental and applied interest.