* 0907390
* Semi Fluorinated Polymers: Forming Energy Controlled Responsive Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Dvora Perahia, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2014
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT The proposal seeks to explore the potential of
semifluorinated polymers as responsive self healing interfaces. Responsive
interfaces are ubiquitous in biological manifolds. From self cleaning surfaces
and adhesion controlled interfaces to self healing layers, nature has inspired
intensive efforts to design synthetic responsive polymeric interfaces.
Fluorinated and protonated segments are highly immiscible and exhibit very
different surface interactions. As a result, inserting a short fluorinated
segment into a polymer chain is often sufficient to induce micro-phase
separation as well as long range order. Tailoring highly incompatible short
segments into one chain offers a means to obtain interfaces that can locally
rearrange and respond to changes in the environment while retaining the
integrity of the layers. The driving forces for reversible responses lie in the
tendency of any system to achieve thermodynamic equilibrium. To attain this
goal, the research will identify and quantify when feasible, the factors that
control the structure and interfacial characteristics of thin semifluorinated
films, study the dynamics of solvents at these complex interfaces and identify
the conditions under which they form interfaces that respond to stimuli. The
proposed study will focus on three groups of semifluorinated copolymers: a)
hydrocarbons and fluorinated aliphatic chains, b) random co-polymer bridged by
perfluoro cyclobutane, and c) diblock copolymers of polystyrene and
semifluorinated siloxane blocks. The structure and energies of the interfaces
will be studied by microscopy and scattering techniques accompanied by molecular
dynamic computer simulations. These measurements, in comparison with the bulk
structure and dynamics will provide a multiple length scale picture critical for
effective design of responsive interfaces. NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY The proposed
research will impact the development of new technologies and contribute to
science education. Developing responsive polymeric materials with controlled
optical and conducting characteristics together with selective adhesion is
essential for the design of next generation devices from nano-bio sensors and
implants to plastic electronics and self healing coatings. The results of the
proposed research will directly impact technological advancements. Ongoing
collaboration of the PI with scientists at 3M will serve as a jump start for
technological implementation and testing of the findings. Further applications
of transport will be explored via small business initiatives at Clemson. With
the realization of the significance of to science education at early stages, the
proposed research will incorporate projects designed for high school students
and derive ways to disseminate science highlights to the public. This will be
done together with two high school teachers in Greenville SC, David Dollbey from
Riverside High School and Dr. Wisenhunt from Greenville High School. On the
graduate level, the project will incorporate studies at Clemson University and
in national laboratories, using neutron and X-ray sources. The traditional
graduate education will transcend to training the next generation of material
researches to take advantage of the unique information extracted from neutron
and X-ray techniques to the design of new materials. This is particularly
significance in a state where the use of these techniques has been very limited.
The PI is the first scientist from her University to use some of these
resources. This initiative will foster new collaborations between Clemson
scientists and those in national laboratories. This educational initiative in of
further significance in view of recent developments in experimental neutron
techniques, funded partially by the National Science Foundation, that allow
probing the response of new materials.

