* 0907128
* Morphology and Mobility in Semi-Crystalline and Nanofilled Solid Polymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Janna Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2013
* USD 308,625.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project addresses solid polymer electrolytes [SPEs], a
class of materials with the potential for use in lithium ion batteries. The
specific aims are to produce nanocomposites with controllable particle
dispersion, determine the nanoscale morphology of coexisting crystalline phases,
and determine the relationship between polymer dynamics and increased
conductivity. Nanocomposites are relevant to SPEs because they have been
demonstrated to increase conductivity into the practical range. However, the
mechanism by which nanoparticles increase conductivity in SPEs is not well
understood. One of the problems is aggregation of the particles, which is
significant using standard preparation methods and leads to irreproducible
samples and results. The project will apply a technique recently reported for
controlling the length scale of phase separation in a polymer blend. This
technique encapsulates the polymers in a nano-emulsion, followed by evaporation
of the polymer phase solvent, leaving a polymer nano-sphere with controllable
size suspended in a non-solvent by use of a surfactant. Two such preparations
are mixed to form the blend. The current project will replace one of the
polymers with a nanoparticle, but otherwise follow the same procedure.
Production of nanocomposites with well controlled spacing will allow for study
of crystallization, polymer mobility and conductivity under reproducible
conditions, thus providing a mechanism for enhanced conductivity, as well as
fundamental understanding of the behavior of confined polymer/salt complexes.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project seeks to improve the properties of a
material with potential use as a flexible and lightweight battery in portable
and other devices. The required material is a solid plastic, and its use in
batteries improves with the addition of nanometer-sized particles. The reason
the particles improve properties is not well understood, because dispersion of
the particles in the plastic matrix is difficult. The project will use a new
method for dispersion of the particles, producing well characterized materials
that can be used to gain the needed understanding. The materials will be studied
using neutron scattering, a technique measuring both existence and movement of
structures over nanometer length scales. The US has recently invested
significantly in neutron scattering facilities: for example the Spallation
Neutron Source at Oakridge National Laboratories. These expanded facilities
require additional investigators to use the instruments. Thus outreach
activities targeted towards scientific areas where neutron scattering is under-
utilized is a part of this project.