* 0907967
* A new census of globular cluster pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Mnatsakanov, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 267,983.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Duncan Lorimer and collaborators
will undertake a detailed statistical study of the neutron star population in
the globular clusters of the Milky Way Galaxy. The dense stellar environments
provided by globular clusters act as astrophysical laboratories to probe stellar
evolution and the dynamics of binary and multiple star systems. Neutron stars in
globular clusters are long-lived tracers of the integrated star formation
history in clusters and have a wealth of physical applications. Radio pulsars -
rapidly spinning highly magnetized neutron stars - provide a very powerful
window into this population. Timing observations of radio pulsars, for example,
have demonstrated for the first time the existence of ionized gas in globular
clusters and provide recent evidence for the existence of high-mass neutron
stars which challenge many equations of state for super-dense matter. Future
discoveries expected from globular clusters include binary pairs of millisecond
pulsars and pulsar-black hole binary systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently,
140 radio pulsars are known in 26 globular clusters. Around half of these
discoveries have been made in the past five years by groups using the NSF-funded
Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia. Despite these significant advances, the
last major census of the radio pulsar population in globular clusters was
carried out over 15 years ago when less than two-dozen objects were known in a
handful of clusters. At that time, it was not clear whether the progenitor
population of millisecond pulsars (the low-mass X-ray binaries) was sufficient
to account for the estimated number of 10,000 pulsars suspected to exist in the
Galactic globular cluster population. Dr. Lorimer plans a comprehensive new
analysis of the population to take account of selection effects due to binary
motion, interstellar propagation and radio frequency interference. His team has
a broad range of experience in pulsar observations and population modeling
necessary to develop detailed Monte Carlo models of the underlying population of
radio pulsars in globular clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
characterizing the overall size and birth-rate of radio pulsars in globular
clusters, they will apply both frequentist and Bayesian statistical analyses to
determine the underlying distributions of spin period, luminosity and (for
binary systems) orbital parameters. They will also address the smaller subset of
younger pulsars known to exist in globular clusters, and those binaries which
will merge on sub-Hubble timescales due to the emission of gravitational
radiation. These results are expected to provide vital input to complementary
studies of the neutron star population which are based on models of stellar
evolution. They will also help determine the likely size of the population of
compact object binaries that contribute as gravitational-wave
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will impact upon a number of
other areas which will benefit the state of West Virginia, teaching astronomy
courses and astronomical research in general. Specifically, the PI and his team
will (a) develop a freely-available laboratory component for undergraduate
astronomy students; (b) develop an inquiry-based learning tool for high-school
science teachers and their students; (c) raise the international research
profile of West Virginia University and help to increase the number of students
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics disciplines; (d) enhance the
science case for future national and international radio facilities; (e) make
available an open-source library of tools for Monte Carlo simulations of
astronomical populations.