* 0907356
* Complex Perovskites: Chemical & Structural Complexity as a Route to New Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Patrick Woodward, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2012
* USD 382,864.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Chemical substitutions that increase the compositional
complexity of the perovskite structure are known to give rise to properties that
cannot be realized in simpler materials. However, as the compositional
complexity increases detailed knowledge of the bonding interactions that drive
atoms to assemble into homogeneous single phase materials is needed to
rationally approach the synthesis and design of such materials. The proposed
research involves synthesis of new perovskites and the use of advanced
structural characterization tools, and property measurements to study these
materials. The specific research objectives involve: (1) Synthesis and
characterization of new perovskites with useful dielectric, magnetic and ionic
conduction properties by simultaneously ordering A- and B-site cation arrays.
(2) Studies of perovskites where octahedral tilting disrupts the corner sharing
connectivity of the octahedral framework. (3) Studies of phase transitions in
oxyfluoride double perovskite, coupled with use of cation bonding preferences to
control the orientational ordering of anionic oxyfluoride polyhedra. Variable
temperature Raman spectroscopy studies will be used to follow changes in local
and long range structure that occur in response to changes in temperature or
composition. New materials with attractive dielectric, magnetic, nonlinear
optical and electrical properties are anticipated. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
Perovskite materials play a central role in many important technologies
including: dielectric materials for electronic applications, ion conductors for
batteries and fuel cells, superconductivity and magnetoresistance to name a few.
This grant will advance our understanding of how to control atomic scale
ordering of elements to produce new materials for these important technologies.
The research involves collaborations with internationally renowned electron
microscopy centers in Australia and Spain. To disseminate this knowledge Web
based resources will be developed that will positively impact teaching and
research across several disciplines. An upper level laboratory experiment that
teaches the principles of X-ray powder diffraction and crystal packing forces
will be created, implemented and disseminated. Finally the project will provide
important opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to learn skills
that are needed for modern materials chemistry research. Students will create
important contacts through national and international collaborations supported
by this project.



