* 0907338
* Theory and Simulation of Correlations in Polymer Liquids: Beyond the Self-Consistent Field Approximation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Morse, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 283,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education with the aim of advancing
beyond the self-consistent field theory that forms the basis for current
understanding of polymer mixtures and block copolymer melts, and is also the
basis of the random phase approximation theory of composition fluctuations.
Self-consistent field theory is accurate in the limit of very long polymers, but
neglects correlation effects that are important in systems of shorter, more
strongly interacting chains, and the effects of strong composition fluctuations
near the critical point of a polymer mixture or the order-disorder transition of
a symmetric diblock copolymer melt. The PI and others have developed a
renormalized one-loop theory of corrections to the self-consistent field theory
that improves on earlier coarse-grained theories. The PI will extend this
approach to calculate corrections to the self-consistent field theory free
energy of ordered phases of diblock copolymer melts, and to construct a
systematic theory of the fluctuation induced first order transition in these
systems. The crossover from classical to Ising critical behavior in polymer
blends will also be studied, by asymptotic matching of the renormalized one-loop
theory and the universal Ising crossover function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
method of independently determining the adjustable parameters in self-consistent
field theory in simple simulation models will be developed and tested. An
extensive set of computer simulations of coarse grained models will measure
composition fluctuations in polymer blends and diblock copolymers, for several
different models, using the method discussed above to establish values for
phenomenological parameters. The use of several models will allow us to test the
universality of the results as well as the accuracy of the one-loop theory.
Simulations of models with more chemically realistic bonded interactions will
test whether the one-loop theory can be used to extrapolate the results of
simulations of short chains to predict properties for longer polymers. As a
contribution to the computational infrastructure of the field, the PI will
develop, maintain, and write extensive documentation for two programs that are
likely to be useful to others: a self-consistent-field code used for calculating
phase diagrams of block copolymers and polymer mixtures and a general molecular
simulation for Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The research supported
under this award involves combining theoretical development with computational
simulations to study the behavior of mixtures of polymers, large chain-like
molecules, and their mixtures. The research focuses on particular classes of
polymers which show a diverse range of structures as a bulk material and are of
both fundamental interest and are used in industry. The PI will focus on
improving current models for polymer mixtures to enable them to handle large
fluctuations in composition such as when the system is near a transition point
between different phases. Extensive simulations, and new methods of comparing
data from different models, will provide a definitive body of data against which
the theory can be tested. The goal will be to elevate the theory of fluctuation
effects in these liquids to a mature field where theory has been validated using
numerical simulations. As a contribution to the computational infrastructure of
the field, the PI will develop, maintain, and write extensive documentation for
two programs that will contribute to the computational tools widely used in the
polymer research community and materials research community more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;