* 0907014
* Efficient estimation in semiparametric regression with possibly incomplete data
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ursula Mueller-Harknett, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2012
* USD 113,928.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In the context of missing data and semiparametric regression models (i.e.,
models with both finite dimensional and infinite-dimensional parameters), little
work has been done on efficient estimation and still less on estimating general
functionals. Most studies limit their attention to estimating the mean response.
In contrast, this research project studies estimation of arbitrary expectations
involving response and covariables. The investigator will also address
estimating densities and distribution functions. The focus is on efficient
estimation in semiparametric regression with responses missing at random. The
analysis of semiparametric models is an important topic with practical, real-
world implications: in applications there is typically some information about
the structure of the data available, but not sufficient to specify an
appropriate parametric model; semiparametric methods make optimal use of that
information. However, even simple (widespread) semiparametric models, such as
the partly linear model, are not yet fully understood. This research will
further our understanding. Most of the anticipated results will also apply to
cases where data are complete. The first research strand has the goal of
deriving efficient estimators of expectations of covariates and the response
variable in semiparametric regression. A second strand focuses on estimation of
the response density in the nonlinear regression model. The investigator intends
to show that, for certain classes of well-behaved regression functions, the
response density can be estimated with a root n rate and, moreover, efficiently.
It is not anticipated that it will always be possible to estimate the density
with the parametric rate root n: limitations and possible alternative approaches
will be investigated. The key methodological innovation in these two strands is
the combination of full imputation, efficiency and empirical likelihood ideas.
The third strand considers estimation of the error distribution function in
nonparametric regression with missing responses.

Many scientific investigations depend upon statistical analysis to draw
conclusions. In many cases, however, incomplete data present a challenge to the
accuracy of those conclusions. This applies in many fields, including
epidemiology, pharmaceutical research and social/behavioral investigations
involving the analysis of survey data. The results of this research project will
enable data sets with missing values to be treated more efficiently and improve
the accuracy of statistical conclusions about the data. Despite significant
recent progress, inefficient methods remain in frequent use. Examples include
listwise deletion of cases, and imputation methods which do not use all the
available information about the data. Deleting or disregarding unique or scarce
data is clearly not a desirable option. Efficient analysis will make use of all
available information about the structure of the data, leading to unbiased,
least-dispersed estimation methods: in other words, greater accuracy.