* 0907827
* MOD: Workshop on Centers, Universities, and the Scientific Innovation Ecology
* SBE,SBE
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Sheila Slaughter, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 02/28/2011
* USD 99,465.00

This project supports a two day workshop to advance the scientific study of
federally funded centers and institutes as key elements in the innovation
ecosystem. The workshop brings together engineers and natural, physical, and
social scientists to address central questions relating to the role of federally
funded centers and institutes in science and innovation policy. This workshop
differs from previous workshops in two ways. First, it builds on the knowledge
base derived from studies of other organizations to develop social scientific
models, tools, and data with which to study new organizational entities that can
contribute to innovation, with particular attention to federally funded centers
and institutes. Second, it directly engages the focal units of analysis - the
centers and institutes and some other related organizational entities (such as
research parks and start-up firms) in developing appropriate models, data, and
tools for analysis. Intellectual merit: This two-day workshop advances the
scientific study of federally funded centers and institutes as key elements in
the innovation ecosystem. Broader impact: The workshop provides an improved
framework for deepening the understanding of university-industry;government
partnerships so as better meet the goals of the American Competitiveness
Initiative (ACI) of 2006 and the America Competes Act (ACA) of 2007. The
workshop provides an opportunity to develop a better understanding of society's
ability to generate and harness the latest in scientific and technological
developments. This set of discussions should enhance US ability to compete in
global markets by optimizing its knowledge-based resources, particularly in
science and technology.