* 0907428
* BMAT: Shape Driven Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 06/30/2013
* USD 420,001.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907428 PI: Fraden, Seth ORG: Brandeis
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Shape Driven Self
Assembly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The objectives of this
proposal are to elucidate general principles for how molecular architecture
(size, shape), molecular properties (flexibility, charge), molecular
interactions (attraction, repulsion), and suspension composition influence phase
behavior. Molecular shape is a fundamental property governing phase behavior.
The concept of excluded volume describes a region of space that one molecule
prevents another from entering. Reducing excluded volume gives molecules more
freedom of motion and thus increases entropy. Consequently molecules are
influenced to undergo phase transitions that have molecular configurations which
minimize excluded volume. In order to reveal the role of entropy in phase
transitions the PI will create shape amphiphiles or entropic surfactants,
molecules composed of two parts that separately have a tendency to phase
separate, but which are bound together forming a block co-polymer. Two
experimental systems will be created. The first colloid will be formed of blocks
of the filamentous virus fd, a long, thin, semi-flexible polymer that forms
liquid crystals and DNA, a polymer too flexible to form liquid crystals. The
second system will be PRINT particles ? nanosized colloids produced by a high
throughput molding technology developed by collaborator, Joseph. DeSimone. The
phase behavior of these systems will be studied, as well as the phase behavior
of mixtures of the shape amphiphiles with the individual components. Entropy is
the dominant feature controlling the phase behavior of these charge stabilized
colloids. Because of the size, shape, and simplicity of the interparticle
interactions this system can be theoretically modeled and simulated with high
precision. To study the phase behavior of shape amphiphiles the PI will employ a
microfluidic device, the PhaseChip, which can precisely meter, mix, and store
sub-nanoliter amounts of sample, solvent, and other reagents. Tens of thousands
of individual mixtures can be stored on a chip in individual wells. Each well is
in contact with a reservoir through a membrane through which only water can
pass, but not salt, polymer, or amphiphile. This enables the concentration of
all solutes in a sample to be reversibly, rapidly, and precisely
varied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This project has important
scientific implications in terms of what will be learned about the factors that
drive self assembly and determine the ultimate architecture of the assemblies.
The proposal describes an already highly developed program for interdisciplinary
training of Brandeis life science and biophysics graduate students, including an
IGERT in Quantitative Biology. Undergraduate participation in research is
actively encouraged, and both graduate and undergraduate students learn to
incorporate microfluidics technology into life sciences research. The PI is
involved in K-12 outreach through the Brandeis POSSE program designed to bring
inner city students to Brandeis and to encourage and support their success in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;