* 0907126
* Electron-Phonon Interaction and Disorder: Nanoscale Interference in Transport Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Mitin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education focused
on electron-phonon kinetics and electric, thermal, and thermomagnetic transport
in low-dimensional conductors, nanomaterials, and strongly correlated materials
such as doped Mott dielectrics, e.g. novel superconductors and conducting
polymers. Vibrating boundaries, defects, or dopants generates another channel of
electron-phonon interaction, which interferes with the usual electron-phonon and
elastic electron scattering. The interference of scattering mechanisms
drastically modifies kinetic and transport phenomena. The interference effects
can be strong and easily observable. While effects of interference have been
known for some time, the research in this field is limited.

The PIs will investigate electron-phonon kinetics and electric, thermal, and
themomagnetic transport in low-dimensional structures, such as heterostructures,
ultrathin films, multi-walled carbon nanotubes, nanowires, metallic clusters,
and quantum dot arrays. In low dimensions, strong enhancement of interference
effects is expected due to a smaller electron momentum transfer and due to
intrinsic peculiarities in the momentum transfer related to the collective
excitations. The PIs will investigate electron-phonon interference effects in
specific materials, such as graphene and various doped Mott dielectrics.

The research is aimed to contribute to the development of critical insights into
the quantum interference of scattering mechanisms in kinetics and transport and
will contribute to significantly improved theoretical techniques, related to the
quantum transport equation and Feynman-Keldysh diagrammatic techniques. This
research program contributes to developing effective ways to manage electron-
phonon transport and energy transfer which will, in turn, strongly impact the
development of advanced nanodevices and materials. A number of puzzling
experimental results will find their explanation in the framework developed by
this program.

The project will have broader impacts through its contributions to education,
and by developing theoretical models that can have impact in materials science
and engineering. Nanoscale thermal management will substantially affect
practically all branches of the electronics industry. This research will have
immediate impact on the development of nanodevices in which energy transfer is
?tailored? to specific applications, e.g. ultrasensitive nanocalorimeters and
single quanta nanodetectors operating at low and moderate temperatures. With
graduate and undergraduate students, the PIs will develop a set of specialized
experiments for elementary and high school students. These demonstrations are
directly related to modern electronics and nanotechnology. The PIs will
incorporate information technologies via Java Applets; they are extending these
applets to incorporate the nanoworld energy transfer. They are also developing
an interactive exhibit for the Physical World Science Studio of the Buffalo
Museum of Science that will help to promote nanotechnology to a broader public.
Lectures and demonstrations will be developed at a level appropriate for the
general public.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research aimed to
elucidate the microscopic mechanisms that control how heat and electricity flow
through materials structures and devices that are thousands of times smaller
than the diameter of a human hair. The PIs will develop a theory on the level of
electrons and the atomic-scale surfaces and defects, and vibrations that they
encounter as they flow through these tiny structures.

This project will contribute to the intellectual foundations for managing heat
dissipation at small length scales anticipated for future circuit feature sizes
of semiconductor devices. The heat generated by high speed electronic devices
looms as one of the barriers to the continuing trend toward ever smaller
electronic devices known as Moore?s law. This research will also contribute to
the intellectual foundations of detector technologies on small length scales.

With graduate and undergraduate students, the PIs will develop a set of
specialized experiments for elementary and high school students. These
demonstrations are directly related to modern electronics and nanotechnology.
The PIs will incorporate information technologies via Java Applets; they are
extending these applets to incorporate the nanoworld energy transfer. They are
also developing an interactive exhibit for the Physical World Science Studio of
the Buffalo Museum of Science that will help to promote nanotechnology to a
broader public. Lectures and demonstrations will be developed at a level
appropriate for the general public.