* 0907068
* Rheo-X-Ray Investigation of Structure Development in Polymer Melts Under Uniaxial Extensional Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wesley Burghardt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2013
* USD 440,000.00

ARRA STATEMENT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability
of flow fields to strongly perturb molecular-scale structure in polymers has
profound scientific and technological consequences. The nonlinear rheology of
polymers is directly attributed to stretching and alignment of polymer molecules
under flow. Materials with more complex internal structure?polymer blends,
ordered block copolymers, polymer nanocomposites, for example?exhibit even more
dramatic modes of flow-structure coupling. Further, polymer technology
frequently hinges on the ability of flow fields during processing to impart
molecular or microstructural anisotropy in the resulting product. X-ray
scattering is a powerful tool for in situ structural studies during both flow
and processing. To date, however, x-ray scattering methods have never been
applied to well defined, homogenous extensional flows. Since extensional flows
involve exponential stretching of fluid elements, they are dramatically more
effective than shear flows at inducing molecular or microstructural alignment.
These same characteristics make it notoriously difficult to produce homogenous
extensional flows for laboratory testing. In this project, researchers at
Northwestern will develop unique instrumentation that will allow, for the first
time, in situ synchrotron-based studies of polymer structure development in
well-defined uniaxial extensional flow. This experiment will be built around a
proven, commercially available test fixture designed to facilitate extensional
rheometry using conventional rotational rheometers. For synchrotron studies,
this fixture will be integrated into a testing platform with computerized motion
control and a custom-fabricated convection oven designed to facilitate x-ray
access for both small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering. This instrumentation
will open new vistas of scientific inquiry in virtually every class of polymer
material that has been the object of flow-induced structure studies. Within this
project, three specific application areas will be explored: (i) alignment of
ordered block copolymers; (ii) particle orientation in polymer nanocomposites;
and (iii) flow-induced crystallization of semi-crystalline
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
of the vast plastic materials industry hinges upon changes in molecular
structure induced in processes such as fiber spinning, extrusion and molding,
that are essential to achieve the desired performance in the end product. Using
powerful x-rays at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory),
researchers from Northwestern University will develop a unique new instrument
that will enable these molecular-scale structural changes to be studied in
?extensional flow?? flows in which molten plastics are stretched much in the
same way that taffy is pulled. Extremely bright x-ray beams will facilitate
?real-time? measurements of nanometer-scale structural dynamics in a wide range
of high-performance materials. Further, the instrumentation developed under this
proposal will be made available to researchers across the country, thus making a
permanent contribution to US scientific infrastructure.