* 0907457
* Moment Localization and Delocalization in f-Electron Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Meigan Aronson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental properties of correlated electron
materials such as their ability to conduct heat or electricity, whether they
sustain static and localized moments or charges, and indeed how these complex
systems approach their ultimate ground states reflect the degree to which their
electrons are localized or delocalized. In f-electron systems, most notably
heavy electron compounds, electrons initially localized on f-orbitals can be
delocalized, expanding the Fermi surface. Of special interest is when this
localization - delocalization occurs at a T=0 quantum critical point, which
separates a magnetically ordered state where the electron is localized and does
not participate in the Fermi surface, from a paramagnetic and strongly
interacting metal where the f-electron is fully incorporated in the Fermi
surface. This project will track this moment deconfinement transition away from
the quantum critical point to higher temperatures and investigate its
relationship to Kondo coherence, where f-electrons are thought to delocalize by
the hybridization of individually Kondo compensated moments. The project will
pursue this program in the YbTX compounds, where with an appropriate choice of
transition metal T and main group element X we can span all regimes of the heavy
electron phase diagram. It has also been suggested that strong quantum
fluctuations associated with geometrical frustration may separate magnetic
localization from the quantum critical point. This possibility will be
investigated in the R2T2X (R=Ce,Yb) Shastry-Sutherland compounds. This program
will combine the synthesis of new f-electron compounds, and their investigation
using neutron scattering experiments as well as lab-based magnetometry, specific
heat, and electrical transport measurements. The project makes extensive use of
national research facilities, and the students trained will be well prepared to
become effective future users. By learning a variety of different synthesis and
characterization techniques, participating students will develop a valuable and
very portable set of skills, and through the excitement of performing the first
measurements on materials of their own invention, will gain the motivation to
sustain them in their future careers as materials-inspired scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Just as changing
temperature can cause water to fundamentally change its properties from solid to
liquid to vapor; other properties of materials can similarly be transformed by
varying temperature, pressure, or magnetic field: metal to insulator, magnet to
non-magnet, conductor to superconductor. The ability to control these phase
transitions is central to implementing new generations of sensors, where for
instance small magnetic fields transform a conductor into a nonconductor, or a
small change in temperature can cause a magnet to become nonmagnetic. These
effects become strongest when the phase transitions occur at the lowest
temperatures, and it is the purpose of this research to study the most extreme
of magnetic phase transitions, where magnetism is stable only at zero
temperature. The goal of this research is to understand the underlying factors
which control the stability of magnetism, information which will be used to
design new generations of magnetic materials with improved functionality for
applications as diverse as magnetic data storage and energy control. This
project will develop new families of materials to enable this research, where
the strength of the magnetism and its onset temperature will be varied
compositionally. We will document the corresponding changes in the material's
ability to conduct heat and electricity, and the strength of the magnetism
induced in the material as we drive it ever closer to the composition where
magnetism is no longer possible. Very near this magnetic instability itself, the
magnetism exists only ephemerally, and over only short length scales. Neutrons
can be used to microscopically probe these magnetic fluctuations. Scattering
experiments will be performed at national neutron scattering facilities such as
those at NIST in Gaithersburg MD and the Spallation Neutron Source in Oak Ridge
TN. It is increasingly recognized that the dearth of scientists trained in
synthesis techniques is placing US competitiveness in materials inspired
research at risk. The project focus is to synthesize new materials with very
specific functionality. Participating undergraduate and graduate students will
learn a variety of different synthesis techniques, as well as the arsenal of
experimental techniques required to certify the high quality of the samples.
Students participating in this program develop a highly sought and very portable
skill set, which has already proven of great value to themselves and their
future employers.