* 0907747
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Colonization and Social Interaction in Early Medieval Southeastern Austria
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2010
* K. Fazioli, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,960.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Tina L. Thurston, K. Patrick Fazioli will examine
the material correlates of daily social and economic interaction in the early
medieval eastern Alpine region, an area that today encompasses parts of eastern
Austria, western Hungary, and northern Slovenia. Beginning in the 8th century
AD, historical sources indicate that Germanic-speaking groups primarily from
Bavaria migrated southeastward into Alpine river valleys under the auspices of
an expanding Frankish empire. These Germanic immigrants settled amidst a local
Slavic-speaking population. Although the two distinct groups would form the
basis of an emergent medieval society, early written records provide almost no
indication of their initial socioeconomic relationship. Did this encounter of
Germanic and Slavic communities result in extensive economic integration and
rapid cultural creolization, or did each group retain a degree of economic and
ethnic autonomy?

This project will shed light on these important processes by analyzing two
critical datasets. First, pedestrian and soil chemical surveys will be employed
to help reconstruct cultural landscapes along the middle Mur river valley in the
Austrian province of Steiermark. By documenting the locations of early medieval
farmsteads, field boundaries, pathways, and trash middens, these surveys will
reveal how early medieval communities organized and conceptualized the space in
which they lived. Secondly, compositional analyses of early medieval pottery
collected from the surveys as well as from previous excavations in the region
will help to establish local patterns of craft production and distribution. The
conclusions drawn from these two datasets will provide greater clarity on the
nature and scope of Germanic/Slavic interaction during this critical but
enigmatic period of east-central European history.

The intellectual merits of this research project are numerous. It addresses
issues of colonization, state integration, and "culture contact" in a decidedly
pre-modern and non-capitalist context. It emphasizes the importance of mundane,
everyday activities in the construction and maintenance of individual and group
identity. These daily practices are rarely mentioned in historical sources, but
can often be recovered through archaeological analysis. This project seeks to
synthesize the historical and material records in a way that can capitalize on
the strengths yet acknowledge the limitations of each approach.

This project will have broad positive impacts in both the U.S. and Europe. It
will facilitate collaborative efforts between American and Austrian
archaeologists and students, providing further opportunities for archaeological
exploration in this fascinating but understudied region. The creation of a
detailed website and implementation of a public outreach program in Buffalo, NY
and Wildon, Austria will enhance the visibility of the project. Presentations at
professional conferences and publication in scholarly journals will surely
contribute to the scientific literature on a number of relevant issues. Finally,
this project will play a major role in the doctoral training of the co-PI,
specifically in the techniques of soil chemical characterization and ceramic
mineralogy, as well as that of other graduate and undergraduate students who
will aid in the laboratory and fieldwork.