* 0907812
* Onsager's conjecture and the energy of singular flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Roman Shvydkoy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 141,312.00

A scale-by-scale description of the energy transfer is required for
understanding many physical and mathematical aspects of fluid motion. These
include derivation of turbulence laws from the governing Navier-Stokes system of
equations, or Euler equations in the inertial subrange of scales; regularity
problems and problems of long time asymptotic behavior. The conventional
analytical methods traditionally used to approach the problems of turbulence are
limited to subcritical regularity regimes not consistent with empirical
observations. The long standing Onsager's conjecture states however that in
spite of these limitations the Euler equations allow for particular singular
solutions sharing common scaling properties of a homogeneous isotropic
turbulence. The principal goal of the project is award developing analytical
tools to study such solutions. We will obtain new frequency local estimates on
the energy flux through dyadic scales; examine the Onsager-critical smoothness
of solutions in the range of Besov spaces; use local energy estimates to study
solutions in a variety of intermittency regimes including the classical
Kolmogorov and fully intermittent regimes. We will revisit some of the
fundamental regularity criteria for Leray-Hopf solutions of the Navier-Stokes
equations to improve the known sufficient conditions for the energy
equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulence is an intricate physical
process of complex motion of fluid elements constantly stirred by a mixing
force. Turbulent wakes behind cars, planes, ships, etc. are a common everyday
phenomenon. A better understanding of this phenomenon leads to finding more
effective designs and energy saving solutions. Due to its complexity a turbulent
motion of fluid is usually studied by statistical methods involving averaging of
observed quantities over a large number of experimental data or long periods of
time.&lt;br/&gt;This research is directed to finding particular individual
realizations of turbulent motion directly from the governing equations. The
project will help to gain a new prospective on the so-called Onsager's
conjecture, stated in 1949, which questions the ability of the classical
equations of fluid motion to describe turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;