* 0907619
* Biomaterials Interfaces for Photoactive Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* David Cliffel, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Vanderbilt University is to study PhotoSystem I (PSI) for potential applications
in solar energy conversion. PSI is the primary macromolecular system in plants
and photosynthetic bacteria for the conversion of sun light to useable energy.
The main goal of the project will be to understand the fundamental mechanisms of
electron transfer to and from immobilized PSI monolayer and multilayer films
during the photosynthesis. With this award, methods will be developed to study
higher order oriented multilayer structures of PSI with that mimic larger scale
biological structures. The deposited films of PSI will be linked through
molecular wires for better connectivity and electron conductivity. The following
studies will be carried out with this project: 1) attachment of PSI to gold
electrodes that are used as molecular wires; 2) optimization of the
photoconversion efficiency for PSI monolayers by electrochemical catalysis; 3)
functional imaging of PSI by scanning electrochemical microscopy; and 4) study
the mechanism of functional multilayer structures that mimic the larger scale
biological structures like the thylakoid membranes. The proposed studies are
expected to integrate functional biological systems with molecular and mesoscale
materials through ?bottom-up? processing, while maintaining the function of the
PSI system. The biomimetic approaches proposed could result in converting
sunlight to be a potential useable source of energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is expected to enhance the fundamental understanding of the
interface between biological structures and well-controlled, model organic
materials. New covalent and biomimetic attachments, along with 2-D crystals and
strategies will be investigated and their effects measured through
electrochemical procedures. This multidisciplinary research team consists of
chemical and biomolecular engineers and chemists from Vanderbilt University and
Tennessee State University, the largest HBCU in Tennessee. In addition, a large
number of graduate and undergraduate students from these institutions will be
trained by the research team. Participation of high school teachers and students
in the research activities through different programs such as NSF-funded
Research Experiences for Teachers and Vanderbilt Summer Academy is another
aspect of the project.&lt;br/&gt;