* 0907172
* Thermodynamic Measurements of Collective Phases of Two-Dimensionally Confined Charge Carriers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gabor Csathy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 296,861.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

***** NON- TECHNICAL ABSTRACT **** The two-dimensional electron gas confined to
semiconductor interfaces has been one of the important model systems of
contemporary condensed matter physics. When the level of disorder in the host
semiconductor is low enough and the randomizing effect of temperature is
reduced, the electrons are free to order in a rich variety of interesting
phases. Historically, with the continuous improvement of sample quality new
electronic phases have been discovered. Some phases are well understood while
others are currently under intense investigation. Instead of the more common
studies utilizing the dc transport of electrons through the system, this project
will use thermodynamic measurements to probe previously inaccessible properties
of known electronic phases and yield insight into the nature of the newly
discovered, exotic phases. The experiments will employ state-of-the art
cryogenic and electronic instruments and modern semiconductor processing. Aside
from advancing our fundamental understanding of these intriguing systems, this
research could have an impact of future technologies. This project will educate
a doctoral student in modern condensed matter physics and training in advanced
technologies. Work in such a field is proven to be an excellent preparation for
a large spectrum of scientific careers from academia to industry. Undergraduate
students will be introduced to concepts and techniques of condensed matter
physics.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Much of our knowledge of low dimensional fermionic
systems comes from studies on two-dimensional electron gases. When subjected to
low temperatures and an external magnetic field, these systems exhibit a large
number of exotic electronic phases. Some of the phases such as the integer and
fractional quantum Hall states and the Wigner solid are well understood. Others
such as states with even denominator filling factors are under intense
investigation. This project will utilize thermodynamic measurements to explore
and elucidate the unusual properties of confined correlated electrons. A new
technique will be used which employs the decoupling of the electrons from the
phonons in the system at dilution refrigerator temperatures. These measurements
will yield new insight into known but not fully understood phases as well as
provide information on the most recently discovered states. This project will
provide excellent preparation for graduate students for their future academic or
industrial careers through the study of modern condensed matter physics and
training in modern semiconductor processing, in conducting low level
measurements, and in the use of cryogenic equipment. Undergraduate students will
be introduced to concepts and techniques of condensed matter physics.