* 0907435
* Towards Scaffolds for Rational Self Assembly: Investigating Nucleation Dependent Growth and Self-Healing of Co-Assembled Amyloid Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* David Lynn, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 12/31/2013
* USD 449,991.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907435 PI: Berland, Keith ORG: Emory University

Title: Towards Scaffolds for Rational Self Assembly: Investigating Nucleation
Dependent Growth and Self-Healing of Co-Assembled Amyloid Nanotubes

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The PIs have observed that prior to ordered assembly, the
amyloid forming peptides aggregate into several-micron sized aggregates with
morphology that is distinct from the ordered fibers or nanotubes, and that the
growth appears to originate from structural reorganization of peptide
conformations and interactions within these aggregate structures. These
preliminary data represent the first direct observation of amyloid nucleation,
and working towards a deeper understanding of the physical mechanisms governing
nucleation, growth, and self-healing properties of these nanomaterials is
essential for advancing their potential use as functional, rationally-designed
platforms for molecular self-assembly. A model system has been developed in
which fluorescent peptides are incorporated into the highly ordered assemblies,
and these constructs provide a unique opportunity to deepen understanding of the
fundamental pathways for assembly. By combining this well defined and
structurally characterized model system with state-of-the-art fluorescence
microscopy, the research plan has the capability to dramatically advance
understanding of these materials. Specifically, it is proposed to apply
fluorescence imaging, lifetime imaging, fluctuation spectroscopy, and
photobleaching measurements to define amyloid nucleation, elongation and growth
as well as the self-healing properties of amyloid nanotubes. The focus will be:
Aim 1: Amyloid nucleation. Characterize aggregate structures, structural
changes, and associated kinetics involved in amyloid nucleation. These
measurements will exploit the experimental model system which has uncovered the
first direct observation of amyloid nucleation. Aim 2: Nanotube elongation and
growth. Directly observe elongation kinetics and make quantitative measurements
of single assembly growth rates to better characterize propagation processes.
These measurements can determine whether growth is uni- or bidirectional, and
coupled with lifetime microscopy can determine whether mature structures are
directly assembled or result from relaxation processes following initial
assembly. Aim 3: Peptide exchange and self healing of amyloid structures. Useful
nanoscale biomaterials require self-healing capabilities, by which damaged
regions can reassemble or self-repair. Initial evidence suggests amyloid
structures possess this capability. This aim focuses on detailed experiments
that are required to understand the self-repair mechanisms.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed studies represent a collaborative effort of the
Berland (Department of Physics) and Lynn (Department of Chemistry) labs at Emory
University. The interdisciplinary nature of the research provides the
opportunity for new training opportunities, both within the Emory community and
beyond. A strength of the teaching and research collaboration is that the
students are trained in the physical spectroscopy, chemical synthesis, and the
analysis techniques necessary to work on interdisciplinary research topics. The
co-PI organizes a series of freshman seminar courses called ?Origins of ORDER?
(On Recent Discoveries by Emory Researchers) that introduce undergraduate
students to cutting edge research. The PI and a recent postdoctoral associate
have developed materials for this course, which were used to teach freshmen
about fluorescence and fluctuations, and their applications in modern research.
Both PIs for this proposal have a history of supervising undergraduate research
projects, providing academic year and summer student training each year. Beyond
the Emory community both PIs have also used the research laboratory to share
enthusiasm and excitement for scientific research with those outside the
University, including interacting with researchers from other institutions as
well as high school students and high school teachers.