* 0907478
* Multifunctional Biomaterials from Collagen-Containing Multiblock Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2015
* Kristi Kiick, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 04/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Delaware is to develop new collagen-domain-containing, elastomeric
multiblock copolymers that will be capable of multiple orders of assembly
triggered by environmental cues such as temperature, pH, and metal ion
concentration. The development of materials functionalized with peptide and
polypeptide domains offers important opportunities for detailed control of the
assembly, responsiveness, and function of hybrid materials. Accordingly, a
variety of polypeptides comprising the putative repeat sequences of natural
structural proteins have been produced with useful applications in
nanotechnology and medicine. This research project is to identify new sequences
and strategies for the bacterial expression of functional collagen polypeptides,
as well as their recombinant incorporation into elastin-collagen-elastin
triblock copolypeptides. The main objectives of this project are: a) Recombinant
expression of new hydrophilic collagen-like polypeptides and characterization of
their triple-helix formation; b) Production of stimuli-responsive triblock and
multiblock copolymers comprising thermally responsive elastin-like domains and
collagen-like domains; and c) Characterization and elaboration of the materials
after their assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic understanding of the programmed
sequential assembly, functionalized with peptide and polypeptide domains, will
offer unprecedented opportunities to produce materials with desired assembled
structures and subsequent control over the presentation of biologically,
electrically, and optically active moieties. Elaboration of these structures
with organic and inorganic groups will offer materials that can function as
adhesives, tough wound healing materials, cell-adherent tissue scaffolds, and
optically active layers in devices. The proposed academic programs include
teaching and training of students from underrepresented groups including women
in the proposed research activities. ?The Science of Art?, an outreach program
as part of this award, will present the science of materials and their
properties at art classes to students at secondary level and engage them in
scientific concepts in an environment outside of that in which science learning
normally occurs.&lt;br/&gt;