* 0907815
* International Research Workshop: Peatland Archives of Holocene Climate Variability
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Stephen Jackson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/2010
* USD 26,789.00

Sediments of Sphagnum-dominated peatlands constitute a valuable archive of
Holocene climate change and variability. These peatlands are broadly distributed
at mid to high latitudes in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, and at
high elevations at lower latitudes, including tropical mountains. Their
sediments contain a variety of microfossil, macrofossil, geochemical, and
stable-isotope proxies of temperature and hydrology, and records are
demonstrably sensitive to subcentennial to subdecadal climate variation.

This grant supports an international workshop to take place in May 2009,
assembling 36 leading researchers to identify critical research needs and
priorities, develop a comprehensive science agenda to advance peatland
paleoclimatology, and initiate planning for a global network of Holocene
peatland records. Participants will include scientists with expertise in
peatland paleoclimatology, hydrology, and biogeochemistry, as well as
paleoclimatologists with expertise in modeling, and statistical analysis, and
other late Holocene archives (e.g., tree rings, speleothems, lake sediments).

Intellectual Merit: The workshop will advance the science of Holocene
paleoclimatology by fostering paleoclimate studies using peatland archives and
integrating them with other high-resolution archives. Workshop products will
include summary articles, research collaborations, and spinoff proposals to
scientific agencies in North America (including NSF), Europe, and elsewhere.

Broader Impacts: The workshop will foster international scientific cooperation
and collaboration in paleoclimatology. At least 25% of the participants will be
from outside North America and western Europe (Asia, South America, former
Soviet Bloc), and at least 15% of the participants will be early-career
scientists, primarily graduate students and post-docs.