* 0907583
* Nanoscale Optoelectronics with Polarization and Bandgap Engineered Nitride Nanowire/Silicon Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Debdeep Jena, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,997.00

Technical. This project addresses growth and optoelectronic properties of
optically active III-V Nitride nanowire semiconductor heterostructures on
silicon substrates. Based on the fundamental studies and combination of
polarization and bandgap engineering, demonstration of ultraviolet and visible
light emitters and detectors integrated with silicon substrates is expected.
Nanowires will be grown without foreign metal catalyst particles, and the
underlying silicon substrate will be used to tunnel-inject holes into the III-V
nitride nanowires that are difficult to dope p-type with traditional acceptor
dopants. Through the wide range of bandgaps viable with AlInGaN alloys,
multicolor detectors and emitters will be grown and characterized. A major part
of the pro-ject involves structures where the nanowires do not need to be broken
off (or 'harvested'), but to exploit the intrinsic structure to develop
applications that are not easily achievable either with III-V nitride thin
films, or with silicon alone. These hybrid heterostructures provide advantages
of dissimilar materials without the constraint of lattice-matching.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of electronic/photonic materials science having technological
relevance. The project will involve undergraduate students during the academic
semesters as well as the summer. Theoretically oriented students will be
involved in the project at the level of simulations of band diagrams and device
structures. Experimentally inclined students will be involved at the level of
fabrication of nanowire/silicon devices and their characterization. They will
work directly with graduate students and the PIs by attending meetings and
presenting their work. Depending on the results, the undergraduate students will
be encouraged to publish their work. The project will result in the training of
graduate students in a forefront area of nanoelectronics. Additional to
expanding the existing outreach programs that the PIs are managing, two new
activities are proposed with a special focus on under-represented groups: 1)
experimental demonstration of nanoscale scanning probe techniques at the
Expanding Your Horizon workshops where young school girls gather for their early
exposure to how science and technology are employed in various careers, and 2)
re-search projects designed for women undergraduate students under the Dual
Degree Program at St. Mary's College. The dissemination of research results by
publications and presentations at conferences, and its inclusion in courses
taught by the investigators will ensure the outreach of the research proposed to
the widest possible audience.