* 0907688
* De Novo Design of Biodegradable and Environmentally Responsive Saccharide-Peptide Nanogels for siRNA Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to University of California Irvine is to
study a new family of biodegradable and environmentally responsive saccharide-
peptide copolymer-based nanogels as smart nanocarriers for small interference
RNA (siRNA) delivery. The recently discovered gene silencing effects of siRNA
presents tremendous potential as a new approach in gene therapy for various
disease treatments. However, one major barrier for its clinical use is the lack
of efficient delivery of siRNA into the target cells. Among different delivery
vectors, cationic synthetic polymers are especially promising because of their
high structural flexibility and functionalities. A number of polymeric systems
have been tested for siRNA delivery, however, their relatively low transfection
efficiency and high cytotoxicity warrants further discovery of new safe and
efficient delivery systems. Based on previous studies from the PI?s laboratory,
the basic saccharide-peptide polymer construct is inherently safe and versatile,
offering potential for rational design and optimization. By programming a number
of stimuli-responsive features into nanogels, the goal is to combine high
stability for nanogel-siRNA complexes (nanoplexes) during extracellular
trafficking with efficient release of siRNA once reaching intracellular
destinations. Whereas the ultimate goal of this program is to discover truly
safe and efficient synthetic vectors for siRNA delivery, the current proposed
efforts will be primarily focused on exploring new concept in chemical design
and synthesis of nanogel vectors, investigation of chemical-physical properties
of siRNA-nanogel complexes, and in vitro siRNA transfection assays using these
nanogel vectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of gene silencing
capability of siRNA forecasts tremendous therapeutic potential for treating
genetic disease using small interference RNA. One major road block preventing it
from realization of clinical applications for siRNA technology is the lack of
efficient methods to deliver siRNA into cells. This study explores a novel
environmentally responsive nanogel approach for efficienct siRNA delivery. The
goal of the study is to test a new design concept of nanogel vectors, understand
basic structure-property relationship of the nanogel vectors, and ultimately
develop safe and efficient synthetic vectors that can potentially have
tremendous impact on biotechnological and pharmaceutical industries. In
addition, the proposed multi-disciplinary research activity will provide
excellent training for graduate and undergraduate students, especially for
minority and women students currently working on this project.&lt;br/&gt;