* 0907076
* The Structural Basis for Glasses More Tolerant to Thermal, Mechanical and Radiation Impacts
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Liping Huang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

0907076&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;By
combining experimental and computational tools in a synergistic manner,
researchers at RPI will significantly advance the understanding of the glass
structure in general, which has proven difficult by using either one of the
techniques alone. By using a pressure-quenching technique, they will synthesize
glasses that have a high thermo-mechanical resistance when subjected to large
temperature and pressure fluctuations, which will find a wide range of uses in
pressure sensors, optoelectronics and space applications. An integral part of
the project is to introduce materials simulation and modeling into the materials
science and engineering curriculum through course development and redesigning.
In carrying out this project, graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in the fields of glass science and computer simulation. Special efforts
will be made to attract underrepresented minority students into materials
research, and into science and engineering in general, through various programs
at Rensselaer. Findings of this project will be disseminated to a wider audience
through national and international seminars and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of the structure of amorphous materials has always
been a challenge. Studies of the pressure and temperature dependence of elastic
moduli for amorphous materials give considerable information about the structure
of glass, since elastic properties are directly related to the interatomic
forces and potentials, which in turn determine the vibrational properties of
glass. In this project, one of their major efforts will be to use light
scattering techniques as structural characterization tools for glass, by
studying the pressure and temperature dependent vibrational and elastic
properties of glass using Raman and Brillouin light scattering. To complement
the experiments, they will carry out large-scale atomistic simulations to study
glasses under external thermal, mechanical and radiation impacts. Once
reasonable models are obtained for the glasses under investigation, they will
use these models to explain experimental observations, predict the properties of
glasses not yet synthesized, and provide guidelines for designing new glasses
with desired properties. In this project, they will develop a pressure-quenching
technique that can be generalized to synthesize glasses with novel properties.
The ultimate goal of this project is to develop an atomistic understanding of
the response of glasses to external thermal, mechanical and radiation impacts,
and an ability to tune these properties by changing the structure of glass
through processing in a controllable way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;