* 0907558
* Investigation of the Metalorganic Vapor Phase Epitaxy of AlInN Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Patrick Kung, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2014
* USD 414,871.00

Technical. The project aims for fundamental understanding of the MOVPE (metallo-
organic vapor phase expitaxy) epitaxial growth of Al1-xInxN compound
semiconductors, by focusing on two primary aspects. The objective of one aspect
is to demonstrate material quality and composition control through the use of a
novel MOVPE reactor whose growth chamber has the ability to be reconfigured in-
situ. Characterization of structural, optical and electrical properties will be
an integral part of these studies. The objective of a second focus area is to
investigate phase segregation phenomena in Al1-xInxN using a Local Electrode
Atom Probe (LEAP), an instrumental tool enabling the identification of
individual atoms and their location in a three-dimensional microstructure with
near atomic resolution. Design of experiments and correlation between growth
conditions and the resulting material properties are expected to yield greater
fundamental understanding of material synthesis mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
Technical. The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area
of electronic/photonic materials science having technological relevance.
Societal benefits of the proposed research on AlInN materials can be very broad
since the specific materials being studied could support applications such as
all-weather radar, surveillance, reconnaissance, high speed wireless
telecommunications and automotive radar for collision warning sensors. Students
will acquire fundamental research and education skills as part of this project.
Additionally, the scientific concepts underlying this project will be integrated
into new courses that the PI and Co-PI are developing at both undergraduate and
graduate levels. In order to broaden the participation from under-represented
groups, the proposed activity will benefit from an HBCU Workshop at U. AL to
reach science faculty members and educators from HBCUs, as well as a project
entitled, "Broadening Participation Research Initiation Grants in Engineering"
(BRIGE) program. Out-reach activities to local schools and general public will
be carried out in conjunction with existing activities within the U. AL Center
for Materials for Information Technology (MINT).