* 0907320
* Collaborative Research: Probing Atomic Structure Changes in Deformation of Metallic Glasses:  An Experimental and Computational Study
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mo Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2013
* USD 240,002.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic glasses, or amorphous alloys,
are structurally disordered solids without the long-range translational order
commonly seen in crystals. The structural disorder originates at the atomic
scale from randomly packed atoms in proximity to each other. This disorder leads
to some of the most remarkable mechanical properties that their crystalline
counterparts can only envy: high strength close to the theoretical value, large
elastic strain, and high toughness. Metallic glass covers a wide range of
systems including transition metals, refractory metals, rare earth metals, and
their alloys. These unique and superb properties make them the perfect
candidates for many applications including structural components, durable and
high performance equipment, coatings, and miniature devices subject to large
loading, wear and corrosive protection, and precision shaping. In the past
decade, extensive research and development have been done to utilize metallic
glasses, especially their mechanical properties. This collaborative research is
focused on probing atomic scale deformation processes and atomic structures. It
combines experimental approaches using synchrotron X-ray scattering and neutron
scattering, and atomistic simulations using molecular dynamics and first-
principle calculations. Specifically, it addresses the following issues: (1)
Atomic structures, including short- and medium-range order and their changes
caused by deformation; (2) Mechanical responses and their differences for
systems with different atomic structures; (3) Atomic scale characterizations of
structure-mechanical responses such as free volume, local shear transformation,
and local atomic bond changes that cannot be easily captured directly by
experimental measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research is to establish
the constitutive relations among stress, strain, strain rate, temperature and
various physical, structural properties and compositional changes. Due to the
difficulties posed by the structural disorder in metallic glasses, reliable
constitutive relations must be built on detailed and accurate understanding of
atomic scale processes and mechanisms. This effort contributes critically to the
advancement of knowledge in this area. We also expect this effort to contribute
a positive step in widening the applications of this marvelous material, thus
gaining an edge for US industries in the highly competitive world market.
Another integral part of this proposed work is the education and outreach
program. The project follows two tracks in this regard: (1) participation in
outreach education program for local minority engineering undergraduates and
K-12 program for students interested in engineering careers through
demonstrations, workshops, and hands-on learning experiences, (2) establishment
of a close collaboration and exchange program between experimental and
computational work for graduate students in Georgia Tech and University of
Tennessee, contributing to a rich education experience for both undergraduates
and graduate students.