* 0907446
* Lie Group and Their Discrete Subgroups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Millson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2013
* USD 221,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI (John Millson) proposes three
main lines of research all within the general framework of reductive algebraic
groups and geometry. &lt;br/&gt;In the first main line (with Jens Funke) the PI
continues his project of using the theta correspondence and differential
geometry to construct&lt;br/&gt;Siegel (resp. Hermitian) modular forms that are
generating functions for the intersection numbers of certain (special)
cycles&lt;br/&gt;in locally symmetric spaces of orthogonal (resp. unitary)
groups. The second main line deals with the ring R of projective invariants of n
ordered points on the&lt;br/&gt;projective line. This ring was much studied by
the invariant theorists in the late eighteenth and early twentieth
centuries.&lt;br/&gt;In 1894, A. Kempe found that R was generated by certain
invariants of lowest degree. In the last year, working with Ben Howard, Andrew
Snowden and &lt;br/&gt;Ravi Vakil, the PI computed the relations between the
Kempe generators. They are quadratic, binomial and have&lt;br/&gt;a simple
graphical description. The third main line is a continuation of the project
dealing with the generalized triangle inequalities and related
(saturation)&lt;br/&gt;problems from algebra. This project was the subject of
the PI's most recent NSF grant, an FRG grant with Prakash Belkale, Thomas
Haines, &lt;br/&gt;Misha Kapovich and Shrawan Kumar. This project is joint with
Thomas Haines and Misha Kapovich. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI (John
Millson) proposes three main lines of research all within the general framework
of reductive algebraic groups and geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the
proposal should have applications to number theory along the lines described by
S. Kudla in&lt;br/&gt;his Beijing ICM talk and also to string theory (according
to a preprint of Ai-Ko Lu).. The second part of the proposal is motivated in
part because&lt;br/&gt;the problem completes work of mathematicians working in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries solving a one hundred year old
problem. &lt;br/&gt;The third part deals with basic problems in representation
theory e.g. decomposing tensor products and branching formulas which if solved
would be of use in&lt;br/&gt;many disciplines.All the above projects are in
collaboration with other mathematicians from within the USA or abroad. The PI
presently&lt;br/&gt;has collaborations with eight mathematicians continuing a
history of extensive collaboration (over forty joint papers).