* 0907781
* Segregation in Multicomponent Macromolecular Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2013
* USD 460,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research that will study pattern formation in fibers and in
self-assembled gels with charged units and with competing interactions.
Nanopatterns in gels of charged chains with self-attracting interactions will
also be analyszed. Models will be developed to analyze the structure and
thermodynamics of macromolecular assemblies which include charged ionic sites. A
long-range goal of this work is improving our understanding of how biomolecules
and other heterogeneous charged macromolecules assemble into robust functional
structures, and this understanding can help us learn to fabricate novel
biomimetic structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrostatics self-assembly occurs
in many technological and biological processes. The interaction of nucleic
acids, which are strongly charged chains, with proteins composed of units with
tunable degrees of charge, for example, generates self-healing heterogeneous
nanostructures which are strongly dependent on ionic concentrations. Work
supported by this grant will analyze the symmetry, including chirality, of
charged nanopatterns formed by molecules assembled onto fibers as a function of
salt concentration and pH value, and nanopatterns in charged gels in the
presence of backbone self-attractions. Analytic and numerical calculations using
coarse grained models will be compared with results from mesoscale simulations
and to experiments. This work will provide guidelines to design complex
networks, including DNA-hybrid sensors, via highly cooperative ionic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will also support educational goals
that will promote the development of scientists capable of solving challenging
and relevant problems for society. The group participates in local educational
programs at the high school level, as well as interacting with Hispanic
professors in the US and Mexico. The PI is a member of the leadership council of
the National Center for Learning and Teaching in Nano Science and Engineering
where she participates in designing courses for the web and developing teaching
road maps for middle schools and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Biomimetic functional materials are designed to mimic the
biological molecules and macromolecules, and are of great importance in
developing new technologies. This award supports research that will develop
theoretical methods for modeling the structural and thermodynamic behavior of
multicomponent ionic solutions containing heterogeneous molecules. The methods
supported by this grant will provide guidelines for designing hydrogels with
unique properties, and aid in the design of actuators and sensors for specific
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will also support educational
goals that will promote the development of scientists capable of solving
challenging and relevant problems for society. The group participates in local
educational programs at the high school level, as well as interacting with
Hispanic professors in the US and Mexico. The PI is a member of the leadership
council of the National Center for Learning and Teaching in Nano Science and
Engineering where she participates in designing courses for the web and
developing teaching road maps for middle schools and high schools.