* 0907037
* RUI: N-Type Ferromagnetism in Oxide Based Dilute Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Pawan Kahol, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,747.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this RUI project is to better
understand the fundamentals of ferromagnetism in carrier mediated n-type
transition metal (TM)-doped In2O3 dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS).
Ferromagnetic behavior after doping, high Curie temperature, and controllable
carrier density are some of the crucial requirements for developing spin-based
multifunctional devices. TM-doped In2O3 is such a unique system, for which
control of the defect concentration can tune the electrical/magnetic behavior
from ferromagnetic metal-like to ferromagnetic semiconducting to paramagnetic
insulating. The charge carrier density of thin films of DMS, grown by pulsed
laser deposition, will be controlled through doping, growth parameters during
deposition, and post-deposition annealing. Structural and interfacial details at
atomic scale will be examined by various state-of-the-art techniques such as
X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, field emission
scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron microcopy.
Ferromagnetism and its correlations with electronic properties will be
investigated through magnetization and magneto-transport studies at high and low
magnetic fields and at temperatures down to 2 K using a superconducting quantum
interference device magnetometer and a high field magneto-transport set-up.
Experimental data will test current theoretical models proposed for DMS. An
understanding of spin physics arising from this research will lead to the
potential development of new spintronic devices such as ultra-sensitive magnetic
field sensors, quantum-based logic, and memory for high speed computation. This
research project will motivate and encourage undergraduate students realize a
firmer understanding of magnetism, semiconductor physics, and spin-electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Ferromagnetism
arises due to the ordering of the magnetic moments of neighboring electrons such
that they point in the same direction. A number of materials show ferromagnetism
at low temperatures, but only iron, cobalt, nickel, and some alloys show
ferromagnetism above room temperature for useful applications. Dilute Magnetic
Semiconductors (DMS) belong to a new class of ferromagnets, which are formed by
incorporating dilute amount of transition metals such as iron or cobalt into
normal semiconductors such as GaAs, ZnO, or In2O3. Ferromagnetic behavior after
doping, high Curie temperature, and controllable electron density are the
crucial requirements for developing spin-based multifunctional devices. The
overall goal of this RUI project is to better understand the fundamentals of
ferromagnetism and control magnetism in electron carrier mediated transition
metal (TM)-doped In2O3 dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS). The electron
carrier concentration of thin films of DMS, to be grown by pulsed laser
deposition, will be controlled through chemical doping, growth parameters during
deposition, and post-deposition annealing. Structural, magnetic, and electronic
properties will be investigated by various state-of-the-art techniques such as
X-ray diffraction, optical spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, electron
microcopies, and superconducting quantum interference device magnetometry.
Experimental results will be analyzed using the theoretical models which have
been proposed for DMS. This research will lead to a deeper understanding of the
phenomenon of ferromagnetism in DMS which will lead to the potential development
of new spin-based devices such as ultra-sensitive magnetic field sensors,
quantum-based logic, and memory for high speed computation. Training and skills
acquired by undergraduate and graduate MS students through this research will
serve them well for employment in high-tech industry, academic institutions, and
government and private research laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;