* 0907911
* Plasma Turbulence in the Interstellar Medium: Characteristics and Consequences
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Steven Spangler, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2015
* USD 387,645.00

Dr. Steven Spangler (University of Iowa) will explore turbulence in the
interstellar medium and the role such turbulence plays in interstellar
processes. Methods of inquiry in the research program include (1) new radio-
astronomical observations using the Very Large Array (VLA) of extragalactic
radio sources viewed through HII regions, (2) new observations at low radio
frequencies of nearby pulsars with the VLA and the Murchison Widefield Array,
and (3) examination and re-analysis of extensive spectroscopic measurements of
turbulence in nearby interstellar clouds. Specific research projects to be
undertaken in the grant period are the following: (1) Faraday rotation
observations will be made with the VLA of a sample of about 150 extragalactic
radio sources viewed through 6 HII regions and their associated bubbles; (2) low
frequency (less than 100 MHz) scintillation measurements will be made of four
pulsars which are weakly scattered and viewed through the "Local Bubble": the
scintillation data will be examined for the presence of "pulsar arcs", which
contain information on the distance and distribution of turbulence along the
line of sight; (3) an existing, high quality set of measurements of absorption
lines due to nearby interstellar clouds will be analysed for the information it
contains on the properties of turbulence in these clouds; (4) the properties of
turbulence in the lightly ionized molecular clouds, and its interaction with
molecular ions, will both be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will benefit society as a whole through the individualized training of young
scientists in the methods of physical science research, the capabilities of
radioastronomical and radiophysical measurements, and in fundamentals of plasma
physics. Dr. Spangler's mentorship of University of Iowa undergraduate and
graduate students will continue under this award. This research program also has
an outreach component, consisting of an association with amateur astronomy
groups in Iowa, particularly the Cedar Amateur Astronomers in Cedar Rapids,
Iowa.