* 0907375
* Collaborative Research: Coherent Transport in the One-Dimensional limit
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Serhii Shafraniuk, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 07/31/2011
* USD 30,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will investigate the physics
of electronic mesoscopic structures. These structures are made of a large number
of atoms, but are sufficiently small to exhibit quantum phenomena that are not
found in macroscopic objects. Understanding how the smaller size affects
electronic properties is an intriguing problem from the standpoint of basic
physics, as well as an essential step towards progress for faster and smaller
electronics, that can even possibly exploit such quantum phenomena. The specific
structures being investigated are made with carbon nanotubes, consisting of a
layer of carbon atoms wrapped in the shape of a cylinder, with a diameter
approximately 100,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. Due to
quantum mechanics, charges propagating along the nanotube behave like waves,
whereas multiple electrodes connected to the tube behave like rocks in a shallow
and narrow pond, obstructing wave propagation and causing reflections and
ripples. This project will study how these phenomena affect electrical
properties. It will also study whether novel states of matter could arise when
the sample size is reduced to such small dimensions. More specifically, it will
investigate whether and under which conditions carbon nanotubes may be novel
superconducting materials. If successful, this study will provide much needed
insight on new mechanisms for superconductivity and how to control
superconducting properties, possibly paving the way towards the discovery of
superconductors that work at temperatures close to room temperatures. The
educational impact of this program goes well beyond the direct support of the
postdoctoral fellow and the graduate student working on the project. Connections
with this research are continuously developed in courses for non-science majors
and physics majors, by introducing lectures on nanotechnology and high-
resolution microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;**** TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes are ideal mesoscopic objects to study
properties of low-dimensional, phase coherent transport, because structures
smaller than the phase coherence length (on the order of 1 micrometer) can be
easily realized. This project will focus on a combined experimental and
theoretical investigation of three manifestations of coherent transport:1)
Nanotubes have been shown to act as coherent electron waveguides. This project
will probe how multiple electrodes on a single nanotube create multiple standing
waves in the nanotube and affect transport properties, including non-local
effects, where transport in one nanotube section is affected by the adjacent
sections; 2) Nanotubes connected to superconducting electrodes through a normal
metal layer are the smallest point contacts and they can detect coherent
transport due to the superconducting proximity effect at the nanometer scale.
This effect will be used to study how the properties of the carbon-
nanotube/normal-metal interface depend on the electrode material and on exposure
to chemicals; and 3) The project will investigate the possible occurrence of
superconductivity in individual single-walled carbon nanotubes when the gate
voltage is applied. This effect will be studied in single nanotubes as well as
in films of multiple nanotubes. The educational impact of this program goes well
beyond the direct support of the postdoctoral fellow and the graduate student
working on the project, as connections with this research are continuously
developed in courses for non-science majors and physics majors.