* 0907742
* The Sixth U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Nanoelectrics and its Integration with Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jong-on Hahm
* 03/31/2010
* USD 28,216.00

The proposed Forum is sixth in a series of meetings begun in 2003 under a US-
Korea bilateral agreement on science and technology. This forum will focus on
fundamentals in nano-electronics, its fusion with bio- and energy- technology as
well as novel applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will be the organizer
for the U.S. participation, which will include eleven presenters and six
additional early-career participants (underrepresented minorities will be
strongly encouraged). A roughly equal number of Korean presenters will also be
selected. The Forum will provide a common platform for scientists and engineers
from both countries to establish partnerships in nano-electronics development
and to further strengthen the achievements and to assess the progress on
recommendations made during the previous five Forums, specifically, the
mechanisms for cooperation and plans for exchanging young scientists. The Forum
proceedings and findings will be published both on a CD and on Carnegie Mellon?s
website and will be available to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;This proposed Forum
will promote the exchange of research, education, and policy between the two
countries in the emerging area of nano-electronics. The novel contribution, in
contrast to previous Forums, is the focus on grand challenges of fundamentals in
nano/molecular electronics as well as feasibility studies on high risk
application in nanodevices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
Forum will result in the sharing of information and experiences in nano-
electronics research and will promote many collaborative research initiatives
between industry, government, and academia in the two countries. The aim of this
Forum is to promote not only research on fundamental and applied nano-
electronics, but also to have a high impact on society and global
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by ECCS and
ENG.