* 0907049
* Synthesis of and Structure-Function Relationships in New Misfit Layered Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 345,385.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The ability to conduct the targeted synthesis of a new solid-state compound is
one of the grand challenges of the field of solid state chemistry. This proposal
targets the synthesis of new misfit layered compounds [(MX)m]1+x[TX2]n where M
is a metal that forms a rock salt structure with either selenium or tellurium
(X), T is transition metal that forms a layered dichalcogenide structure, n and
m denote the number of layers of each constituent, and x denotes the degree of
misfit between the components. These new compounds are assumed to be at least
kinetically stable and will be prepared by depositing a layered precursor that
is designed to self-assemble into the targeted compound. Preliminary data
demonstrates that this approach works and that extended annealing in controlled
chalcogen partial pressures can be used to fix the chemical potential,
controlling carrier concentrations if the targeted compounds are semiconductors.
Charge transfer between the constituents of the misfit layer compounds
stabilizes the structure and makes them an ideal test bed for examining the
effect of nanostructure on properties in well-controlled one-dimensional
structures. The misfit layered compounds provide an opportunity to subtly probe
the effect of charge transfer on electrical and magnetic properties, viewing
them as intercalation compounds of a transition metal dichalcogenide.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The development of new synthetic techniques that allow the targeted synthesis of
kinetically stable compounds is a crucial component necessary for the
advancement of fundamental science and both current and future technologies
crucial to international competitiveness. The proposed research program provides
a firm and broad technical background for the graduate students in deposition
technologies and thin film characterization techniques. The proposed external
internships provides an opportunity for the graduate students to ?test drive?
future careers while expanding their knowledge base, leading to more productive
researchers and preparing them for careers in industry, academia or national
laboratories. The graduate students will mentor one or more undergraduate
researchers as part of this project, and it is anticipated that these
undergraduate students will pursue advanced degrees after graduation.