* 0907588
* CAREER:    Microtopography-Controlled Puddle-filling to Puddle-merging (P2P) Overland Flow Mechanism:    Discontinuity, Variability, and Hierarchy
* GEO,EAR
* 11/03/2008,05/31/2013
* Xuefeng Chu, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 378,509.00

The objectives of the research are to: (1) develop improved, multi-scale methods
to quantify the puddle-filling and puddle-merging (P2P) overland flow process
under control of microtopography, with focus on characterizing discontinuity,
variability, and hierarchy of overland flow; (2) develop a P2P overland flow
modeling system that integrates the new methods and modeling techniques in a
user-friendly Windows interface; and (3) improve hydrology education at all
levels by providing an interactive, education-enhanced P2P teaching-learning
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary field data and previous studies
highlight the important role of microtopography in overland flow generation and
evolution, and emphasize the need for bridging the macro- and micro-scale
hydrologic studies. Major challenges herein are: (1) effects of soil surface
roughness on the P2P overland flow process are scale dependent; and (2) simply
incorporating micro-scale effects of soil roughness in a larger-scale modeling
framework can be computationally prohibitive. In this project, multi-scale
methods, which involve dynamic puddle delineation and "point" and "area"
modeling at two scale levels, will be developed to cope with these challenges
and improve computational efficiency. Specifically, a quasi-three-dimensional
model will be developed to simulate vertical infiltration into layered soils and
rainfall excess at "points," and mass exchange and hydraulic connections between
"points" over "areas" (puddle filling-connecting-merging process). The "point"
modeling will be implemented on the cell/grid scale, while the "area" modeling
will explicitly account for the effects of microrelief of cells on small-scale
overland flow processes, such as flow types (microchannel flow or sheet flow)
determined by an inundated factor. The P2P overland flow mechanism will also be
examined by a series of laboratory and field experiments that reflect
variability in soils, their spatial combination, roughness, and rainfall
characteristics. Microrelief of the soil surfaces will be measured by using the
laser scanner. The fractal model will be used to quantify soil surface roughness
and scale effects of roughness will also be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
Windows-based P2P overland flow modeling system will be developed to enhance
applications of the new methods. An interactive P2P teaching-learning software
will be further developed for improving hydrology education at all levels. The
educational software, with enhanced visualization capabilities, will integrate
the new modeling techniques, computer-guided self-learning center, and a set of
education-oriented tools and databases in a user-friendly Windows interface. The
teaching-learning software will be used as the core for graduate and
undergraduate hydrology courses, as well as other outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts: The
research on multi-scale P2P overland flow methods should be the first
investigation of characterizing microtopography-controlled overland flow from a
multi-scale perspective. The new methods will improve the understanding of
intrinsic natures of overland flow: discontinuity, variability, and hierarchy.
The models will be valuable tools for analyzing overland flow generation and
evolution, and quantifying dynamic changes in the contributing areas of storm
runoff, which is critical to nonpoint source pollution. Thus, this study will
also have substantial impacts on environmental and ecological research and broad
interdisciplinary application potentials. The user-friendly Windows P2P modeling
system will particularly improve the accessibility to the new methods by the
entire hydrology community. As an integral part of the NSF-funded LTER program,
this unique hydrologic study will also provide valuable support for other LTER
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state-of-the-art, interactive software will
be the first comprehensive teaching-learning tool specially designed for
hydrology education at all levels. The software, with enhanced visualization
capabilities, the computer-guided self-learning center, and hydrologic tools and
databases, will not only effectively promote students' learning and interest in
hydrologic sciences, but also benefit instructors by creating an active and
innovative teaching-learning environment in their classes. Most importantly, the
work will give the underrepresented students an excellent opportunity to conduct
the cutting-edge hydrologic research and gain skills and experiences that are
invaluable to their studies and future career.