* 0907045
* Catalytic Hydrogels from Bifunctional Enzymatic Building Blocks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Scott Banta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 06/30/2011
* USD 75,429.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to Columbia University is study the use of
molecular engineering to create novel bifunctional enzymes that can self-
assemble into hydrogels and support an intra-gel metabolic pathway that can
oxidize methanol through two steps to formic acid. Rationally designed alpha-
helical appendages will be genetically fused to the horse liver alcohol
dehydrogenase homodimer enzyme and to the human liver mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase homotetramer enzyme. The effects of these mutations on the
performance of the enzymes will be assessed, and then the enzymes will be
combined to form mixed self-assembling hydrogels that will oxidize methanol to
formic acid while concomitantly producing NADH from NAD+ a cofactor required for
the reaction. This will be the first proof of principle of a self-assembling
bioactive biomaterial that can support a simple intra-gel metabolic network.
This material could be applied to an electrode and used as an anode in an
enzymatic biofuel cell using methanol as a fuel
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein engineering has been used to improve
globular proteins such as enzymes, and structural proteins such as the elastin-
like peptides. This research project is designing and creating new proteins with
both globular and structural domains to form bioactive biomaterials. Earlier
studies by the researcher already modified proteins to self-assemble into
enzymatic hydrogels, and in this proposal the investigators will create a new
material that contains two active enzymes which can function together to form a
simple metabolic pathway. The enzymes will be able to oxidize methanol first to
formaldehyde and then the formaldehyde will be oxidized to formic acid. Each
step will generate NADH which can be used in a power generating format such as
an enzymatic biofuel cell. The creation of novel protein constructs with both
useful enzymatic and materials properties is a new area in the field of protein
engineering, and this approach will be very useful in the design and
construction of new bioelectrocatalytic devices such as enzymatic biofuel cells
and biosensors.