* 0907409
* Molecular Monolayer Optimization of the Interface in Nanostructured Organic/Inorganic Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Furtak, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 477,876.00

Technical: The goal of this project is to develop systematic surface
modification strategies to improve the interrelated issues of morphology,
energetics, and charge transport across organic/inorganic interfaces. The
approach is based on difunctional molecular layers. One end is designed for
surface attachment while the other end imparts a special chemical or electronic
characteristic to the modified interface. Research will be directed toward
developing surface molecular layers on semiconducting oxides, with a special
emphasis on ZnO/polymer blends. The overall focus of the work is on identifying
design rules that could be applied to a broader class of oxide interfaces and
organic constituents, which would simplify future development of
organic/inorganic composites. Advanced optical, structural, surface, and
electronic characterization techniques will be applied to these systems to
develop an understanding of the properties of the specific functionalized
surfaces under study, and define a systematic approach to uncovering the
interfacial morphological and electronic properties of organic/inorganic hybrid
materials. Non-Technical: The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The
research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level to new understanding and capabilities for potential next generation
electronic/photonic devices. Organic/inorganic composites have the potential for
creating electronic materials with new functionality in energy efficiency,
biological, medical, and environmental applications. This project will
accelerate the development of these materials by providing fundamental
understanding of one of the key issues limiting performance. The proposed
project directly integrates research with education. Students and faculty will
work with an existing outreach program at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM)
aimed at Denver elementary and middle schools with large populations of
underrepresented groups. Modules, which connect basic science concepts to the
impact that advanced materials are having on the world, will be introduced into
these schools. Approaches developed during the project will also be included in
a teacher recertification program taught by one of the Co-PIs. The project
includes significant undergraduate research involvement through summer REU
opportunities and an international student exchange with NTNU (Norwegian
University of Science and Technology). All of the students will work on a daily
basis as part of an integrated team with their advisors, collaborators at the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) which is located in close proximity
to CSM, with scientists at NTNU, and with colleagues at the University of
Arizona. A focus on diversity, communication skills, and developing skills for
work in a team environment are all integral parts of the proposed program. This
project is co-funded by the DMR Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, and
the DMR Electronic and Photonic Materials program.