* 0907974
* Constructive Existence Proofs for PDE in Multi-Dimensional Compressible Inviscid Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Volker Elling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2012
* USD 140,082.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at obtaining
constructive proofs of existence of various particular solutions of the multi-
dimensional compressible Euler and potential flow equations. Constructive proofs
provide not only mathematical rigor, but also detailed information about flow
structure and behavior under parameter changes. This information has allowed
progress on important engineering questions, such as transition from regular to
Mach reflection or weak versus strong shocks at wedges and ramps. Other open
problems, like the nature of supersonic bubbles at wings or the von Neumann
paradox for triple points, also require new techniques for constructing
particular solutions revealing structural information. Even more importantly,
recent examples show that particular solutions can reveal non-uniqueness and
instability of the underlying model equations and the numerical schemes used to
solve them. The project will study narrower function classes where well-
posedness is more likely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Euler equations and related
systems model the flow of gas or liquid, a central problem in physics and
engineering. Applications in science and technology abound, from the theory of
flight over combustion engines, hydraulics, magneto-hydrodynamic plasma,
atmospheric and oceanic motion, to stars and nebulae in cosmology. Many
applications rely on computer simulations of flows. However, results of
computations are not perfectly reliable; sometimes spurious features are
observed that do not occur in nature. The project relates these poorly
understood problems with numerical simulations to previously unknown flaws of
the underlying mathematical models and investigates possible
remedies.&lt;br/&gt;