* 0907529
* Photonic Crystals in Biology:  Study and Mimicry of Butterfly Wing Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jung Park, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 07/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0907529 PI: Srinivasarao, Mohan ORG: Georgia Tech

Title: Photonic Crystals in Biology: Study and Mimicry of Butterfly Wings

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The brilliant colors found on the bodies of butterflies and
beetles have attracted enormous attention from biologists, physicists, chemists
and more recently from materials scientists. It is now well recognized that many
of these colors are due to the nano-structures or sub-wavelength structures on
the surface of the wing scales, thus becoming natural analogues of a class of
optical materials known as photonic crystals. While it is recognized that
structural colors are not the only butterfly color production mechanism, this
proposal is limited to instances where structural color production is the
primary source of color on the butterfly wings. The focus here is on a variety
of butterflies that produce color by structural means. Specifically, the PI
intends to characterize the optics of individual wing scales using the methods
developed in his laboratory, model the optical properties of the wing scales
both from the point of view of color science as well as from an optics
perspective, and mimic/replicate the structure of wing scales that produce the
color. It is also proposed to mimic the optical character of the butterfly
Papilio palinurus, which produces its green coloration by what is termed color
stimulus synthesis (CSS) by using bottom-up self-assembly process. The
scientific merit of the proposal lies in the fact that it will attempt to
characterize a variety of (individual) wing scales of butterflies that possess
structural colors, and model their optical properties using the language of
color science as well as the language of photonic crystals.

BROADER IMPACTS: The broader impacts of the proposed activities take at-least
three forms: (i) student education in a very cross-disciplinary fashion; (ii)
outreach activities to high school students and high school science teachers and
more recently (iii) interacting with the San Francisco Exploratorium and
participating in informal science education. The students working on this
project will be trained in a very interdisciplinary fashion where they will have
to understand the biology to some extent while being well versed in optical
physics ? and in order to replicate these structures they will also have to be
quite comfortable with chemistry. The fact that butterflies are colored due to
physical structures lends itself beautifully to teach optics to high school
children. Hence, the PI goes to local high schools and also runs workshops on
optics for high school science teachers at least once a year. More recently he
has been working with the San Francisco Exploratorium to disseminate his results
to the general public as a means of informal science education, and he will
continue to collaborate with the Exploratorium, as it is quite rewarding to
disseminate his work to the general public in this forum.