* 0907500
* Density Matrix Renormalization Group Studies of Frustrated and Doped Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2012
* USD 475,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports theoretical research on the properties of strongly interacting electron
systems in low dimensions. In particular, the research focuses on the
application of the density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method, developed
by the PI in 1992, to several relevant problems of strongly correlated
electrons. This method is one of the most reliable and now widely used
techniques to treat strong correlations and quantum systems, and has been
extended to several other areas in materials theory. The study of strong
correlation effects in low dimensional systems is one of the most exciting areas
in condensed matter physics. These systems exhibit a wide range of behavior,
such as high temperature superconductivity, antiferromagnetism, striped, and
spin liquid phases. Numerical simulation techniques have become increasingly
necessary to understand these systems, as the systems have strong coupling terms
and competition between different types of order. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop improved methods for describing transport and consequently
being able to compare theory with experiment. For example, recent breakthroughs
in real-time DMRG will allow the study of spectral functions for a variety of
chain, ladder, and small 2D cluster systems. The PI anticipates being able to
calculate temperature-dependent dynamical properties of 2D copper-oxygen plane
models which can be compared directly with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
experiments. The development of methods for simulating 2D doped and frustrated
systems will also be pursued, using both traditional 2D DMRG "wide ladders" and
novel algorithms based on tensor networks. Two-dimensional models for cuprate
superconductors and recently discovered Fe-superconductors will be studied using
large 2D clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important component of this
research will be the development of a general purpose software library for
matrix computations used within DMRG simulations, which will be made freely
available to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports primarily computational research on the
properties of strongly interacting systems of electrons in one- and two-
dimensions, with particular application to nanodevices and superconducting
materials. The behavior of electrons when they are confined in these small
spaces and when they are very close to each other can lead to novel effects.
This grant supports work that will develop computational techniques to describe
these effects. In addition to discovering and understanding novel properties,
which may lead to new devices, the computational techniques developed will find
wide application in other fields of study. This is the power of developing
computational methods in one field that can be applied to many other
applications. Students involved in this research will receive excellent training
in condensed matter physics and computational physics.