* 0907695
* Optimization and Extension of MRE for the Study of Force Chain Structure in 3D Granular Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Stephen Altobelli, New Mexico Resonance
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 06/30/2011
* USD 156,116.00

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Granular materials suffuse
daily life; from the cereal eaten at breakfast, the coal used for fuel, the
ingredients in the pharmaceuticals which return us to health, to the soil and
rocks that make up avalanches and landslides. The inherently granular nature of
these types of systems make them difficult to describe and predict. One of the
fundamental questions regarding granular systems has been the way in which force
is transmitted through the grains. In two-dimensions, using optical techniques,
it was discovered that the force is concentrated and transmitted through
filamentary chain-like structures that have become known as "force chains", with
many of the grains carrying little or none of the force. More recently, using a
novel variation of a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) method called magnetic
resonance elastography (MRE), the existence of such chains in three-dimensions
was confirmed. This individual investigator award supports a project that will
refine the MRE imaging method as applied to dense granular materials and extend
it to studies of a wide variety of granular systems. Analyses of the statistics
of the force chain structure, as determined from the MRE images, will
characterize these complex granular systems and allow quantitative predictions
to be made. The experiments will engage undergraduate students, allowing them a
varied learning environment including hardware and software development in
addition to the physics of Nuclear Magnetic Resonace and the engineering of
granular materials.

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). Understanding the internal 3D force
chain structure of dense granular materials is necessary for a comprehensive
explanation of granular behavior. These structures have been studied in 2D using
photoelastic techniques, and preliminary experiments were recently conducted in
3D to detect force chains using a novel magnetic resonance imaging method termed
magnetic resonance elastography (MRE). MRE measures amplitudes of small periodic
displacements having a specific frequency and maps them as images. Periodic
stimuli that are transmitted predominantly along the force chains are made
visible in MRE images as lines of particles oscillating in-phase with the
largest amplitudes, therefore the highest image intensities. This individual
investigator award supports a project to refine the MRE imaging method as
applied to dense granular materials and extend it to studies of a wide variety
of systems. These investigations will include an optimization of the confining
containers, the forcing scheme and the forcing frequency and amplitude used for
studies of the chain structure, as well as a probe of a variety of compression
types and amounts in both 2D and 3D systems. Furthermore, analyses of the
statistics of the force chain structure, as determined from the MRE images, will
be conducted. These will include the distribution of force chain lengths and
statistics of the Voronoi cells, e.g., volumes, faces, areas, and edges.
Students will be included in these studies, presenting them an exciting and
varied learning environment, from hardware and software development to
conducting and analyzing experiments and from the physics of NMR to the
engineering of granular materials.