* 0907075
* Investigation of Freestanding Nanoparticle Sheets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 06/30/2012
* USD 405,000.00

This Award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a new class of free-
standing, ultrathin sheets comprised of layers of close-packed metallic
nanoparticles, each particle surrounded by a thin shell of short organic
molecules that act as inter-particle spacers. The sheets can be self-assembled
in a single processing step from solution onto a solid substrate, can drape
themselves over open holes in the substrate that are hundreds to thousands of
nanoparticles across, and exhibit remarkable mechanical strength and robustness,
including Young?s moduli of several GigaPascal. As monolayers these sheets are
the thinnest structures that can be fabricated from nanoparticle building
blocks. The project exploits the fact that the properties of nanoparticle
assemblies can be tuned by varying the size, shape and type of the individual
particles and, independently, by varying the spacer molecules. Free-standing
sheets make it possible to investigate the unique material properties of large
assemblies of nanoscale building blocks without interference from a substrate,
and at the same time allow for direct experimental access, via a range of probes
such as transmission electron or scanning probe microscopies, to the individual
building blocks themselves. Combining systematic experiments with simulations of
the elastic response, the research addresses a key issue that is still
unanswered, namely the detailed mechanisms giving rise to the observed large
tensile strength of ultrathin nanoparticle sheets. In addition, new directions
are pursued, such as the possibility of introducing mechanical anisotropy
through suitable particle shapes, further tunability through the use of magnetic
particles, and the feasibility of the sheets as novel
resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle self-assembly offers special
opportunities for the design of next-generation materials. This project focuses
on a new class of ultra-thin sheets, fabricated from single layers of metal
nanoparticles. In this ultrathin limit, the sheets combine extreme flexibility
with unusual mechanical strength. This combination makes it possible to design
novel coatings as well as freely suspended monolayer membranes involving 10
million or more particles. The project also provides a natural platform for
integrating research with training and outreach. It will train one postdoc and
one graduate student in vital nanoscience know-how, and introduce undergraduates
to forefront science. A unique component is a set of outreach activities that
include the development and prototyping of small-scale, hands-on activities with
a major science museum.