* 0907430
* Understanding and Recreation of a 4500 Year Old  Reconstituted Limestone
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michel Barsoum, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 125,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;How the Great Pyramids of Giza were built
has remained an enduring mystery. In the mid-Eighties a French scientist
proposed that blocks of the pyramids were cast in place using limestone
aggregate and a cement-like binder. In 2006, Barsoum et al. published a paper
presenting evidence that some pyramid blocks were cast. In this grant, Prof.
Barsoum?s group will examine more pyramid samples to obtain further evidence
that they were cast, including using techniques such as C-dating. Subsequently
some discussions and work on reverse-engineering the technology and exploring
its potential for today?s world will begin. The impact of this work on society
is truly multifaceted and universal. For one it may be possible to rewrite the
history books and be of fundamental importance to Egyptologists, archeologists
and to the restoration of ancient Egyptian antiquities made with that
technology. It could push the date of the invention of concrete back. In the
long run, it may be possible to build affordable and durable homes and shelters
that are esthetically indistinguishable from natural limestone. Reconstituted
limestone such as this would release roughly 80-90 % less CO2 than Portland
cement-based concrete. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS&lt;br/&gt;The
microstructure of some pyramid limestones will be studied in order to understand
how they were formed. Furthermore, they will carbon date these materials (i) to
test the hypothesis that some of the key pyramidal structures are synthetic in
nature, and (ii) to supply an independent date for the building of the pyramids.
A second aspect of the project is to reverse-engineer this limestone based on
what is learned from the characterization through collaborations. The long-term
goal is to develop a low technology, low energy and thus low CO2, building
material for the third world and possibly the developed world. In terms of
outreach and education, a scaled down pyramid (with ~10 m by ~10 m base) is to
be built by students at Drexel University and documented. Three-dimensional
animations of how the pyramids are believed to have been built will be generated
and widely disseminated via several means, including the web (e.g., U-tube).
&lt;br/&gt;