* 0907204
* Magnetic-Fluorescent Bifunctional Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Yuping Bao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2014
* USD 226,516.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of this proposal lies in: (1)
Fluorescent Ag nanoclusters (a few Ag atoms) are used as the fluorescent
component, which can overcome the size increase issue of the current practice.
(2) The capping agents of iron oxide nanoparticles are directly used as
templates for Ag nanocluster formation under UV-radiation without the addition
of other chemicals, which avoids tedious synthetic procedures. Besides the
routine structural and physicochemical characterization of the proposed
integrated nanostructures, detailed photophysical properties of Ag nanoclusters
on nanoparticle surfaces will be explored with fluorescent correlation
spectroscopy. Further, the structural integrity of the integrated nanostructures
will be tested in biological systems. The proposed work will offer fundamental
insight into the integration of multiple nanocomponents (e.g., correlations
between structure-properties-performance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic nanoparticles have significantly advanced
cancer treatments through targeted drug delivery and localized therapy and
further make simultaneous therapy and diagnosis possible as magnetic resonant
imaging (MRI) contrast agents. Unfortunately, these applications are limited by
the expensive MRI equipments, which are not available to common research
laboratories. Currently, fluorescence imaging remains the primary choice for
bio-imaging because of its high sensitivity. This proposal will develop
magnetic-fluorescent nanoparticles which provide a single platform with
therapeutic and diagnostic functions. Beyond the new possibilities of this
nanostructure in biomedical fields, further findings on the photophysics of Ag
nanoclusters on nanoparticle surfaces may provide valuable information to
physicists and spectroscopists. The integrated nanostructures may be used for
monitored magnetic removal of the contaminants from the environment. Part of the
research project will be incorporated in the junior summer laboratory course
(ChBE320), a five hour laboratory operation class, promoting students? learning
through hands-on experience, such as building alternating current (AC) magnetic
coils to study the heat generation from magnetic nanoparticles and creating
magnetic-fluorescent nanoparticle arrays on a chip to demonstrate the bio-
sensing capability.&lt;br/&gt;