* 0908487
* Research Proposal in Algebraic Geometry and String Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ron Donagi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2013
* USD 480,780.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This proposal explores several areas where algebraic geometry interacts with
quantum field theory and string theory: the Geometric Langlands Program, on the
math side; heterotic string phenomenology and F theory, in physics; and the
superstring measure, an algebraic geometry project motivated by physics. The
recent breakthrough in producing a Heterotic Standard Model is a perfect
illustration of the power of algebraic geometry at the service of physics. Using
techniques for construction of non simply connected Calabi-Yau threefolds and of
bundles on them satisfying various constraints on their chern classes and
cohomology, the PI produced the only known example of a heterotic string
compactification which has exactly the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
(MSSM) spectrum of particles and forces, with no unwanted exotic matter. A
systematic study is proposed of the High Country region of the string Landscape,
where the Heterotic Standard Models live. This includes investigation of all
known non simply connected Calabi-Yau threefolds, incorporating a classification
of all Standard Model bundles on them and analysis of their mathematical and
phenomenological properties. The apparent great scarcity of these Heterotic
Standard Models motivates attempts to determine the rough size of the string
High Country. The recent phenomenological breakthroughs based on F-theory
underlie the urgency of constructing global, geometric models realizing the
various known local models. The construction, at all genera, of the superstring
measure is an important foundational issue in string theory. Recent proposals
have converted this to a question in classical algebraic geometry, closely
related to modular forms, the Schottky problem, and theta identities. The
existing proposals do not quite work. Fortunately, it seems likely that the
addition of some algebro-geometric ingredients may overcome the obstruction.

The Geometric Langlands Conjecture is an old and central open problem in
algebraic geometry and representation theory. In recent years it has also been
of great interest to physicists, who have embedded it into the context of
quantum field theory. The combination of their physical insights with recent
breakthroughs in non abelian Hodge theory and older ideas from integrable
systems offers the real possibility of a complete solution soon. F-theory and
its duality to the heterotic string are another area where algebraic geometry is
able to make powerful contributions to the physics. The PI also proposes to
continue a wide range of educational activities, including curriculum
development, the writing of a textbook, and extensive work with undergraduate
and graduate students, aimed at the dissemination of new knowledge concerning
the interactions of mathematics and high energy physics.