* 0908994
* Materials World Network: Fundamental Investigations of Conjugated Polymers Enabled by Orthogonal Lithography
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 900,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will study the
fundamental behavior of new devices made to study organic semiconductors using a
newly discovered process called orthogonal lithography. Organic semiconductors
used in thin, flexible electronic circuits offer the possibility of creating low
cost electronics that will provide new intelligent capabilities to everyday
items. An example of this might be a smart bandage, a wound covering that can
sense healing, communicate to medical staff and possibly release antibiotics.
Orthogonal lithography, a breakthrough fabrication process for organic
electronic materials that was discovered at Cornell University involves the use
of patterning materials soluble in environmentally safe fluorine containing
solvents. Orthogonal lithography will be used to make complex, multilayer
organic semiconductor devices not possible by other means. We expect a range of
new materials, processes and possibly industries will be developed. The
resulting transferable skills will be shared between Cornell and our partners at
Cambridge University during exchange visits of individual coworkers.
Participating students and other researchers will not only take part in globally
leading research, but through interactions with our UK partners, will be exposed
to the transfer of science to the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to leverage orthogonal lithography to create unique device architectures
that will elucidate the fundamentals of organic electronic materials. Key
research opportunities such as the ability to probe charge transport in a single
crystalline domain of a conjugated polymer will be the focus of the proposed
research. The project combines the complementary skills of the Cornell Materials
and the Cambridge Organic Electronics groups in a study that will elucidate
vital aspects of organic semiconductor physics and advance organic patterning
science. The significance of the proposed research is that if successful we have
the opportunity to better understand charge generation, injection, transport,
and recombination in organic materials as well as to achieve organic
semiconductor device properties and features that are presently inaccessible.
The planned research benefits from the complementary skills of this experienced
international team in which the group at Cornell will provide expertise in the
both the development of sophisticated resists and processes for the benign
patterning of organics, and in precision materials characterization, while the
Cambridge group will bring to the collaboration their exceptional device physics
capabilities. The PIs will conduct outreach to high school girls and
particularly their teachers, as this greatly increases its impact. Finally,
industry has shown interest in the anticipated discoveries coming from this
research.