* 0908652
* Arctic Perspectives
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Paul Josephson, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 11/30/2011
* USD 75,750.00

Arctic resources and climate have become the increasing focus of attention of
circumpolar residents, scientists, engineers, and policy makers,. Bringing
together a number of junior and several senior scholars at the cutting edge of
basic research in a number of pertinent fields, this international project
consists of a working conference to discuss "Arctic Perspectives" in the 21st
century. In June 2010 PI Paul Josephson (Colby College) will convene the
research conference in Naryan Mar, Russia, to discuss crucial issues concerning
the Arctic in the 21st century, and the place of science and technology in
Arctic regions. These issues include, but are not limited to: climate change;
new claims on, and mounting competition for resources; the tension between
national determinants of policy and the need for adequate international
agreements for cooperation in resource management; increasing awareness of the
rights of indigenous peoples to land and resources; and an examination of the
preliminary results of the fourth International Polar
Year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-hosted by the Administration of the Nenets
Autonomous Region of the Russian Federation, the conference will draw together
scholars from the US, Russia, Finland, Norway, Denmark, Canada, and Inuit
homelands to consider the issues from historical and policy perspectives. The
conference participants will examine: 1) the national determinants of resource
management practices versus tensions for international cooperation, including
evaluation of the adequacy of international agreements to regulate Arctic
resources; 2) empire, science and economic development; 3) the infrastructure of
arctic development; and 4) changing issues of urbanization, settlement and
migration. The geographic focus of this conference includes the entire
circumpolar region. This project is comparative; involves collaborations between
researchers and those living in the Arctic; centers upon cutting edge research
in a variety of disciplines; and will help form partnerships among disciplines,
regions, researchers, communities, and students.