* 0908877
* Numerical simulations of non-equilibrium plasmas and their spectra - extensions to the molecular environs of AGN & Starburst Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2012
* USD 159,571.00

AST-0908877 Gary Ferland

This award will support the continued development of the spectral synthesis code
"Cloudy." Cloudy is a widely used astrophysical modeling program used to
simulate the microphysics of a non-equilibrium gas, determine its microscopic
properties, and predict the resulting spectrum. It is used to understand spectra
from astronomical objects over the whole range from star forming clouds to the
cores of active galaxies, with over a hundred scientific papers per year
acknowledging its use. Dr. Ferland has recently expanded the program to include
states from fully molecular to fully ionized with comprehensive treatments of
H2, H I, He I, other ions, and dust emission. During this award, additional
improvements will be implemented, including a database driven framework for
atomic and molecular physics which will expand the number of species that can be
modeled in the spectra, various infrastructure changes to permit parallel
processing and new radiative transfer methods. The code infrastructure changes
are also the first steps in a longer-term effort to allow 3D simulations. All of
these improvements will greatly enhance the capabilities of this important
software tool.

Dr. Ferland continues to involve junior researchers throughout this project, and
this award helps to support a postdoctoral scholar, training in modeling plasmas
and radiative transfer. Talented scientists with such skills are critical to
interpreting the increasingly detailed astronomical data coming from current and
future ground- and space-based observatories.