* 0908368
* Stellar Population Synthesis Modeling:  A Critical Evaluation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Gunn, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,275.00

Dr. James Gunn (Princeton University) will undertake a detailed examination of
the ingredients and methodology of stellar population synthesis (SPS) models.
This type of modeling provides the bridge between the physical properties of
galaxies (such as chemical composition, stellar mass, and star formation
history) and the observed spectral energy distributions. It also represents the
fundamental link between extragalactic observations and models of galaxy
assembly. Despite its importance in many areas of extragalactic astronomy, the
uncertainties associated with SPS modeling have received relatively little
attention. This situation is especially troubling in light of known and
important deficiencies in current implementations of
SPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Gunn will develop a flexible SPS
code that is capable of incorporating uncertainties in stellar evolution,
including the evolution and properties of evolved stars of all types. He will
also explore uncertainties in stellar spectral libraries, models of dust in
galaxies, the distribution of stellar abundances and the history of chemical
enrichment, and the relative numbers of stars of different mass. The goals of
the study are to provide robust constraints on the physical properties of large
samples of galaxies, to investigate the extent to which uncertainties in SPS
make it difficult to compare galaxy formation models to observations, and to
highlight which uncertainties in SPS are the most important to address with
future observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new, versatile SPS code developed
under this proposal will be publicly released so that it may be maximally useful
to the community. In addition, the code will be open source, which is unique for
SPS codes. The project will also create comprehensive catalogs of a variety of
physical properties of galaxies from existing and future surveys of galaxy
properties. These catalogs will be fully released to the public on a short time-
scale. &lt;br/&gt;