* 0908480
* Probing Hydrogen and Helium Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Siang Peng Oh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2012
* USD 346,967.00

Dr Oh and his team will study the effect of newly-forming galaxies on the
diffuse intergalactic medium, as the ultraviolet radiation from their young
stars and active nuclei reionizes the gas. They will incorporate Monte-Carlo
radiative transfer into the cosmological hydrodynamics code of collaborator
Yoshida, and use this code to investigate how radiation pressure and the
trapping of Lyman-alpha photons can regulate star formation and gas flow in
early proto-galaxies. Several low-frequency radio telescopes now under
construction will measure the redshifted 21cm radiation emitted by neutral
hydrogen gas less than half a billion years after the Big Bang. Dr Oh and his
team will develop better numerical algorithms and statistics to analyze these
observations, and to remove signals from nearby objects. This will provide
better measures of how the fraction of neutral gas decreases with time, and of
the location and size of the regions ionized by nascent galaxies. The remaining
neutral gas produces absorption lines in the spectra of distant quasars. This
team will use simulations to derive an improved model that will allow better
estimates for the time that hydrogen and helium were reionized, for the equation
of state of the intergalactic gas at early times, and for the clustering of
intergalactic gas clouds close to the present day.

Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained by participating in the
research. Dr Oh and his team will make their analysis codes available to the
astronomical community. This is an international project in collaboration with a
Japanese investigator.