* 0908806
* Collaborative Research: The Holocene paleomagnetic record of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2013
* USD 299,842.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a
reconstruction of the Holocene paleomagnetic record of the Arctic and
investigate linkages with regional climate. The central focus of this project is
to recover continuous 3 to 5 m-long sediment cores from lakes in NW and NE
Alaska, and the Mackenzie Delta, Banks Island and Victoria Island, Canada.
Multiple cores from two similar lake systems at each of the four locations will
be recovered. The cores will be the subject of a series of analytical techniques
including magnetic, lithostratigraphic, geochemical and biological measurements.
The sites selected for study will provide records that extend through the
Holocene back as far as 20 ka providing the longest high-resolution Arctic
paleomagnetic records to date. Chronologies will be primarily derived by
radiocarbon dating using modern AMS C-14 techniques. A series of methods will be
used to document the climate history of the region including environmental
magnetism, geochemistry, scanning XRF, biogenic silica and a host of biological
climate proxies with Canadian collaborators. The paleomagnetic and environmental
magnetic records will be studied on multiple cores from each lake by alternating
field demagnetization of u-channel samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
'Intellectual Merit' of the study lies in the development of a new set of
Holocene paleomagnetic observations that will confirm and expand, spatially and
temporally, upon previous Arctic paleomagnetic observations and supplement
ongoing Arctic and global Holocene paleomagnetic initiatives. The extended
Arctic paleomagnetic record will permit direct comparison to marine records from
Iceland and those now being developed in the Gulf of Alaska and the Arctic Ocean
and Baffin Bay. These new records will permit reconstruction of the Holocene
(and possibly beyond) paleomagnetic record of the Arctic, provide constraints
necessary to test geomagnetic hypotheses, contribute to the continuing
development of an Arctic magneto-stratigraphic network to facilitate dating of
marine and terrestrial paleorecords, and provide new constraints on whether the
geomagnetic field has a role in the climate system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
'Broader Impacts' of the study relate to scientific and educational outcomes.
Data generated from the study, when combined with results from Phase I and other
published studies, will provide a 180Â° paleomagnetic perspective around the
Arctic, documenting past changes and providing paleo-constraints on the future
behavior and impacts of the ongoing motion of the north magnetic pole. The data
will also help to differentiate the contributions of geomagnetic versus solar
control on terrestrial cosmic ray flux and cosmogenic isotope production with
practical implications for telecommunications, human health, global ecosystems
and climate. Data will be contributed to magIC, sedDB and NOAA paleoclimate
databases and used to supplement ongoing spherical harmonic studies of the
global geomagnetic field from a region with little data. The study will support
the training of undergraduate and graduate students and the results will be
widely communicated to the general public through Web sites, public lectures and
K-12 teaching initiatives.