* 0908642
* Studies of Hot Subdwarf Stars in Binary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Wade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 295,596.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Richard Wade will carry out a
program of multi-epoch radial velocity observations of subdwarf B stars in
binaries to establish whether their orbits are as predicted by theory. Subdwarf
B stars are luminous, hot, evolved stars which are undergoing nuclear fusion of
helium in their cores. Stellar evolution theory and recent observations suggest
that many subdwarf B stars were formed in interacting binary systems. Those
systems for which radial velocity variations are found will be followed to
determine full orbits; conversely, if many systems show no detectable
acceleration at a low measurement threshold, then this class of binaries cannot
have interacted to form the subdwarf B star.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
observations will be carried out at the Hobby-Eberly Telescope and at national
facilities. This work will provide fundamental data that can be used to put the
theory of binary star interactions and the origin of subdwarf B stars on a
firmer basis. A better understanding of the ages and mass ranges of stars that
can become subdwarf B stars is important in interpreting the ultraviolet light
from galaxies at large lookback times. The work will help to validate,
challenge, and ultimately improve binary population synthesis models that are
used to predict or understand a wide variety of phenomena in modern
astrophysics. The project will employ and train students to carry out a large
portion of the research tasks. A new series of frequent and regular evening
public talks will be initiated. This will provide a pathway for informal science
education to help maintain a scientifically literate populace.