* 0908529
* Modeling Composition and Dynamics of Cometary Comae Using Recent Observations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* William Jackson, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 399,661.00

AST-0908529 Boice

This project will analyze observations of two recent comets, 9P/Tempel 1 (the
target of the Deep Impact Mission) and C/2004 Q2 (Comet Machholz), to gain
insights into the intrinsic properties of their nuclei and the important
physical and chemical processes that occur in their comae. The work uses
computational tools developed over the past decades that take into account all
relevant physical and chemical processes with sufficient detail not to
oversimplify the interpretation of the complex molecular spectra. This includes
a global gas dynamics simulation with chemistry, and a time-dependent
fluorescence model with collisions and superposition of non-equilibrium states.
This is an innovative and unique opportunity to advance our knowledge of parent
molecules in comets (including water and simple hydrocarbons), and any
compositional variations with depth, gaining clues to the origin of the solar
system and possibly the origin of life on Earth. More specific objectives
include updating the chemical database of photolytic and gas-phase reactions,
and applying the enhanced computational model to the chemistry and composition
of the comae of both comet Tempel 1 and comet Machholz.

This study will yield basic chemical data with applications to many fields of
science, as has been demonstrated in previous work. The model calculations can
be used by observers to search for new species in comets and other astronomical
objects. Dr Boice has close ties with the University of Texas San Antonio (UTSA)
and San Antonio Community College. This research will inform and enhance his
teaching, and provide training for a graduate student, in line with the UTSA
goal of becoming a center of excellence in graduate education and research
opportunities for Hispanics.