* 0908108
* Investigation of the Formation of Water and of the Growth of Ices on Dust Grain Analogues
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gianfranco Vidali, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 528,461.00

AST-0908108&lt;br/&gt;Vidali&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the formation of
water molecules and the growth of ice in conditions that simulate the
interstellar medium and planetary environments. Water is a well-recognized
prerequisite for the complex chemistry linked to the emergence and
sustainability of life, and yet little is known of how water molecules actually
form, although it is clear that gas-phase reactions are inadequate to explain
the observed abundance of water and water-ice in space. This challenging work
exploits the group's expertise and unique laboratory techniques in areas such
low fluxes of reactants, hydrogen and oxygen atomic beams, mass spectrometry,
in-situ infrared spectroscopy, and surface characterization probes, and involves
close collaboration with a theoretical team. The program will study the
mechanism and rates of water formation on grains via hydrogenation reactions and
interaction with energetic particles, measure the alteration of grains early in
ice-mantle formation, determine how ices grow and the effect of photo-
dissociation, and evaluate the competing reactions of H with O to form water, H
with H to form molecular hydrogen, and H with CO to form various different
molecules. The team will also determine the deuteration rate and pathways.
Theoretical analysis will use the experimentally determined parameters to obtain
reaction rates in space environment conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is widely valuable for interpreting results from current and future
ground- and space-based telescopes, such as the Spitzer and Herschel satellites
and the Atacama Large Millimeter Array. It will provide an unprecedented
understanding of the formation of water and the growth of ices. The anticipated
theoretical understanding will benefit all modelers of interstellar and
planetary chemistry. The project provides students with an opportunity to work
in an interdisciplinary field at the forefront of research in astrophysics,
planetary science and surface science. The principal investigator in particular
is very active in outreach programs sponsored by local and national
organizations and provides a recognized nurturing environment to undergraduate
and high-school students.