* 0908207
* Analysis of Liquid Crystal and Ideal Gas Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yuxi Zheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 217,985.00

Zheng DMS-0908207

The investigator studies the Euler equations modeling inviscid fluids, and
nonlinear variational wave equations modeling liquid crystals. His objective is
to gain better understanding of complicated phenomena, such as defects in liquid
crystals and shocks in fluid flows, that show themselves as singularities or
shocks in the solutions of the equations. The methods include hard, soft, and
asymptotic analysis, numerical computation, and techniques of mathematical
modeling. In the fluids topic the investigator explores the role of symmetry in
describing the structure of solutions to shock reflection problems for the
multi-dimensional Euler equations. This bears on the von Neumann paradox. The
issue in the nematic liquid crystals topic is to provide a quantitative as well
as qualitative foundation for manipulating the effect of defects in electronic
devices. The investigation of these mathematical issues (1) yields new
understanding regarding fluids and liquid crystals, which are critical for the
advancement of many engineering sciences such as aerospace engineering, robot
designing, and energy efficient devices; (2) provides advanced training for
graduate students or postdoctoral researchers; (3) enhances collaboration and
cross training of faculties between mathematics, materials science, and physics,
thereby establishing a foundation for training students in these broad areas.

The investigator studies some applied mathematical problems in fluid dynamics
(which includes the motion of air and water) and in liquid crystal physics in
materials science. Scientists and engineers have used certain mathematical
equations, called partial differential equations, to model motion or change in a
system. Turbulence in fluids and defects in materials show up in the form of
singularities and instabilities in the solutions of the equations that model the
behavior of the systems. Even in cases where the equations are quite simple, it
is these singularities and instabilities that often spoil accurate numerical
computations of the solutions. The investigator uses state of the art analytical
tools to study the structures of the solutions. In the case of a compressible
gas such as air, for example, he isolates typical singularities (hurricanes,
tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigates their individual structures. The
result of the investigation is a clearer understanding of the worst possible
solutions, or of the structure of solutions. Such results quantify our knowledge
of the physics and offer guidance in high-performance numerical computations of
general solutions. Results here influence scientific areas such as weather
forecasting, fluid dynamics, and materials science, and provide critical
knowledge for the advancement of many application areas such as aerospace
engineering, robot design, and energy efficient devices. In addition, the
project provides advanced training for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers and enhances collaboration and cross training of faculties between
mathematics, materials science, and physics.