* 0908740
* Star Formation in the Turbulent ISM with Realistic Large-Scale Forcing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alexei Kritsuk, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2013
* USD 506,157.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
constrain star formation models with high dynamic range simulations. Current
star formation simulations are based on unphysical initial conditions or
artificial driving forces that mimic the energy injection from a large-scale
turbulent cascade. In this project, Dr. Paolo Padoan (University of California -
San Diego) will overcome this limitation by developing star formation
simulations that resolve the collapse of individual protostellar cores, while
including the large-scale physical processes that drive the turbulence and
control the life cycle of star-forming clouds. The project will include the
large-scale physics by embedding the star-formation simulations, reaching a
resolution of 200 astronomical units in collapsing cores, in a 1 × 1 × 20
Kiloparsec region perpendicular to the Galactic disk. The interstellar medium in
this region will be modeled using three-dimensional, compressible, ideal
magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) simulations, including density stratification in the
Galactic gravitational field, gas self-gravity, radiative cooling, photoelectric
and cosmic-ray heating, large-scale Galactic shear, star formation, and thermal
and mechanical feedback from Type Ia, Ib+c, and Type II supernova explosions.
The large samples of star-forming clouds generated by these simulations will be
processed with radiative transfer codes to produce datasets of simulated dust-
continuum and line emission observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Star formation
is central to much of astrophysics and cosmology. Results from this project will
be relevant to studies of the formation and evolution of galaxies and to the
star formation history of the universe. They will be used to formulate sub-grid
models for cosmological simulations of galaxy formation, where stellar feedback
is important. The radiative transfer calculations will result in large datasets
of simulated observations of star-forming clouds that will be helpful in the
interpretation of real observations. Because this project will generate some of
the largest simulations of supersonic turbulence to date, it will also allow
high resolution studies of the statistical properties of supernova-driven MHD
turbulence. Dr. Padoan, in collaboration with the San Diego Supercomputer
Center, has recently started the Computational Astrophysics Data Analysis Center
(CADAC), a new service to collect, share, and analyze datasets from numerical
simulations. CADAC provides powerful data-storage and data-analysis resources to
the astrophysical community, encouraging the early publication of numerical
datasets and data-analysis tools. Through CADAC, data from this project and
computational resources will be available to the scientific community, including
graduate students.