* 0908437
* Semiclassical and Quantum Theory of Open and Complex Lasers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Alfred Stone, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education at the interface of condensed matter physics, quantum optics, and
photonics. The PI and coworkers have developed a novel self-consistent laser
theory, which finds the steady-state of a laser with a cavity of arbitrary
complexity and openness without doing time-dependent simulations. The theory
treats the openness of the cavity exactly and the non-linear interactions in the
cavity to all orders with a single, well-justified approximation. Recent
comparisons to exact time-dependent numerical simulations of the lasing
equations confirm the accuracy and validity of the approach. The PI has applied
the theory to treat diffusive random lasers, a system which resisted
conventional approaches because of its extreme openness. Applications of the
theory to shape design of dielectric cavity lasers, to speckle correlation
measurements in media with gain and to tunable random lasers will be studied. In
addition, a full statistical theory of random lasers will be developed, to
characterize their frequency distribution, number of lasing modes, the stability
of their frequencies and modal intensities under changes in pump and impurity
configuration. Finally, the theory will be extended beyond the semiclassical
limit to include field quantization effects, which determine the laser linewidth
and noise properties. A long-term goal is to develop a realistic laser
simulation code based on the theoretical model developed by this work, which
could have very wide technological impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education with
potential impacts on the fields of quantum optics and photonics. The research
supported by this award has the potential to change our basic understanding of
lasers, which are used in a wide range of technologies including CD players and
some surgical tools. Unlike a light bulb, lasers generate light waves in which
each wave is in lock-step with another. This property of coherence enables
device technologies that exploit the phenomenon of interference for their
operation. This research project develops a theory for a new kind of laser,
random lasers which, like other lasers, emits coherent light, but unlike other
lasers, in random directions. Ordinary lasers use strategically placed precision
mirrors to trap laser light in a gain material to amplify the light. In
contrast, light in random lasers is trapped in the gain material by the laser
light being scattered from randomly positioned scattering centers in that
material. This notion of localizing light has analogies to electrons being
trapped in localized quantum mechanical states in imperfect materials ? a
phenomenon studied in condensed matter physics with aspects that keep the
problem at the frontiers of the field. The PI?s research has potential impact on
newly developed lasers that are about a ten-millionth of an inch in size and has
many potential practical applications, including detecting injuries in human
tissues, revealing chemical impurities in water, and determining the
authenticity of documents.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop a
realistic laser simulation code based on this theoretical model, which would
have wide technological impact, with the code then used for laser design and
optimization. This research lies at the cutting edge of science and optical
engineering, and will possible real world applications that would benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;