* 0908890
* Damped and Sub-damped Lyman-alpha Absorbers: What Are They, and What Do They Tell Us About Galaxy Evolution?
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Varsha Kulkarni, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,491.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Kulkarni will study the gas between
galaxies and around nascent galaxies by observing its absorption lines in the
spectra of more distant bright quasars. Generally, the densest gas, in the
damped Lyman-alpha absorbers, is already forming stars. If these absorbers
represented young galaxies, we would expect the abundance of heavy elements to
rise from a low value towards roughly the solar levels at the present day, as
dying stars return these elements to the gas. Instead, most such gas clouds are
metal-poor. Dr Kulkarni and her collaborators have shown that 'sub-damped Lyman-
alpha absorbers', of slightly lower density, do become more metal-rich over time
as expected. This suggests that much star-forming activity happens in these
less-dense clouds. Dr Kulkarni will conduct further studies of both damped and
sub-damped Lyman-alpha absorbers. She will take spectra for a larger sample, to
elucidate the physical and chemical differences between systems of low and high
metal content. Using adaptive-optics techniques at the Gemini and Keck
telescopes, she will obtain deep images of their star-forming regions in the
near infrared. With European collaborators, she will obtain spatially resolved
spectroscopy at the Very Large Telescope, to trace the motions of gas ionized by
the young stars and examine gradients in gas properties. Spectroscopy of binary
quasars and gravitationally lensed quasars with the Magellan telescopes will
probe the spatial extent of the absorbing gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate
student will be trained by participating in the research. Dr Kulkarni will
continue her outreach talks at local schools and organizations, and public
observing sessions at the campus observatory. She has a strong record of
mentoring students from under-represented groups in research, which she will
continue.