* 0908379
* Weight Enumeration for Convolutional Codes
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Heide Gluesing-Luerssen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 183,418.00

Gluesing-Luerssen DMS-0908379

The project aims at furthering the mathematical theory of convolutional codes.
The error-correcting quality of these codes can be measured by a variety of
distance parameters that have been introduced in the engineering-oriented
literature. The main idea of the project is the investigation of convolutional
codes based on the weight adjacency matrix, a single parameter that comprises,
among other things, all those different distance measures. So far two major
results have been established by the investigator: a MacWilliams Identity
Theorem stating that the weight adjacency matrix of a code fully determines that
of the dual code, and a theorem stating that codes without non-zero constant
codewords and sharing the same weight adjacency matrix are monomially
equivalent. These results open up new directions in convolutional coding theory.
Firstly, self-dual codes can be studied theoretically. Besides the obvious fact
that the weight adjacency matrix of a self-dual code is invariant under the
MacWilliams transformation, the close link between self-dual convolutional codes
and self-dual block codes obtained by tail-biting plays a crucial role. It can
be expected that, conversely, positive results for self-dual convolutional codes
will also have an impact on the theory of self-dual tail-biting block codes.
Furthermore, the investigator explores the MacWilliams Identity and its
consequences for minimal conventional and tail-biting trellises for linear block
codes. The analogy in the graphical representation of trellis block codes and
convolutional codes indeed suggests a parallel treatment of these two classes of
codes. Another subproject aims at investigating under what conditions one may
declare two convolutional codes identical with respect to their algebraic
structure and error-correcting capabilities. In light of the result about
monomially equivalent codes mentioned above, the weight adjacency matrix is
expected to play a crucial role in this project as well. The goal of this
subproject is a classification and a comparison of convolutional codes in the
sense of classical coding theory.

This project focuses on the algebraic theory of error-correcting codes. Such
codes protect data against alteration through noise and enable the
reconstruction of the original data from the corrupted information. All current
standards of data transmission and data storage have built-in error correcting
mechanisms. The most famous examples are the compact disk player, cell phones,
the internet, satellite and deep space communication systems. The project aims
at deepening the mathematical theory of convolutional codes. This specific class
of codes forms one of the major players in many communication schemes, mainly in
deep space communication and other wireless data transmission schemes. With the
ever-growing demand of sophisticated information technology there is a
continuing need of a thorough mathematical theory in order to improve the
performance of such communication devices.