* 0908403
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Convex Optimization Based Approach for High Fidelity Uncertainty Propagation Through Nonlinear Dynamic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Puneet Singla, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2011
* USD 160,067.00

The main focus of this research work is on the problem of accurate uncertainty
propagation through nonlinear dynamical systems with stochastic forcing term and
the design of data assimilation algorithms to determine optimal and multi-
hypothesis estimates of the actual physical phenomenon. A main feature of the
proposed research work is to pose the uncertainty evolution problem as a convex
optimization problem with guaranteed convergence. The Fokker-Planck-Kolmogorov
equation (FPKE) and Chapman-Kolmogorov equation (CKE) will be used to determine
evolution of state pdf due to probabilistic uncertainty in initial or boundary
conditions, model parameters and forcing function. By accurately characterizing
the uncertainty associated with both process and measurement models, the
proposed research offers systematic design of low-complexity data assimilation
algorithms with significant improvement in nominal performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research effort will focus on demonstrating,
through rigorous analysis, simulation and design, the applicability and
feasibility of these new ideas in accurate forecasting of complex physical
phenomenon such as the dispersion of toxic material through atmosphere. Release
of hazardous material from one or multiple source locations creates a plume,
which is diffused and transported by local meteorological conditions. Any model
used to represent the dispersion of a pollutant is a reflection of numerous
assumptions and simplifications to permit determination of a tractable model.
The uncertainties resulting from the lack of knowledge of local meteorological
conditions or numerous assumptions in the modeling process can have a profoundly
detrimental effect on the accurate estimate of the toxic plume. The application
of the proposed methodologies to the dispersion of toxic material through the
atmosphere will provide governmental agencies such as EPA or DHS means to
control or monitor the emission of harmful air
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extensive plan to integrate the research
plan into an educational and outreach plan will be put in place that involves
graduate, undergraduate as well as high-school students and under-represented
minorities in science and engineering fields&lt;br/&gt;