* 0908274
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic and Multiscale Analysis of Ambient-Noise Generated Scattered Waves and Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Knut Solna, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2013
* USD 298,612.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is the
development of a comprehensive theory to analyze (inverse) scattering problems
with waves in random media generated by (random) ambient noise sources. In
particular, the investigators are interested in the analysis of measurements of
such waves if the (multiple) scattering takes place in the interior of a domain
and the measurements are taken on its boundary. Milestones include: (1) an
analysis framework for the scattering of jointly coherent and incoherent waves
in a mixed model consisting of a macro multi-scale component, a random
microscale component and coherent conormal singularities (the word
``incoherent'' is used advisedly; many would prefer the term ``diffuse'' if the
phase relation between source of ambient seisms and the field that is generated
is deterministic); and (2) the design of functionals of cross correlations and
beyond, and associated sensitivity maps statistically stably resolving (changes
in) the various (random) model parameters. This project develops methods for
extracting information from ``noise''. The idea is to look at higher order
statistical patterns in noise-generated data. As an example, imagine to estimate
the distance to a wall by analyzing noise reflected off the wall rather than by
analyzing the delayed echo of a coherent signal. In the project much more
complicated situations are considered in which noise generated waves have
propagated through a complex (random) medium before they are measured. The
investigators will develop new techniques for describing waves that are affected
by such a medium, in addition to algorithms that effectively process the
mentioned data numerically to extract relevant statistical information and
subsequent imaging. These will have applications in remote sensing, medical
imaging and seismic imaging using ambient noise sources; the investigators will
focus on the latter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With improved theory the
investigators can develop inverse scattering tools that have the potential to
revolutionize the characterization of structures and processes (e.g., flow,
tremors, seismogenesis) in the subsurface, on spatial scales relevant for
regional studies (e.g., structure and microseismic activity of crust and upper
mantle lithosphere; hazards) and hydrocarbon production (energy). The results
can furthermore be applied to monitoring CO_2 sequestration. Large and dense
sensor arrays that have become operative recently provide unprecedented
opportunities for exploiting new theoretical insights to unravel, hitherto
unexplored, complexities in the subsurface.