* 0908346
* The dynamics of rotating triaxial galaxies with massive black holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Monica Valluri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 09/30/2013
* USD 440,112.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Valluri will study stellar motions
in galaxies that are triaxial or have barred disks, and harbor supermassive
black holes at their centers. Most elliptical galaxies are triaxial, and roughly
half of all disk galaxies are barred. Despite this, the masses of their central
black holes are generally determined by fitting axisymmetric (or even spherical)
galaxy models to the observational data. Dr Valluri will start by investigating
orbits in model triaxial potentials, finding the underlying frequencies of the
regular orbits to classify them into their major families, and mapping out the
regions where orbits are chaotic. She will then use the same technique on the
orbits of particles in gravitational N-body simulations of rotating triaxial and
barred galaxies, both with and without a central black hole. Finally, she will
improve her current axisymmetric Schwarzschild code to include triaxiality and
figure rotation. This code generates gravitationally self-consistent models that
will be used to estimate the masses of the black holes at the centers of well-
observed nearby galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An undergraduate student will
participate in the research. The anticipated results are of broad scientific
interest, since mass estimates for galaxy-center black holes are used to
constrain the efficiency with which active galactic nuclei radiate energy, and
to estimate how often the merger of binary supermassive black holes should be
detectable by gravitational wave experiments. Dr Valluri will lead a discussion
and mentoring group for women graduate students and undergraduate students in
her department. She will also carry out hands-on astronomy projects for K-12
students in collaboration with the University of Michigan's Museum of Natural
History and Planetarium.