* 0908221
* Adaptation and Percolation in Complex Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Juan Restrepo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 248,054.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Many important dynamical processes take place on networks. Examples include
epidemic propagation, genetic regulation, synchronization, information
propagation, and many more. Often, these dynamical processes have a modifying
effect on the network structure. This project will study the bidirectional
interaction of network structure and network processes. As an important and
representative case, the synchronization of network-coupled dynamical systems
will be studied when network links and oscillator parameters adapt in response
to node dynamics. Network and parameter adaptation will be investigated
numerically and analytically by developing averaged equations that describe the
evolution of the network and oscillator parameters. Possible network fixed
points, bifurcations, and attractors in low-dimensional subsets of the space of
networks will be studied as a function of various network measures and adaption
rules. In a related project, percolation in non-Markovian networks will be
studied. The effect of network structure on the percolation threshold has been
studied for Markovian networks and for locally tree-like networks. The validity
of the Markovian assumption will be tested for various networks arising in
applications. Additionally, a way to determine the percolation threshold in non-
Markovian networks that are not tree-like will be sought.

Network percolation is related to models of epidemic propagation, the
propagation of information in a network, or the robustness of networks under
attack or random failures. For example, in the epidemic context, the percolation
threshold separates networks in which a disease will die out from those in which
it will propagate to infect a significant fraction of the population. Our
theoretical understanding of how network structure (for example, how people
interact with each other during an epidemic) determines this transition is
restricted to networks satisfying specific conditions. One of the goals of this
project is to directly test whether or not networks found in practice, such as
social networks, satisfy them. In addition, existing theoretical tools will be
extended to networks that do not satisfy these conditions. Many processes that
can be described in terms of networks, such as communication networks of
unmanned aerial vehicles, food-chain networks, and neuron networks, do not take
place on a static network, but on a network that changes in response to node
dynamics. The other part of the project seeks to increase our understanding of
how networks change in response to the processes that they mediate, and how they
can be described as dynamical objects.