* 0908186
* Collaborative Research: The impact of bromine chemistry on the isotopic composition of nitrate at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Lewis Huey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 283,052.00

Nitrate is one of the major ions found in alpine and polar snow, yet it
continues to be one of the least understood chemical components in ice core
records. Recent work ahs shown nitrate isotope ratios to be a powerful tool for
the study of nitrate in snow and ice cores. The isotopic composition of nitrate
has been shown to contain information about the source of the nitrate (nitrogen
oxides) and the oxidation processes that convert nitrogen oxides to nitrate in
the atmosphere prior to deposition. Because hydroxyl and peroxy radicals have
very different isotopic compositions than ozone, one can now distinguish the
impact of the different oxidation processes that produce nitrate in the
atmosphere. Seasonal observations of the oxygen isotopic composition of nitrate
in snow at Summit, Greenland, cannot be understood in terms of standard, local
photochemistry. The most likely causes of the model and observation discrepancy
are that the box model lacks transport of nitrate from regions outside of Summit
and the influence of halogen chemistry (i.e., BrO) on nitrate. Recent
measurements suggest a higher than expected presence of BrO in the boundary
layer above Summit. The aim of this project is to quantify the influence of
bromine chemistry on nitrate production in the spring and summer. The approach
includes field and laboratory measurements as well as modeling. During spring
and summer field seasons, BrO and multiple gas-phase measurements will be
conducted on-site, while isotopic analyses of snow and atmospheric samples will
be completed in the laboratory. The oxygen isotopic composition of nitrate in
snow and glacial ice holds potential for quantitatively reconstructing
paleoatmospheric oxidant concentrations, but it is important to constrain how
much this tracer reflects local versus regional or hemispheric scale chemistry.
Furthermore, since BrO at Summit most likely originates from a natural source,
and this source is affected by changes in climate, the influence of halogen
chemistry on nitrogen oxides has important implications for the interpretation
of recent and deep ice core records of nitrate.