* 0908334
* Reconstructing The Cosmic Density Field to Understand  the Local Intergalactic Medium and its Relation to Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Houjun Mo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2013
* USD 428,336.00

Dr. Mo and his team will use the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), a large survey
of nearby galaxies, to reconstruct the distribution of dark matter in the local
Universe at the present time. With the aid of large gravitational N-body
simulations, they will deduce what that matter distribution must have been
earlier in cosmic history, before the galaxies began to form their stars. At
those early times, normal matter in the form of gas would have been evenly mixed
with the dark matter. The team will then use smooth-particle hydrodynamic
simulations to follow the combined development of the dark matter and the gas,
under various assumptions about how the gas is turned into stars, and how those
stars feed energy back into the intergalactic gas. Their aims include testing a
currently-popular model, according to which gas is shocked and heated as it
falls into massive systems, but flows quietly into smaller galaxies, remaining
cold so that it can readily form stars. They will estimate how much gas is
associated with various cosmic environments, such as filaments and sheets of
galaxies, and examine how metals produced by the nuclear reactions inside stars
are fed into the intergalactic gas.

A graduate student will be trained by participating in the research, and the
team also expects to offer small-scale research projects for undergraduates. The
density fields derived from the SDSS catalog, and various catalogs from the
simulations, will be made available to the astronomical community. The team will
produce three-dimensional maps of the reconstructed distribution of dark matter,
luminous galaxies and intergalactic gas, for use in teaching and public
outreach.

