* 0908700
* Materials World Network: Novel Physical Phenomena in Unusual Mesoscopic Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Materials World Network (MWN) team consists of five experimentalists and
two theorists from China, Colombia, Japan, Switzerland, and the US to
investigate unusual, mostly unexplored mesoscopic superconductors. In particular
it 1) studies ultrasmall mesoscopic superconductors that feature a singly,
doubly, or multiply connected sample geometry as well as a destructive regime;
2) investigates mesoscopic, conventional s-wave superconductor, and/or a normal
metal bordered by an unconventional, chiral p-wave superconductor; 3) explores
p-wave superconductor-ferromagnetic metal-superconductor (S/F/S) Josephson
junctions to understand the interplay between exchange and Cooper pairing
interactions; and finally, 4) pursues integrated research and education
activities. This work seeks to uncover novel physical phenomena by varying the
sample topology and shrinking the sample size simultaneously, making use of
recently discovered unconventional mesoscopic superconducting systems, or
venturing into the fabrication and measurement of exotic p-wave S/F/S Josephson
junctions for which dramatic phenomena have been predicted theoretically.
Through these studies we expect to obtain new insights into sample-topology
dependent mesoscopic superconductivity and unconventional superconductivity
including Josephson coupling through a ferromagnetic a barrier. The unusual
nature of the mesoscopic superconducting systems to be explored and the fact
that they have largely been unexplored previously appear to ensure ample
opportunities for new discoveries. In addition, this MWN team possesses an
unusually wide range of technical expertise including ultrapure single crystal
growth (by floating zone method), advanced e-beam lithography and focused ion
beam nanofabrication, sophisticated structural and spectroscopic
characterization (Z-contrasted transmission electron microscopy and low-
temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy), highly specialized
device fabrication (SFS Josephson junctions), and low-temperature measurements
(dilution-refrigerator temperatures). On the theoretical side, our team includes
specialists on computational modeling, phenomenology, and microscopic theories.
This research lays a foundation for using mesoscopic superconductors for future
technological applications and also serves as an effective vehicle for
meaningful integration of research and education aiming at providing our
graduate and undergraduate students an international environment for learning
and research. This program helps attract more talents from the vast pool of
woman and minority students to pursue a career in physical sciences. In addition
to providing our students research experience in a multi institution, multi-
culture environment through student exchange and the visits of our international
collaborators.