* 0908569
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Link Between Hybridization and Vocal Communication within Red and Sika Deer
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Megan Wyman, Wyman                   Megan          T
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 07/31/2012
* USD 178,627.00

0908569 Wyman

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Megan
Wyman to work with Drs. Karen McComb and David Reby at the University of Sussex
in the UK.

Hybridization with introduced species is an important but often overlooked
threat to native species survival. Reproductive isolating mechanisms are
integral to the process of speciation. These mechanisms often include species-
specific signals in the context of mate attraction (to locate and identify
appropriate mates) and mate competition (to identify and defend against
potential mating competitors). When these isolating mechanisms are weak,
hybridization may occur. Vocal communication in the context of sexual selection
(mate choice/competition) is used extensively by many deer species and
theoretically should present reproductive barriers to hybridization. However, in
the UK, extensive hybridization and introgression between native red deer and
introduced Japanese sika deer is currently threatening the red deer with genetic
extinction. This project examines two behavioral mechanisms behind this
hybridization by testing species discrimination in male-male competition and
mate choice in the context of reproductive calls. The ?male-male competition
hypothesis? states that males will act more aggressively towards conspecific
calls and least aggressively towards heterospecific calls. The ?female mate
choice hypothesis? states that females will be more attracted to conspecific
calls and least attracted to heterospecific calls. These hypotheses are being
tested using playback experiments that broadcast male reproductive vocalizations
of red, sika, and hybrid deer to wild and captive red and sika deer while their
behavioral reactions (attraction and aggression) are recorded. Differences in
reactions between the sexes or species will point to weaknesses in reproductive
barriers and potential sources of hybridization and introgression. Experiments
are being run on wild deer in the UK and in controlled captive environments at
deer farms in the UK, France, and New Zealand. Additionally, more fine-scale
female choice decisions involved in hybridization are being examined in France
using playbacks of synthetic calls to females with synchronized estrous periods.
No species discrimination experiments of this type have been carried out on
mammalian species and thus the study results will provide a baseline for
understanding the role of vocalizations in mammal hybridization. The PI will
bring this important knowledge back to the US where it can be applied both
locally and globally to a wide variety of interspecific interactions and
hybridizations. The goal is to use this knowledge to implement behavior-focused
conservation efforts aimed at stemming hybridization. Additionally, after this
fellowship the PI plans to teach and conduct research at a US university where
her experience, skills, and collaborations will be shared with US colleagues and
students.