* 0908286
* Problems in Complex Network Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Bassler, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education on the statistical physics of
networks. The research will be focused on network dynamics, and on three
important questions: (1) For a given network structure, how can the dynamics on
the network be designed to optimize desired properties? (2) How does network
structure effect, or influence, the dynamics of networks? (3) How are networks
assembled, or how can they be assembled, in order to have desired dynamics, and,
similarly, how do, or can, they adapt or evolve to optimize desired dynamical
features? By answering these questions, the PI aims to transform understanding
of the dynamics of natural and engineered networks, and transform the design and
control of new and existing networks. Natural networks are ubiquitous, extending
from granular materials to aspects of biological cells and systems. The PI aims
to answer fundamental questions about emergent behavior in condensed matter and
biological systems. These questions lie at the heart of many of the
technological and scientific questions that cut across disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first set of problems concerns two important
optimization problems: &lt;br/&gt;1.) How to best route transport on complex
networks when there is congested traffic. Solutions of this problem obtained by
maximizing the betweenness of any node will be explored and compared to real-
world data. &lt;br/&gt;2.) Community detection in complex networks through
maximizing modularity based on either static or dynamic behavior of the network.
The PI will pursue an algorithmic improvement and a statistical approach to
interpreting the results. As an application for these community detection
methods, the PI will study micro RNA expression data in mice in order to help
understand their biological function.&lt;br/&gt;The second set of problems
studies adaptive dynamics of complex networks in which the topology of the
network and the dynamics on the network simultaneously evolve in response to
each other. The PI will model the growth of fungus networks. Funguses adapt
their structure due to the location of nutrients and the ability to transport
nutrients effectively throughout the network. The PI will explore the
evolutionary development of canalization in Boolean networks. Canalization is an
important form of robustness found in developmental organisms.&lt;br/&gt;The
third set of problems will study the application of random matrix theory to the
dynamics of complex networks. Specifically, we will investigate how perturbing
matrices in various random matrix ensembles affects the spectral properties of
the ensembles. Spectral properties control many of the essential structural and
dynamical properties of complex systems. The ensembles that will be studied
include those describing complex networks of various structures. Additionally,
the statistical predictions of random matrix theory will be applied to
understand the results obtained for the other two sets of
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to multi-disciplinary
efforts at the University of Houston in Computational and Network Science. It
provides an interdisciplinary learning experience for students; they will be
trained in broadly applicable analytical and computational skills. The research
will be done collaboratively with a diverse, international group of theorists,
and experimentalists from Germany, Australia, and Houston. The PI is strongly
committed to involving students from under-represented groups in this project,
including women, ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education with a focus to develop the principles that
govern phenomena that emerge in networks with immediate application to
biological systems and materials. The notion of a network is an abstract concept
that enables the representation and analysis of diverse complex interacting
systems. Common examples include the power-grid, phone lines, the Internet, and
social networks, such as those describing acquaintanceships, collaborations, and
terrorists. Many biological systems and materials and physical systems can be
viewed to be structured as networks leading to deeper insights into their
fundamental nature. The PI aims to discover fundamental principles of the
dynamics of networks that will apply to diverse physical systems. The PI will
focus on problems at the interface of condensed matter physics and biology and
more traditional topics of statistical physics to achieve this goal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is theoretical and computational and may have
impact on diverse complex systems and across disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award contributes to multi-disciplinary efforts at
the University of Houston in Computational and Network Science. It provides an
interdisciplinary learning experience for students; they will be trained in
broadly applicable analytical and computational skills. The research will be
done collaboratively with a diverse, international group of theorists, and
experimentalists from Germany, Australia and Houston. The PI is strongly
committed to involving students from under-represented groups in this project,
including women, ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities.