* 0908040
* Collaborative Research: A Systematic Study of the Role of Magnetic Fields in Relativistic Jets and Shocks
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kenichi Nishikawa, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2013
* USD 465,443.00

AST-0908010/AST-0908040&lt;br/&gt;Hardee/Nishikawa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is the first study of important three-dimensional effects in
relativistic strongly-magnetized outflows. It will lay a firm basis for the
realistic modeling of jets from black hole binary star systems, known as
microquasars, and from active galactic nuclei, and of pulsar wind outflows and
gamma-ray bursts. It will add substantially to our understanding of relativistic
magnetohydrodynamic processes. Numerical simulations and theoretical development
will provide an understanding of the role of strong magnetic fields in
relativistic jets and shocks. The results will be used with observations of jets
in very different environments to make predictions about the acceleration and
collimation process and accompanying magnetization, and means of energy
transport, in different astrophysical systems and at different spatial scales.
This research directly addresses the relationship between jet dynamics and
magnetic processes, adding insight into the physics of jet acceleration,
collimation, propagation and particle acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study also enhances the partnership between scientists at two campuses of the
University of Alabama, at the National Space Science and Technology Center
(Huntsville, Alabama), at Ben Gurion University (Israel), and at other national
and international facilities. Student training in mathematical and computational
techniques, their involvement in forefront research, and their participation in
scientific meetings, will help prepare them for a range of science-based
careers. The researchers are severally involved in public outreach at a variety
of levels.