* 0908075
* Political Violence, Globalization, and Transnational Activism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/10/2008,04/30/2010
* Lesley Gill, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 04/30/2010
* USD 2,797.00

This project examines the relationship between free-market policies, political
violence, and new kinds of national and transnational collective worker action.
Despite a large anthropological literature on globalization, there is little
research on how political violence and free-market policies reshape the nature
of work and collective action. This study addresses these research questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field research will be conducted in Colombia and the
United States. The principal investigator will conduct research in the Colombian
cities of Bucaramanga and Bogota, where workers experience different levels of
union activism and politically motivated violence. She also will interview
worker-rights activists in the United States. The principal investigator will
combine a variety of anthropological research methods, such as intensive
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and life-history
interviews, and she will collect archival materials to situate the project in a
broader context. There are three main objectives: 1) to explore the
restructuring of a sector of the labor force in Colombia over the last twenty
years; 2) to investigate how workers understand these changes, as well as their
shifting relationships to each other, their families, other marginalized groups,
and the company; and 3) to examine how, in the context of violence and the
decline of unions, some workers have crafted new kinds of national and
transnational resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will foster greater
understanding of how unions, together with other individuals, groups, and
institutions, confront economic globalization, conceptualize social justice, and
develop forms of collective action that extend beyond the work place. This has
significance for broadening human rights, strengthening democracy, and promoting
peace in Colombia. It is also important for understanding current debates about
the social responsibility of global corporations.&lt;br/&gt;