* 0908795
* Materials World Network:  Synthesis and Characterization of Molecular Building Blocks for Responsive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nolan Holland, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network program
award by the Biomaterials program and Office of Special Programs in the Division
of Materials Research to Cleveland State University (CSU) is to study responsive
hydrogel materials that can exhibit drastic changes in their volume and generate
force with small environmental changes. This collaborative effort by Prof.
Holland at CSU and Prof. Hugel at Technical University Munich in Germany will
combine the expertise in polymer chemistry and protein sciences in the US and
the expertise in single molecule manipulation and surface chemistry in Germany.
These responsive materials, stimulated by temperature, pH, light, or other
solution property, could have applications as biomaterials, drug delivery
devices, and in microfluidic devices. The major limitations of current
responsive hydrogels are their slow response time and small volume changes. The
objective of this collaboration is to overcome these limitations by developing
molecular scale responsive subunits. These molecular building blocks will be
composed of only three polypeptide chains linked together, and will respond to
their environment without being incorporated in a larger disordered gel. Because
of their organized folded structure, these materials are expected to respond
much more quickly and exhibit a greater percent reduction in size than the
traditional responsive hydrogels. These benefits should be retained when these
building blocks are connected to form larger responsive networks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The results of this multidisciplinary collaboration will be in the
development of novel responsive materials that can be translated to new
biomedical applications, and nanoscience, such as optically driven molecular
motors, fast response hydrogels for controlled release, and oriented responsive
fibers. Their considerably faster and larger responses will open the path to
discover and develop new uses for responsive materials. The research is designed
to integrate education at all levels - from introducing high school students to
research through supporting doctoral research.