* 0908461
* The Numeraire in Stochastic Finance Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Constantinos Kardaras, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2012
* USD 173,982.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The optimal wealth process corresponding to the expected logarithmic utility
maximization problem is probably the most popular and important investment
strategy, due to the abundance of its optimality properties. One of the most
prominent characteristics of the log-optimal strategy is its remarkable
numeraire property: every nonnegative wealth process, when discounted by the
log-optimal one, becomes a supermartingale. For this last reason, the log-
optimal wealth process is commonly referred to as "the numeraire". The present
project investigates issues related to the numeraire in financial market
modeling. Focus is given in the following areas: (1) deep connections between
the existence of the numeraire and market viability, which will result in
strengthening and simplifying the theoretical foundations of Stochastic Finance;
(2) several ramifications of the numeraire property in non-traditional models;
(3) enlargement of the list of optimality properties of the numeraire; (4)
closed-form expressions of general equilibria in incomplete financial markets
with logarithmic investors possessing heterogeneous beliefs; (5) continuity and
differentiability of the numeraire with respect to market inputs, such as
statistical probabilities and information.

This project provides a new approach in analyzing the appropriateness of
theoretical market models to successfully reflect real-world phenomena, as well
as to investigate deeper properties of financial markets. The power of this
approach is its all-encompassing nature and its simplicity, since it solely
depends on the existence and structure of a singe remarkable investment
opportunity in the market, which is the numeraire. The broader impact that the
project will have is twofold: (1) it will facilitate cross-fertilization between
the scientific areas of Probability and Finance, with rich interplay of ideas
flowing both ways from one field to the other; (2) it will cast the pedagogical
methodology of teaching Financial Mathematics under a new perspective. In fact,
a monograph incorporating this new approach in Stochastic Finance is expected to
emerge after the project has been carried out.