* 0908038
* The Formation and Feedback of Massive Stellar Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Eric Feigelson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2015
* USD 542,596.00

Dr. Eric Feigelson (Pennsylvania State University) and his collaborators will
carry out a multi-faceted investigation into the astrophysics of massive star-
forming regions (MSFRs). This work is founded on the recent recognition that
sensitive high-resolution X-ray images of rich young stellar clusters and their
associated gaseous environments give critical information unavailable at longer
wavelengths. The Chandra X-ray Observatory provides large, well-defined, and
nearly disk-unbiased samples of pre-main sequence and massive cluster members
with negligible contamination from older field stars. These X-ray sources have
subarcsecond positions, are readily associated with stars from infrared (IR)
surveys, and can be identified even through heavy absorption. When these stellar
sources are removed, the X-ray images reveal faint diffuse emission produced by
shocked O star winds suffusing HII regions on parsec scales. Combining the
X-ray-selected sample with IR-excess sources, established from near- and mid-IR
surveys, will result in the best stellar census available with thousands of low-
mass, hundreds of intermediate-mass, and dozens of OB stellar members in 20
MSFRs with ages less than or equal to 8 million years, lying within 4
kiloparsecs of the Sun. Using this uniform, detailed database, the team will
then pursue astrophysical investigations into the structure and origins of rich
stellar clusters, and their feedback onto their natal clouds. The work is
conducted in collaboration with expert, international groups located at the
University of Exeter, McMaster University, and the University of
Leeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing detailed understanding of
the 20 targeted MSFRs, this work should significantly deepen our general
astrophysical understanding of star formation in the Galaxy. These results will
strengthen our ability to predict the evolution of protoplanetary disks in
hostile environments near OB stars. This work also represents an early synergism
between high-energy X-ray astronomy and ground-based optical/IR astronomy for
understanding the complex processes of star formation and Galactic ecology.
Members of this team will also conduct a program of outreach to an underserved
population of rural Americans who have little access to modern science and
technology. During the award period, they will participate in a new program of
in-service workshops for both rural and urban secondary school science teachers.