* 0908252
* Collaborative Research: Conservation Laws, Simple Waves and Mixing in Stratified Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Esteban Tabak, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 344,824.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The atmosphere and the ocean are stratified in the density and background flows
are often sheared. The variation of density enables the propagation of internal
waves - waves in the interior of the fluid - not on its surface. These waves, as
they propagate, can deform and break and, when they do, they mix fluid of
different densities, changing the medium in which they propagate. A competing
effect is mixing engendered by shear instabilities. This project will develop a
mathematical methodology for the study of the evolution of fully nonlinear
sheared, stratified flows, with the goal to understand and model the dynamics
leading to fluid mixing. The wave and shear-generated mixing will be addressed
with tools in the theory of systems of finite and infinitely many conservation
laws. We shall calculate and study exact nonlinear solutions that break -
especially simple waves of the system, general criteria for the nonlinear
stability of systems of mixed type, and the statistical description of
incomplete systems, based on the maximization of a coarse-grained mixing
entropy.

This research is concerned with the propagation of waves and the dynamics of
shear in atmospheric and oceanic flows and how these phenomena mix the fluid in
which they exist. Mixing in geophysical flows is a crucial component of climate
dynamics. The rate of mixing of ocean waters, for instance, determines the
temperature at the surface, which communicates directly with the atmosphere,
affecting our weather and climate. The dispersion and mixing of chemicals,
carbon dioxide and water in the atmosphere, on the other hand, has a profound
effect on the radiative balance leading to predictions for climate change. Waves
are also an element of atmospheric teleconnection: they can have long range
effects since they carry energy over long distances without transporting the
fluid itself. Since the length scales in which the waves and the mixing
processes occur are too small and fast to be computed together with planetary
scale flows, they are nowadays represented by a low number of aggregate
parameters (parameterized) using simple criteria. A better understanding of the
dynamics and mixing processes will improve these parameterizations and the
reliability of the climate models that use them.