* 0908431
* RET Site:  Enrichment Experiences in Engineering (E3) for Teachers Summer Research Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robin Autenrieth, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for a 3
year standard award to support a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in
Engineering Site program at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) entitled, "RET Site:
Enrichment Experiences in Engineering (E3) for Teachers Summer Research
Program", under the direction of Dr. Robin Autenrieth. This program is a renewal
of a successful RET Site and is a collaborative effort with the TAMU College of
Engineering, College of Science, and College of Education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by Dr. Autenrieth, and co-PI, Karen Butler-Purry, the
E3 RET Site will continue to match 10 inservice and 2 preservice teachers per
year (36 total) with TAMU engineering researchers for a six week summer research
experience. This Site addresses the program's goal of involving K-12 teachers in
NSF-funded engineering research to bring knowledge of engineering and
technological innovation into their classrooms. To accomplish this goal the
program has the following four major objectives linked to the intended outcomes
and impacts: 1) Provide contemporary engineering research experiences and
enhance understanding of the nature of engineering. 2) Scaffold teacher
development of authentic inquiry activities. 3) Improve public school teachers
knowledge about careers in engineering. 4) Build a community of teachers who
remain engaged with TAMU Engineering and network among themselves.