* 0908506
* NSF Workshop Sponsorship for the Second International Workshop on Social Computing, Behavioral Modeling, and Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2009,12/31/2009
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,000.00

The Workshop on Social Computing, Behavioral Modeling, and Prediction provides
an interdisciplinary platform to encourage researchers of traditionally disjoint
fields such as sociology, psychology, behavioral science, cognitive science,
mathematics, computer science, religious studies, and engineering to exchange
ideas and findings, enhance mutual understanding of
state&amp;#8208;of&amp;#8208;the art development in individual fields, develop
cross&amp;#8208;discipline awareness, promote collaborative research
opportunities, and offer a conducive environment for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years, the emergence of the social web has
had a profound influence on computing and on society. A pertinent example stems
from social networks where individuals from various cultural and social
backgrounds interact and exchange information. In such a scenario, it will be
useful to understand the development of such social networks and the behavior of
individuals who are part of such networks to gain insight into different
cultures and patterns of social behavior that can form the basis for predictive
models. The focus of this workshop is not only on applications pf social
computing but also on the encompassing research from varied areas that can
provide insight. Computer scientists are key members of this community of
researchers but social scientists are integral as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop provides a training ground for budding
researchers in the area. This workshop will create awareness among the community
about the uses of such research to various areas. The workshop will be webcast
to include people that are unable to attend, and will result in a proceedings
published as a book by Springer.&lt;br/&gt;