* 0908051
* Theoretic Studies in Geophysical Fluid Dynamics and Climate Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Shouhong Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 303,125.00

Wang&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0908051&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the
American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;studies factors that are relevant to the low-
frequency&lt;br/&gt;variability of atmospheric and oceanic flows and that play a
role&lt;br/&gt;in climate changes. He focuses on three sources of
atmospheric&lt;br/&gt;and oceanic variability: the wind-driven ocean
circulation, the&lt;br/&gt;thermohaline circulation, and the El Nino Southern
Oscillations&lt;br/&gt;(ENSO). The study involves, on the one hand, applications
of&lt;br/&gt;existing mathematical theory to the understanding of
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying problems, and, on the other hand, the
further&lt;br/&gt;development of new mathematical theories -- dynamic
transition&lt;br/&gt;theory, geometric theory for incompressible flows, and
attractor&lt;br/&gt;bifurcation theory -- that are applied to the physical
problems. &lt;br/&gt;These new theories also have application to other problems
in&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear science and engineering. The main idea of
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;transition theory is to search for the full set of
transition&lt;br/&gt;states, giving a complete characterization of stability
and&lt;br/&gt;transition. The set of transition states -- physical
"reality"&lt;br/&gt;-- is represented by a local attractor. Following this
line,&lt;br/&gt;dynamic transition theory is developed to identify the
transition&lt;br/&gt;states and to classify them both dynamically and
physically. The&lt;br/&gt;project involves specific collaborations with
atmosphere/ocean&lt;br/&gt;scientists in different institutions and includes
training of&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator
studies some typical sources of climate&lt;br/&gt;variability, which,
independently and interactively, play a&lt;br/&gt;significant role in climate
changes. Wind-driven circulation&lt;br/&gt;plays a role mostly in the oceans'
subannual-to-interannual&lt;br/&gt;variability, the El Nino Southern
Oscillations are associated&lt;br/&gt;with interannual variability, and the
thermohaline circulation is&lt;br/&gt;most important in decadal-to-millenial
variability. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator undertakes a careful fundamental-level
examination&lt;br/&gt;of these phenomena. Graduate students are involved in
the&lt;br/&gt;project. The studies could lead to improved predictions of
and&lt;br/&gt;new insights into weather, climate, and environmental
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;of central importance to our economy. &lt;br/&gt;