* 0908724
* Frost flowers in Arctic winter: Sea-to-air transport of microbes and viruses
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jody Deming, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta N. Edmonds
* 07/31/2013
* USD 356,185.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this proposal is to explore the microbiology of frost flowers --
delicate ice crystal structures with high brine content that form on the surface
of new sea ice in winter -- through controlled experiments in the field (near
Barrow, Alaska) and in the laboratory. The working hypothesis is that frost
flowers, as they wick brine from sea ice during growth, serve as upward vectors
for microbes and viruses, concentrating them in structures where some microbial
and viral activity may proceed prior to aerial dispersal or following collapse
under snow. In the field, experimental plots will enable time-course sampling of
frost flowers and environs to examine these ideas. Laboratory work will track
1-um fluorescent beads (as passive bacterial mimics), live bacteria, and a
coldstable virus, singly and in combination, from source seawater into frost
flowers. Further tests will address selective transport or ice retention due to
exopolymer coatings. Microbial activity in frost flower brines will be tested
both in situ and in the laboratory using the respiratory stain CTC, while
selective transport, ice-retention or virally mediated loss of specific
phylotypes (of Bacteria and Archaea) will be evaluated using a DNA
fingerprinting approach (T-RFLP). Outreach and educational activities associated
with proposed research include coordinating fieldwork with the NASA JPL project
on the Astrobiology of Icy Worlds, involving residents of Barrow in fieldwork,
participating in Barrow K-12 classroom activities, and training of undergraduate
and graduate students.