* 0908317
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Optimization of Enterprise Dynamical Systems Described By Rules
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wolf Kohn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2013
* USD 393,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Enterprises, such as energy management, supply chain management,
transportation and disaster management are complex engineering systems. Decision
makers struggle to reduce costs and increase efficiencies in the face of
uncertainty and complicated interactions among a large number of agents.
Traditional optimization approaches that rely on static mixed integer
programming models cannot accurately capture the complexities of the dynamic
enterprise and are limited by computational complexity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose a novel approach to integrate rule-based systems with optimization to
dynamically control modern enterprises. By allowing decision makers to model
their complex enterprise with if-then rules, we will enable them to accurately
reflect the real-life environment and to easily modify the rules to capture
unexpected changes in the system. We will consider one of several potential
application areas. One area is the transmission and distribution of electrical
power, where rules or protocol are used to decide how to distribute power
reserves to accommodate uncertainties in the power market (due to weather, power
outage, demand, etc.). Another possible application area is transportation
management, where vehicle routing and scheduling must respond to dynamic pick-up
and delivery requests that consider traffic, truck maintenance, and personnel.
We may also test our rule-based methodology with disaster management teams,
including medical providers and fire departments, to design protocols for
efficient responses to disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches to
optimizing enterprise systems are limited by their ability to accurately model a
complex system, as well as the computational limitations to solve NP-hard
problems. The intellectual merit of our approach lies in developing a
mathematical scheme that converts rules of an enterprise to an automaton, which
provides the dynamics of the rules. That allows us to solve an optimal control
problem. We translate the solution back into the rules of the application via
the automaton. This research will contribute to computer science, applied math
and operations research communities by creating a new hybrid methodology. Our
approach is transformative in that it can apply to virtually any enterprise, and
provides the decision makers with rules in their own natural language. Its broad
impact resides in the potential to provide a new hybrid methodology for
combinatorial type enterprise problems, such as routing, sequencing and
scheduling, that currently rely on mixed integer programs and heuristics. In our
research and education missions, we are committed to fostering diversity and
will recruit and mentor underrepresented students.