* 0908599
* Wave propagation in linear and nonlinear optical parity-time (PT) periodic media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ziad Musslimani, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 195,250.00

The purpose of this project is to study the nonlinear dynamical behavior of
light propagating in multi-dimensional complex parity-time (PT) photonic
structures and disordered lattices. The mathematical strategy in this research
is to use asymptotic and perturbation methods to develop reduced models. Using
novel computational approaches these models will be examined numerically for the
existence of localized solutions and their stability properties (where possible
an analytic approach will also be undertaken). The results will be directly
compared with experimental data, thus providing viable information on the
accuracy of the model and quantitative insight to observations. The asymptotic
validity of the model and various perturbative regimes will be examined in order
to achieve a comprehensive mathematical understanding. Specifically, we will
study localization properties and stability analysis of optical waves
propagating in nonlinear multi-dimensional complex PT periodic structures that
is modeled by the PT nonlinear Schroedinger equation. Moreover, we will
investigate wave localization and dynamic stability in nonlinear three-
dimensional random photonic lattices and study the phenomenon known as nonlinear
Anderson localization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of optical wave
propagation in nonlinear and random photonic structures has the potential for
technological applications such as all-optical signal processing, navigation and
switching. Photonics hold great promise for building high-speed, nanoscale
switches and gates. Control of spatially or temporally localized structures
within optical media is a critical issue in fabricating all optical devices. As
such many resources have been put into building innovative experiments utilizing
new optical materials that explore the dynamics and control the effects of
nonlinearity and randomness in optical materials. To date, much of the research
has been in the linear regime. Recent experimental discoveries such as the
optical induction technique to create photonic lattices, have begun to allow
researchers addressing many important issues related to wave propagation in
periodic media such as optical waveguide arrays which until recently were
thought to be impossible. However, even with the current detailed
experimentation, probing optical phenomena at a sufficiently high spatial and
temporal resolution to gain an improved theoretical understanding remains a
challenge. There is thus great demand for companion theoretical investigations
capable of accurately describing experiments. Due to the disparate range of
scales involved, the primitive equations for investigating optical phenomena,
Maxwell's equations are computationally prohibitive to solve. Thus there is a
need for computationally efficient reduced models that quantitatively capture
the essential phenomena, providing clear physical and theoretical insight. The
purpose of this project is to address these issues for optical photonic systems
by exploring, investigating, and simulating reductions of Maxwell's equations.
The emphasis is on the modeling and computational aspects of wave propagation in
photonic lattices and waveguide arrays. &lt;br/&gt;