* 0908098
* Collaborative Proposal RUI: Multi-wavelength Survey and Analysis of X/M/E Asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Beth Ellen Clark, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 133,284.00

AST-0908098/0908217&lt;br/&gt;Shepard/Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of the main belt asteroids provide
critical tests for models of the formation and dynamical evolution of our solar
system. Of special interest are the X/M/E class asteroids, which represent about
20% of the inner main belt asteroids, in part because they potentially include
asteroids with metallic cores, which are the remnant metallic cores of
catastrophically disrupted parent bodies. Unfortunately, the nature of these
asteroids is one of the leading unsolved problems in asteroid composition
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Shepard and Dr. Clark's current asteroid
program will be continued with the goal of doubling the number of X/M/E class
asteroids (to around thirty) with multiwavelength (radar and infrared)
observations. The primary objectives are to characterize the physical properties
of M and E class asteroids, to search for the metallic cores of disrupted parent
bodies, and to examine possible relationships between radar and spectral
properties and size. Specific tasks include determining whether or not a size
difference exists between the metal-rich and the metal-poor M class population,
settling whether or not correlations exist between the spectral and radar
properties of M class asteroids, finding the fraction of M class asteroids which
are metal-rich, and better understanding the physical properties of E class
asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, students at both
institutions (one at Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania at two at Ithaca
College) will participate and be trained in the scientific process directly by
participating in observing runs, data reduction, and the presentation of
results. Data obtained during this project will also be directly incorporated
into the laboratory component of a "senior level capstone course" at Bloomsburg
University. Research by faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions provides
important exposure to scientific methods to a broader range of students and is a
valuable contribution to the educational infrastructure.