* 0908187
* REVSYS: Phylogeny, Biogeography, and Taxonomy within the Ground Beetle subfamily Paussinae (Carabidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2013
* Wendy Moore Brusca, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 329,964.00

Species in the carabid beetle genus Paussus (340 species) exhibit an
extraordinary diversity of unique morphological structures, in part because they
are obligate symbionts of ants (i.e., myrmecophiles). The taxonomy of Paussus is
in a state of turmoil, as evinced by multiple contradictory classifications of
the group. This is to some degree due to the striking phenotypic uniqueness of
these beetles, which tends to obscure similarities that can be used to infer
evolutionary relationships between species. The objectives of this project are
to: (1) infer the evolutionary relationships within Paussus based on DNA
sequence data; (2) examine the evolution of morphological characters using the
resulting phylogenetic framework; (3) produce a novel species-group
classification within Paussus and an electronic interactive key to those species
groups; (4) produce a systematic revision of those species of Paussus endemic to
Madagascar, one of the most diverse and threatened regions of the world; and,
(5) provide georeferenced biodiversity data to environmental non-profit
organizations and governmental agencies in Madagascar for science-based
conservation planning.&lt;br/&gt; The phylogeny produced with this research will
provide a stable evolutionary framework for the proposed systematic revision of
the Malagasy fauna, as well as for all future revisions and biogeographic
analyses within the genus. Analyses of character evolution will reveal patterns
of evolution of some very unusual traits associated with myrmecophily.
Distributional and life history data, species- and higher-level classifications,
phylogenetic hypotheses, and paper and web-based identification tools will be
made available to ecologists and conservation biologists as facilitated by
Réseau de la Biodiversité de Madagascar (REBIOMA). Throughout this project, the
PI will train high school students, undergraduates, and graduate students in
morphological and molecular approaches to revisionary systematics research.