* 0908115
* Metal-Directed Protein Self-Assembly and Construction of Selective Metal Binding Sites in Protein-Protein Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Faik Tezcan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professor F. Akif Tezcan at
the University of California, San Diego to carry out fundamental/basic studies
on the self-assembly of supramolecular protein architectures directed by metal
coordination. Nature uses Proteins as premier building blocks for sophisticated
nanoscale architectures that carry out complex tasks and chemical
transformations. Yet, the rational assembly of multi-protein complexes is an
unmet challenge, because protein-protein interactions comprise an extensive set
of weak, non-covalent bonds that are difficult targets for de novo design. In
this research program, the strength, directionality and selectivity of metal-
ligand interactions are exploited to control protein-protein interactions,
thereby achieving specificity and affinity without requiring extensive and
complementary binding surfaces. Such inorganic chemical control of protein-
protein interactions is ultimately utilized towards the construction of
functional, protein-based bioassemblies and novel metallocenters built within
protein-protein interfaces. This trans-disciplinary program provides an
effective platform for attracting members of underrepresented groups to research
careers, mentoring and recruitment of transfer students who have a particularly
hard time to adjust to the rigors of a large research university, and outreach
to students in local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research under this
award will pave the way for the future generation of stable, porous protein
frameworks with reactive interfacial metal centers, biomaterials whose
assembly/disassembly can be controlled by external stimuli, and provide
fundamental information regarding the evolution of natural metalloproteins and
enzymes.