* 0908293
* The Solar Oxygen Problem: Crisis, Catastrophe, or Opportunity?
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Ayres, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 226,398.00

Dr. Ayres of the University of Colorado will undertake a multifaceted study of
the outer layers of the Sun. A controversy has shaken solar physics, over what
ordinarily might be seen as the most arcane of details: the oxygen abundance. In
the past few years, the measured abundance in the photosphere has plummeted
nearly a factor of two, driven mainly by application of sophisticated 3D
convection models to key atomic tracers such as atomic oxygen and oxygen-bearing
molecules like OH and CO. The new low value is said to resolve several
outstanding questions in the abundances in hot stars and the interstellar
medium, but at the expense of wrecking the previous spectacularly good agreement
between theoretical models of the solar interior (where oxygen is a crucial
opacity source) and highly precise internal sound speed profiles from
helioseismology. The solar low-O problem borders on a crisis, when one considers
ramifications for diverse areas of astrophysics that rely fundamentally on the
Sun to provide a baseline chemical composition; and even a catastrophe if the
studies of solar abundances and helioseismology cannot be reconciled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present work will address these deficiencies with a
multi-pronged strategy. A key objective will be to develop a series of new solar
atlases at the highest possible spectral resolution and signal-to-noise,
exploiting the recently upgraded Fourier transform spectrometer at Kitt Peak
Observatory. A second objective will be to carefully test the most recent
generation of 3D convection models, and to make such empirical modifications to
the upper layers as necessary to apply them to molecular formation problems. A
third, related objective, is to continue exploring the outer boundary of the
photosphere, where the highly ordered fibril fields of the deep atmosphere
become severely twisted and tangled, causing local heating, propelling jets of
gas into the corona, and generally wreaking havoc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will advance knowledge of our Sun, specifically atmospheric structure and
energy transport from the deep photosphere out to the magnetically complex low
chromosphere; relevant to space weather, one of few areas in astronomy that has
direct societal impact. Beyond the Sun, better determinations of the oxygen (and
carbon) abundance, and the rare isotopes of C and O, are crucial to many areas
of astronomy that rely on the solar baseline. Ongoing instrumental developments,
in partnership with the National Solar Observatory, will serve the broader NSO
user community; as well as path finding for the Advanced Technology Solar
Telescope (ATST), slated for operation in the next decade. ATST will benefit not
only solar observers, but also specialized nighttime projects such as
coronography of faint IR sources near bright objects. Finally, a variety of
outreach projects and community service activities relevant to NSF will be
carried out.