* 0908554
* SGER:  Assessing the Deliberative Quality and Impact of the Australian Citizens and Online Parliaments
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2009,07/31/2010
* John Gastil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2010
* USD 96,980.00

In the last 20 years deliberative democracy has emerged as perspective on
governance and decision making. When attempting to solve shared problems,
democratic deliberation aims to combine the most rigorous analytic process with
an egalitarian and respectful social process, such that deliberating groups
yield not only sound decisions but also good will among the membership. The
larger aim is to generate a decision that the wider society or organizational
membership can endorse and support. Unfortunately, a tension exists between the
process integrity of small-scale discussion designs, such as Citizen Juries, and
the more legitimizing force of large-scale designs, such as Deliberative Polls.
One hope for resolving that tension is the innovative design of the Australian
Citizens Parliament, which combines large-scale online discussion with more
intensive face-to-face deliberation.

Through analysis of discussion transcripts, interviews, and surveys, this study
aims to answer two questions about the Citizens Parliament. First, can this
deliberative process effectively channel the findings of large-scale online
deliberations into a final, smaller-scale face-to-face meeting? Second, this
study examines the relative impact of deliberative participation on online and
face-to-face deliberators: Do those participating exclusively in the Online
Parliament change their long-term civic attitudes and behaviors in the same way
as those taking part in the more intensive face-to-face Citizens Parliament?
Answers to those questions will help people in the United States and across the
globe to design deliberative and effective hybrid decision-making processes for
large scale organizations and governments. Whether the results of this research
validate or call into question the particular design developed in Australia, the
findings will aid the development of face-to-face and online technology that
yields collective choices in ways that simultaneously ensure process integrity
and decision legitimacy.