* 0908009
* Traveling Fronts with Unstable Continuous Spectrum:  Geometric Structure and Nonlinear Stability Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Anna Ghazaryan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2011
* USD 63,087.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Fronts are traveling waves that asymptotically connect two equilibrium states of
a system. This research project is concerned with the analysis of the stability
of fronts. The mechanism of the instability of fronts is defined by the
competition between the rate of growth of perturbations and the rate of their
transport. In the convective regime perturbations to the front are transported
away faster than they grow and thus decay pointwise. Critical information about
nonlinear stability of the front is contained in the spectrum of the
linearization of the system about the wave, but in many cases the spectral
information is not definitive. That happens, for example, when the continuous
spectrum of the linearized operator crosses the imaginary axis. Standard
bifurcation theory techniques then typically fail. Reducing the domain for the
system to some weighted spaces often works on the linear level, but there are
serious issues related to the proof of nonlinear stability in the weighted
spaces. One of the goals of this project is to develop general criteria for the
convective nature of instability for classes of applied problems. An instability
caused by the continuous spectrum can also manifest itself in the appearance of
new local or global structures. Another goal of this project is to investigate
whether the instability caused by the continuous spectrum may be the key point
in the explanation of phenomena that are characterized by a sudden transition
from one coherent structure to another.

Fronts arise in a variety of applied problems from different fields: optical
communication, combustion theory, biomathematics (calcium waves in tissue, nerve
conduction, population dynamics), chemistry, ecology, to name a few, therefore
their stability is of a great interest. For many models the stability of a front
in a full nonlinear equation cannot be simply inferred from the properties of
its linear approximation. This project is focused on finding criteria for the
convective (or transient) nature of the instability in such cases and
investigating the mechanism of the transition between drastically different
regimes within the same system, such as a sudden transition from a slow process
to a much faster one. Capturing this phenomenon analytically will assist in
predicting when the transition happens and exploring ways to control it.
Progress in this direction will be of importance for applications in combustion
theory, ecology, and biomathematics. The techniques of the analysis will be
based on the relation between the geometric structure of the wave and its
stability.