* 0908479
* Water Transport and Dispersal of Gas in Protoplanetary Disks
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ilaria Pascucci, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 399,955.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, Dr. Pascucci, along
with students and collaborators, will complete an on-going ground-based campaign
to spectrally resolve bright gas emission lines detected with the Spitzer Space
Telescope toward many protoplanetary disks. These observations, combined with
the space-based data, will address two fundamental questions related to the
formation of giant and terrestrial planets: (1) When and through which
mechanisms do gas disks disperse? (2) Can water vapor remain long in the disk to
affect the water abundance of terrestrial planets? Specifically, Dr. Pascucci
and her collaborators will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Investigate how to use the
emission line from ionized neon at 12.81 microns to trace dissipating gas disks.
Disk models predict that this emission is a sensitive tracer of small gas masses
in the terrestrial and giant planet forming region of disks. The Spitzer Space
Telescope has detected spatially and spectrally unresolved neon emission lines
toward many young disks. Dr. Pascucci and her collaborators will use ground-
based telescopes to spectrally resolve bright neon lines from 30
prototoplanetary disks. By measuring the widths, peak velocities, and modeling
the line profiles, they will separate the emission originating in a disk from
that in a jet/outflow and measure the disk radii contributing to the spectal
flux, and reveal if X-rays or ultraviolet photons are the major ionization
source for neon atoms. This can clarify the role of photoevaporation in
dispersing gas disks and guide the use of the numerous spectrally unresolved
neon lines in measuring the timescale over which gas
disperses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Map out the distribution and evolution of
water in protoplanetary disks. A key yet unanswered question is how Earth
acquired its water. A new emerging scenario suggests that this happened
relatively early, before Earth was fully formed, by accretion of hydrated
silicates migrating inward from the outer asteroid belt. Models of the transport
of water in an evolving protoplanetary disk identify robust trends in the
evolution of water vapor. Dr. Pascucci and her collaborators will acquire the
datasets to test these models. In particular, they will obtain high-resolution
L-band spectra of disks in different evolutionary stages that have mid-infrared
water lines detected with Spitzer. They will model the line profiles using
various codes to: a) estimate the properties of the gas traced by the L-band
water lines; and b) investigate if water emission lines are correlated with the
disk evolutionary stage as proposed by disk models. Finally, they will work on
the combined interpretation of L-band, mid-infrared and far-infrared water lines
that they will obtain from their approved Herschel Key program to map out the
distribution and evolution of water in protoplanetary disks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is an essential complement to current
and upcoming space-based observations, necessary to fully understand the
evolution of gas in disks and the implications of this evolution on the
formation of giant and terrestrial planets. This research program will form the
basis for a PhD thesis for a Johns Hopkins University graduate student and offer
small- and large- scale projects for undergraduate students interested in planet
formation studies. These activities will train students in using state-of-the-
art ground- and space-based facilities and in addressing some of the most
fundamental questions in planet formation studies.