* 0908399
* Analytical and computational methods for femtosecond lasers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gino Biondini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 268,758.00

One of the most important recent advances in nonlinear optics has been the
development of a new generation of very stable short-pulse lasers, with typical
pulse durations of just a few femtoseconds. Such lasers have numerous
applications. Among others, they provide precise sources for spectroscopy and
frequency metrology, and are an essential component in optical atomic clocks.
Because of the many physical effects present and the vastly different timescales
involved, however, making quantitative predictions about the behavior of these
systems and their fundamental performance limits is a challenging task. This
project will address these challenges by developing new mathematical models
aimed at describing these lasers' behavior and an accompanying set of analytical
and computational tools. The new models, which will explicitly take into account
the inherent complexity of these systems and the multiple time scales present,
will then be used to analyze the mode-locking and nonlinear dynamics of pulses
in the laser cavity. Moreover, these new models will guide the development of
statistical computational algorithms that can accurately quantify the impact of
noise and calculate the probability of the rare events that limit the accuracy
and ultimate reliability of these systems.

Femtosecond lasers have a wide range of applicability. Beyond metrology and
atomic clocks, already mentioned, important applications are a new generation of
global positioning systems, the probing of transients occurring during chemical
reactions and the ablation of tumors. Thus, this project will impact not only
the scientific community, but also society at large. The new mathematical models
and computational methods that will be derived as part of this project will
substantially advance the theory of femtosecond lasers, and they will make it
possible to accurately and efficiently predict the performance of these lasers.
As a result, they will provide useful tools for the scientists and engineers who
design and build these systems. An important part of the project will also be
the training of students and junior researchers: through this interdisciplinary
effort, students will be trained to use concepts, methods and techniques outside
their main discipline, thus greatly enriching their educational and professional
experience.