* 0908345
* New Models of M Dwarf Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Brian Chaboyer, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 279,939.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brian Chaboyer of Dartmouth College
will undertake a theoretical investigation of the structure of M dwarfs, which
are unevolved stars like the Sun but with less than half its mass. Observations
have indicated for some time that theoretical models are unable to correctly
predict the mass-radius relation for M dwarfs found in eclipsing binary systems.
The observed radii are found to be systematically larger (by about 10%) than
that predicted by theoretical models. Recent work has suggested that this is due
to increased magnetic activity in these rapidly rotating stars which are tidally
locked to their companions. The research will center on the construction of new
models of M dwarfs, building upon previous efforts by critically examining the
treatment of convection and incorporating the effects of magnetic fields. The
physics of the magnetic fields will be included within the stellar structure
equations in a phenomenological fashion and the impact of fields of various
topologies and field strengths will be studied. Dr. Chaboyer will also explore
the effects that various treatments of convection have on the structure and
observed properties of low mass stars. This part of the work will incorporate
results from recent hydrodynamical calculations of convection. Finally, he will
critically examine the color-effective temperature transformations which are
used when comparing the models to observations in order to derive an improved
calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M dwarf stars are the most common type of star
in the Milky Way galaxy. Recently, astronomers have realized that the first
Earth-mass planets around other stars are likely to be found around M dwarfs.
The models generated in this study will be made available to general
astronomical community. There will be extensive involvement of both
undergraduate and graduate students in all aspects of this research. This will
include mentoring of first year undergraduate students who will work on this
project through the auspices of the Women in Science Project at Dartmouth
College. This program is designed to encourage more Dartmouth women to pursue a
career in science, math or engineering through early exposure to hands-on
research experiences, role modeling and mentoring. Upper-year undergraduates
will also be employed as research assistants. Dr. Chaboyer will also continue
his involvement with local K-8 schools and the Monteshire Museum of Science
located in Norwich, Vermont, to discuss this research with young learners and
the public at large.