* 0908074
* RUI: Stability analysis for soliton solutions of the Vortex Filament Equation and beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Stephane Lafortune, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 137,721.00

The principal objective of the project is the study of dynamics of vortex
filaments (slender filaments where vorticity is concentrated). The research is
focused on the vortex filament equation (VFE) that describes the motion of the
vortex filament, assuming that the motion of a vortex filament in an
incompressible, inviscid fluid is due to its own induction. The VFE is related
to the nonlinear Schroedinger equation via a Hasimoto map. The project will take
advantage of this relation to investigate stability of special solutions
(Hasimoto solitons) for VFE, and to extend the analysis to the models that
incorporate physical effects initially neglected by the idealized VFE model.

Hasimoto solitons take the form of localized loops traveling along the vortex
filament. Solitary waves of vortices in turbulent fluids have been observed both
in laboratory and numerical experiments. While the most commonly encountered
phenomena involving vortex filaments are waterspouts and tornadoes, the study of
vortex filaments has fascinating applications to other aspects of science such
as in superfluidity and superconductivity. In specific applications, Hasimoto
solitons occur, for example, in the context of superconductivity, of tornadoes,
of particle transport in a fluid by solitons, and of laser-matter interaction.
Although they have been studied abundantly in the literature not much is known
about their stability. The main purpose of this project is studying solutions'
stability properties, which is of fundamental importance, since only stable
solutions can be realized and observed experimentally. The project involves a
broad participation of undergraduate and graduate students. In the process of
doing research the students will learn sophisticated numerical and mathematical
methods needed to carry this research through.