* 0908093
* Infinite Dimensional Dynamical Systems and Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Clarence Wayne, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Curry
* 09/30/2013
* USD 567,631.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Professor Wayne will study the behavior of infinite dimensional dynamical
systems such as the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam model, the Navier-Stokes equations and the
Euler equations. He will use methods from dynamical systems theory to make
qualitative and quantitative predictions about the solutions of these systems
and will focus on four main areas: (i) The stability and interactions of
solitary wave solutions in infinite dimensional dispersive Hamiltonian systems,
and the geometry of the phase space of such systems; (ii) The derivation and
justification of approximate equations for the evolution of wave packets on a
fluid surface and the relation of such results to normal form theorems for
Hamiltonian systems in which the linear part has continuous spectrum; (iii)
Metastable behavior in the nearly inviscid Navier-Stokes equations and other
weakly dissipative systems; and (iv) The use of invariant manifold theorems to
analyze singularly perturbed partial differential equations. The geometrical
properties of objects like invariant manifolds have been a great aid in
illuminating the behavior of finite dimensional dynamical systems and this
project will develop similar methods and insights into the behavior of infinite
dimensional systems, particularly those defined on unbounded spatial regions
where the linear problem has continuous spectrum.

The differential equations that Professor Wayne will study arise in a variety of
different physical circumstances and are characterized by the fact that while
the equations themselves are well known they are too complicated to solve except
in special and/or unrealistic cases. Nonetheless, applications require at least
a qualitative understanding of the behavior of their solutions and this project
will develop such an understanding for the equations enumerated above. As an
example related to point (i) in the preceding paragraph, the equations that
describe waves on the ocean, which are of importance both for understanding
climate and weather and for predicting events such as tsunamis, have a family of
solutions known as ``solitary waves'' which represent a single wave traveling
across theocean. In practice, however, many waves are inevitably present and it
becomes necessary to understand how these waves interact with each other. This
project will study the types of interactions that can occur in such systems and
their consequences. The remaining three sections of the research project will
aim, in a similar fashion, to extend the understanding of special or limiting
cases of equations of physical importance to more realistic conditions.