* 0908199
* SGER:  Material and Structural Response of Historic Hakka Rammed Earth Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Hota GangaRao, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 06/30/2011
* USD 87,472.00

The in-service Hakka rammed earth structures, i.e. Fujian Tulou of China, are
historic and unique in design, construction and performance. The research effort
will attempt to better understand their thermo-mechanical and aging responses
under thermal, hurricane and earthquake loads. The scope of work will include
to: 1) identify constituent materials in rammed earth and investigate durability
of the constituents; 2) investigate structural integrity of Hakka buildings for
structural efficiency under extreme loads, including modes of failure and verify
any self-healing of cracks; 3) analyze heat transfer process through rammed
earth wall for thermal comfort and energy-efficiency; 4) evaluate potential
benefits of material and structural performance for implementation in modern
constructions; and 5) identify other structural issues of scientific interest
for further study and develop a follow-on proposal for international
collaboration. The research approach to be used includes to: 1) review reports
and articles on Hakka earth structures with reference to material selection and
structural design; 2) visit Hakka earth structures and collect core extraction
samples and field data nondestructively; 3) evaluate thermal, mechanical,
chemical and morphological properties from wall samples through core extraction;
and 4) analyze their response through finite element
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implications of findings of this research in
terms of their application to modern structures are to: 1) identify durable
rammed earth material systems; 2) advance rammed earth construction technique
using reinforcing wall ribs; 3) build affordable housing and space-efficient
office towers in urban areas; 4) develop disaster-resistant structural
configurations; and 5) construct energy-efficient and green buildings. One
graduate student will be trained to understand the Hakka rammed earth
construction techniques. The research findings will be disseminated through
journal publications, conference presentations, internet posting, out-reaching
initiative and networking with professionals, who would be interested in Hakka
building technology. This award is co-funded by OISE at NSF.