* 0908099
* AMC-SS: Mathematical foundations of responsible risk management in credit markets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Tomasz Bielecki, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 299,965.00

The aim of the research to be done is to develop new mathematical methodologies
and models in the areas of stochastic analysis and financial engineering, for
the propose of solving complex and important problems related to financial risk
management and to financial decision making. Due to the current world-wide
market turbulence, and taking into account the known causes that triggered the
credit crunch, particular emphasis will be put on dynamic valuation and hedging
of credit derivatives, with focus on credit default swaps and basket credit
derivatives, as well as other complex financial instruments such as inflation-
indexed swaps. This research will frame the following two main research areas:
mathematical modeling for the purpose of financial risk management, with
applications, among others, to hedging, valuation, and management of portfolio
credit risk, and applications of stochastic analysis to studying of dependence
between stochastic processes. Although the forthcoming research will yield
fundamental advances within the areas of stochastic analysis and financial
mathematics, it is anticipated that it will lead to new and practical tools that
eventually become widely used in the financial industry and other applied
disciplines, so to mitigate and to appropriately control the involved
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be of fundamental importance for
several reasons. First, the troubled credit derivative industry will benefit
directly from it, as new methods and techniques based on solid mathematical and
financial advances will be developed for the purpose of valuing and managing
basket credit derivatives, such as basket swaps, cash collateral debt
obligations, asset backed securities, etc. This industry suffered great losses
since the spring of 2007 mainly because the nature of such complex hybrid
derivatives as structured credit derivatives was not really well understood,
especially on the level of risk management (hedging of risk exposure). The
research to be done will result in developing new robust dynamic models for
these securities and provide reliable dynamic hedging strategies associated to
these models, which consequently will give a better and broader understanding of
an important part of the modern financial markets. Second, new applications of
stochastic analysis will be developed, in particular with regard to dynamic
acceptability indices. Dynamic acceptability indices are unitless measures of
performances of a given cashflow, which will be studied from abstract
probability point of view. The obtained results will be beneficiary for all
market participants including regulators and government agencies, and will lead
to a better understanding of market efficiency. Third, valuation and hedging of
credit default swaps (CDS) as well as valuation and hedging of credit default
swaptions, which are essential for the financial industry, will be specifically
emphasized and new analytical tools will be developed for this purpose. Fourth,
if true, then an analog of Sklar's theorem for probability measures on canonical
spaces of stochastic processes will be an important extension of the classical
Sklar's theorem. Perhaps, an analog of Sklar's theorem for probability measures
on some general vector spaces (such as Polish spaces) will be derived in the
process. Fifth, the researchers will study the dynamic "copula" problem with
regard to Markov processes: for a given multidimensional Markov process, with
each coordinate being also Markovian, what conditions need to be satisfied by
the pseudo-differential operator corresponding to the (extended) infinitesimal
generator of the multidimensional process, given that the pseudo-differential
operator corresponding to the (extended) infinitesimal generator of each
coordinate are known. Sixth, there will be a practical importance of studying of
the above problems in view of potential applications, such as valuation and
hedging of basket derivatives (basket equity options, basket credit derivatives,
etc.).&lt;br/&gt;