* 0908567
* SBIR Phase I:  Airborne Soot Sensor for Improving Fuel Efficiency and Reducing Pollutants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* James White, Active Spectrum Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 98,458.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I research project will test the feasibility of increasing diesel fuel
economy while reducing soot to below EPA emissions standards for diesel exhaust
by adjusting fuel injection timing using feedback from an inexpensive soot
sensor that can be placed in the exhaust path and replace the currently employed
expensive and fuel inefficient soot filtering devices. It is proposed to reduce
fuel consumption 2-5% by replacing the current expensive (~$3000) diesel soot
filter system with an inexpensive (&lt;$150) sensor &amp; feedback system that
will keep soot levels below EPA standards and increase fuel economy by adjusting
fuel injection timing. The proposal will determine if the measurements from this
sensor can be used to adjust fuel injection timing to reduce soot levels to
below EPA standards while increasing engine performance, both of which are
theoretically possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to increasing fuel
efficiency and decreasing diesel powered vehicle costs, the EPA will require the
use of such sensors on all diesel vehicles starting in 2012. This sensor will be
usable on all diesel engines, thus greatly reducing a major cause of pollutants
in all major cities. In fact, the EPA estimates that 60,000 people die in the US
each from airborne particulate matter pollutants. Finally, a fuel economy
savings of 2-4% on diesel engines could have a significant economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;