* 0908548
* Chemical Bond Breaking and the Role of Cavities in Solution Studied Using Femtosecond Spectroscopy and Mixed Quantum/Classical Molecular Dynamics Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,593.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Benjamin J. Schwartz of the University of California,
Los Angeles and his postdoctoral and graduate student colleagues will undertake
a combined experimental and theoretical program of research to develop a better
understanding of electron transfer and photodissociation reactions in solution
through the study of simple, prototypical model systems. The theoretical work
will center on molecular dynamics simulations incorporating a rigorous, mixed
quantum/classical method (including configuration interaction) that Schwartz and
his colleagues have developed, and will focus both on on atomic electron
transfer reactions and preliminarily on the photodissociation of simple diatomic
molecules such as alkali metal dimers or hydrides. The simulations will be
complemented by ultrafast spectroscopy measurements of electron transfer
reactions on iodide and alkali metal anion charge transfer to solvent systems.
These results should be broadly applicable to a wide variety of solution-phase
systems, wherever electron transfer and related chemical reactions take
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the broader scientific impacts of the
research being supported, the young researchers working on this project will
gain simultaneous experience in both cutting edge theoretical and experimental
methods.&lt;br/&gt;