* 0908627
* Materials World Network: In-Situ Investigation of Model Multi-Component Catalyst Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a joint project between the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT- USA) and the University of Bayreuth
(UB- Germany). Catalysts have played a central role in reducing automotive
emissions by over 90% over the past three decades but progress is slowed by
largely a phenomenological, "trial-and-error" approach. As a consequence, means
for rationalizing the modeling and optimization of catalysts for on-board
diagnosis applications has been inhibited. This project aims to obtain an
improved understanding of the catalyst materials properties and their
interactions with substrate and gases. Such understanding will advance the
science of catalysts as well as improve the ability to engineer catalysts
towards improved functionality. This has the potential for impacting a broad
range of commercially strategic industries including petrochemical catalytic
cracking, steam-reforming, synthesis of standard chemicals (ammonia, sulfuric
acid), &amp; fuel cell electrodes, all of which depend on heterogeneous
catalysts. Given the focus on environment, this work is ideally suited for young
students and an outreach program for K-12 students is expanded under this
program from present levels at MIT. The program is used to attract
undergraduates and to provide graduate students experience working in a global
scientific environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary approach is
applied which utilizes multiple characterization tools, under realistic
operating conditions, to achieve a detailed knowledge of the behavior and
interplay of all the components within the catalyst system (support, storage
component, noble metal). Model structures composed of noble metal, oxygen/NOx
storage and support materials are integrated in three-layer arrangements
featuring films deposited by vapor or solution methods onto oxide substrates
allowing for systematic control of surface area, triple phase boundary and
diffusion lengths. Surface area and controlled meso- and nano-porosity are
achieved by microsphere templating and ink-jet printing (MIT). The defect
chemistry and oxygen exchange properties of the storage materials, to be
modified by solid solution formation/dopants, is examined by coulometric
titration, electronic/ionic conductivity, complex impedance and crystal
microbalance methods. Additionally, surface sensitive measurements, including
work function (MIT), XPS and DRIFT (UB), are applied in the two laboratories.
Differential flow reactor studies (UB) provide needed overall catalyst
performance input, while low thermal mass ceramic micro hot-plates allow for
programmed rapid thermal excursions of the type experienced in automotive
exhausts. Models describing the interactions of the various catalyst system
components are developed and tested. The electrical response of the model system
is of interest as an investigative tool and as a means of diagnosing catalyst
performance in situ. A central component is the extensive exchange of students
and staff providing opportunities to learn new experimental and modeling methods
and to gain insight into how research is approached from a global perspective.