* 0908413
* Mathematical Problems in Collisionless Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Hristo Kojouharov, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 159,569.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collisionless plasma is a fully
ionized gas in which electromagnetic forces are strong enough to dominate
collisional effects. The motion of a high temperature, low density collisionless
plasma is described by the Vlasov-Maxwell equations, a nonlinear system of
hyperbolic partial differential equations. In this setting collisions are
neglected while the charge and current densities (which drive the Maxwell
system) are determined in a self-consistent manner from velocity moments of
solutions to the Vlasov equation. The major question to be studied is this: are
there shocks in a collisionless plasma? That is, could a singularity develop
from smoothly prescribed initial values as time progresses? In some cases, such
as in lower dimensional, relativistic formulations (e.g., one space and two
velocity variables), smooth global solutions are known to exist. Another problem
to be investigated concerns the long-time behavior of the charge and current
densities and electromagnetic fields in the system. More specifically, do
dispersive effects in the equations cause these quantities to decay over time,
or is there sufficient interaction so as to sustain their strength even as time
approaches infinity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetic Theory includes the study of
the motion and properties of plasma. Plasmas are often referred to as the fourth
state of matter (after solids, liquids and gases) and account for 99.99% of all
material in the universe. They are of great practical interest because they are
charged gases and thus serve as excellent conductors of electricity. For
example, "plasma engines" have been developed by a number of space agencies and
recently used to power some NASA spacecraft. Additionally, the use of plasmas
through nuclear fusion as a source of clean energy is currently of immense
scientific interest. Notable examples of collisionless plasmas include the solar
wind, the Earth's ionosphere, galactic nebulae, low-density fusion reactors, and
comet tails. The motion of a plasma is described by a number of complicated
equations dictated by physics. Among the mathematician's goals are to show that
these equations possess solutions (under appropriate conditions), determine
their qualitative behavior, and approximate them numerically (so that one can
predict behavior in future situations with certainty). A proof that the Vlasov-
Maxwell system has a "nice" solution would also confirm that the system of
equations is the "right" one to describe plasma-related phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;