* 0908815
* Infrared Studies of Circumstellar Dust in Planet-Forming Exo-Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Carey Lisse, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2012
* USD 291,577.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Carey Lisse of Johns Hopkins
University will investigate the formation and evolution of asteroids, comets,
and planetary bodies around young stars. The research will compare mid-infrared
observations of dust in circumstellar disks to planetary astronomy studies of
solar system comets, interplanetary dust, and meteorites. He will focus on
determining the location, amount, and mineralogical and elemental composition of
the material (including water ice and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) to infer
the composition, location, and minimum mass of the parent bodies producing the
dust. The goal is to obtain an understanding of the evolutionary processes in
these young solar systems, and to determine parameters that will aid in the
creation of better models of solar system formation. Included in the list of new
spectra are a 1 million year old system with a spectral signature like that of
comets; a system at the right age for terrestrial planet formation; one showing
spectral signatures of hypervelocity impacts like the ones that formed the Moon
or stripped Mercury of its surface layers; and a 'mature' system with very
primitive dust like that in the interstellar medium, suggesting that the high
temperature processing and radial mixing did not occur there.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lisse will also incorporate results from the Herschel
Space Telescope to improve models of cold, icy dust in the outer parts of disk,
while preparing the way for resolved spectral imaging of these and other systems
by the James Webb Space Telescope mission in the next decade. Connections will
be made with ground based optical/infra-red imagery from large telescopes and
the upcoming Atacama Large Millimeter Array observatory. These new datasets will
help constrain the location of the circumstellar material, improving the
determination of the dust composition and mass, the taxonomy of the parent
bodies, and the physical processes operating on the dust.