* 0908079
* Upper Atmospheres of Hot Jupiters: Planetary Magnetic Field, Photoionization and Interaction with the Stellar Wind
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Zhi-Yun Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 246,445.00

AST-0908079&lt;br/&gt;Arras&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas giant exoplanets in short-
period orbits around their parent star, often referred to as 'hot Jupiters', are
exposed to ionizing radiation and a stellar wind flux that are orders of
magnitude more intense than for solar system gas giants. Under such conditions,
magnetic effects become important. This project will include, for the first
time, the intrinsic planetary magnetic field in models of upper atmosphere
structure and interaction with the stellar wind, under conditions appropriate to
this type of planet. The research study will construct a static model for low
magnetic latitudes; a dynamical model for flow along open field lines near the
magnetic poles; and will run two-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics simulations of
photo-ionization driven outflow from magnetized planets. These models relate to
several different observations of hot Jupiters and their host stars. Model
composition, density and ionization state profiles will be used to understand
the transmission spectra of transiting planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intrinsic magnetic field is also crucial for understanding the interaction of
the planet with the stellar wind. Existing methods developed for the Jupiter-Io
interaction will be applied to understanding the observed time-dependent
chromospheric emission from the host stars of some hot Jupiters, as well as the
magnetic torques exerted on the planet and how they affect its long term spin
and orbital evolution. These important physical effects have been neglected in
previous studies of the upper atmospheres of hot
Jupiters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study supports research training of graduate
and undergraduate students. The topic of extrasolar planets is of inherent
interest to the public, and the research will be used to inform public talks at
the McCormick Observatory at the University of
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).