* 0908538
* Mathematical Study of Smectic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Carlos Garcia-Cervera, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 10/31/2011
* USD 101,645.00

Joo&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0908538&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and her
colleague study mathematically the&lt;br/&gt;interaction of smectic liquid
crystals with external electric or&lt;br/&gt;magnetic fields. Typical liquid
crystals are nematic and smectic&lt;br/&gt;liquid crystals, consisting of rod-
like molecules that tend to&lt;br/&gt;align themselves lengthwise along a common
axis, called the&lt;br/&gt;director. The local orientation of a nematic liquid
crystal is&lt;br/&gt;described by the director field. However, in smectic phases
the&lt;br/&gt;molecules of the liquid crystal also tend to lie in layers.
To&lt;br/&gt;describe the local orientation, a smectic order parameter must
be&lt;br/&gt;introduced in addition to the director field. The free energy
of&lt;br/&gt;smectic liquid crystals has a resemblance to the Ginzburg-
Landau&lt;br/&gt;energy for superconductivity, and it is a nonlinear,
nonconvex&lt;br/&gt;second order energy. While nematic phases are rather
well&lt;br/&gt;understood, the mathematical theory of smectic phases
is&lt;br/&gt;comparatively underdeveloped. This study consists of two
main&lt;br/&gt;projects. In the first project, the investigators advance
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical understanding of smectic liquid crystals in the
area&lt;br/&gt;of instabilities driven by external magnetic fields, by means
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis and numerical simulations.
Partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equation methods for phase transition, calculus
of&lt;br/&gt;variations, Gamma convergence theory, and bifurcation theory
are&lt;br/&gt;employed. In the second project, the investigators
study&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric liquid crystals such as smectic C* and bent-
core&lt;br/&gt;phases, which are named after the bent or banana-
shaped&lt;br/&gt;molecules. The response time of bent-core liquid crystals
is&lt;br/&gt;only in the range of microseconds and thus this material
offers&lt;br/&gt;huge potential for many applications. The investigator
studies&lt;br/&gt;an electrodynamic model of the molecular reorientation
of&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric liquid crystals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Liquid
crystals are used in many different applications such&lt;br/&gt;as optical
switching devices and temperature sensors. Nematic&lt;br/&gt;liquid crystal
materials have been widely studied because of&lt;br/&gt;their applications to
flat panel displays. However, it is known&lt;br/&gt;that ferroelectric liquid
crystals such as smectic C phases with&lt;br/&gt;chiral molecules exhibit much
faster switching times. Thus&lt;br/&gt;understanding the features of smectic
liquid crystals such as&lt;br/&gt;defect structures and switching dynamics is a
very important&lt;br/&gt;issue in practical applications. &lt;br/&gt;