* 0908167
* Analytical and Numerical Studies of Nonlinear Light Propagation in Two-dimensional Photonic Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jianke Yang, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 176,494.00

The objective of this project is to investigate novel phenomena of nonlinear
light propagation in two-dimensional photonic lattices. In particular, a special
important class of solutions (self-trapped nonlinear localized states, often
called solitons) of the underlying mathematical models will be studied both
analytically and numerically. Three inter-related issues will be investigated:
(i) determination and classification of all possible types of soliton states
admitted by two-dimensional photonic lattices; (ii) determination of linear
stability properties of these solitons; (iii) development of more efficient
numerical methods for computing these solitons and their linear-stability
eigenvalues. The mathematical models appropriate for these physical problems
will be two-dimensional nonlinear Schroedinger equations with periodic or quasi-
periodic potentials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear optics in periodic and
quasi-periodic media is an exciting frontier of optics and applied mathematics
these days. With appropriate engineering of micro-scale periodic structures,
light propagation can be controlled and steered in various ways. This controlled
steering then points to promising technological applications such as micro-scale
optical data-processing devices and potential optical chips for ultrafast
computers. From a physical viewpoint, this project will lead to a deeper
understanding on nonlinear wave phenomena in micro-scale periodic media. From a
mathematical viewpoint, these studies will advance the analytical and numerical
methodologies for the treatment of nonlinear waves in periodic media. In
addition, this research is intimately related to research in areas beyond
nonlinear optics, such as Bose-Einstein condensates loaded in optical lattices.
The project will facilitate interdisciplinary training of a graduate student in
these important areas of research. &lt;br/&gt;