* 0908873
* Nonlinear Damping of Tides in Stellar and Planetary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eliot Quataert, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 266,804.00

Dr. Philip Arras (University of Virginia) and collaborators will investigate the
energy lost by binary stars via tides. Dissipation of gravitational tides in
close binary systems acts to synchronize the rotation and circularize the orbit.
Despite decades of intense observational and theoretical study, the physical
mechanism for tidal dissipation in fluid objects remains a mystery. Physically
motivated, accurate theories of tides are crucial to understand the origin of
close binaries, their subsequent orbital evolution, and thermal evolution due to
tidal heating. Theories of tidal dissipation find application in a broad range
of systems, from the survival of exoplanets, to the circularization of binaries
containing a Sun-like star, to the fate of compact binaries which are strong
gravitational wave sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous investigations of
tidal dissipation assumed the flow is laminar and much of the focus was on
linear damping mechanisms, such as radiative diffusion or turbulent viscosity
arising in convection zones. Such studies fail by orders of magnitude to produce
the level of dissipation needed to explain the observed systems. In recent
studies of tides by this research team, it was discovered that the linear tidal
flow is unstable, leading to the growth of small scale waves and tidally-induced
turbulence. In essence, the laminar flow often assumed does not exist for the
types of situations in which it is employed. Nonlinear damping from this
tidally-induced turbulence provides a promising alternative to conventional
linear damping mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors will develop the
theory of nonlinear tides by studying, for each type of stellar or planetary
structure of interest, the stability of linear tidal flow, tidally induced
turbulence, synchronization and circularization rates, and depth-dependent
internal heating. The primary applications of their calculations on tidal
dissipation are to close-in gas giant extrasolar planets, solar-type binaries,
and inspiraling binaries containing white dwarfs or neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research will have impact on a wide
variety of problems in astrophysics, due to the ubiquitous importance of tides
in close binaries. It will shed light on longstanding puzzles in the evolution
of extrasolar planetary systems and stellar binaries, and will elucidate the
impact of tidal heating on the internal structure of Hot Jupiters. The work on
close white dwarf and neutron star binaries will determine if tides can alter
the orbital evolution of these systems, which has important implications for
both electromagnetic and gravitational wave measurements. This project involves
training of a postdoc and a graduate student. The team will disseminate the
results from their research to the astronomical community and to general public.