* 0908097
* Collaborative Proposal: The role of convection on dynamic stability of 3D incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 86,911.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is to investigate the role of convection on dynamic stability of
the three-dimensional incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. The main
objective is to show that convection together with incompressibility plays an
essential role in studying the dynamic stability of the incompressible Euler and
Navier-Stokes equations. Another objective of this project is to show that there
is a close connection between the global regularity of the three-dimensional
Euler equations and that of the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations.
Finally, a new regularity analysis using a Lagrangian approach for the three-
dimensional Euler equations is developed to control the dynamic growth of the
local curvature of vortex filaments and the maximum vorticity simultaneously.
The local nonlinear stability analysis developed in this project can be
potentially applied to study a large class of nonlinear dynamic problems arising
from other disciplines.

The understanding of the dynamic stability and the role of convection has a
significant impact on many scientific applications which could affect the
quality of people's life in a fundamental way. These applications include
weather forecasting, environmental or global climate change, fluid dynamic
applications, turbulence modeling and high performance computing. For a long
time, many experts considered convection as destabilizing. This project reveals
that convection actually has a surprising stabilizing effect which could affect
the large time behavior of the three-dimensional incompressible flows in an
essential way. An additional impact of this project is the involvement of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. This project provides a solid
training in mathematical analysis, physical modeling, and numerical simulation.
The interdisciplinary training they receive in this project is very important
for their future careers in mathematics and science.