* 0908432
* Support for the Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Meredith Lane, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2014
* USD 625,000.00

The scientific study of human-environment interactions is a coherent
interdisciplinary research area that is related to but distinct from
conventional environmental science. Research on environmental social and
behavioral science seeks to integrate knowledge from the disciplines that focus
on human action, cognition, and institutions with natural science knowledge to
understand the human causes of environmental change; the human consequences of
such change; and the ways in which individuals, organizations, and social
institutions respond to the potential or actuality of environmental variation
and change in pursuing their objectives. To facilitate research and community-
development in the emerging field of human-environmental interaction, the
National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences has operated a
Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change (CHDGC). This award will
provide support for core operations of the CHDGC, including identification of
issues needing research attention and overseeing studies on these topics;
interactions with various federal agencies on issues requiring scientific
analysis of human-environment interactions; contributions to international
research programs addressing human-environment relationships; and organization
of workshops and other ad hoc activities that enhance scientific contributions
to understanding of human-environment interactions but that might not be
requested by federal environment agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued
support for the CHDGC will facilitate that group's functioning as the primary
NRC committee that spans social and behavioral science fields and looks to
involve leading researchers in those communities in studies of problems related
to human-environmental interaction. This award will facilitate the conduct of
one special workshop each year to examine specific topics, and it will enable
the committee to examine topics that are not directly related to climate change
but instead to other forms of human-natural system dynamics. Publications
resulting from committee workshops and studies will continue to be major
foundations for future work across a diverse set of fields. The research
fostered by CHDGC activities will continue to directly address environmental
topics of great public interest and concern. The results of committee workshops
and studies will have benefits for land and resource managers as well as policy
makers at all levels of government. The committee's work also will enhance
interactions between social and behavioral scientists and natural scientists and
engineers who already are active in environmental discussions, thereby enhancing
the likelihood that more comprehensively framed and more integrated research
activities will result in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;