* 0908378
* Sputtering, Radiolysis, and Photolysis: Physical Mechanisms in Astrophysical Environments
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Robert Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 183,014.00

AST-0908378&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetospheric and solar wind
ions and electrons, UV photons, X-rays and cosmic ray ions alter materials in
the solar system as well as in other astrophysical environments. The chemistry
induced by photons (photolysis) and by charged particles (radiolysis) relates to
the production of gas-phase species (called desorption or sputtering). Incident
radiation contributes to the ambient gas observed in giant planet
magnetospheres, in regions of the interstellar medium, and around young stellar
objects. Observations of neutrals and ions can therefore give information on the
materials present in environments such as the oxygen atmosphere over Saturn's
main rings and grains in Saturn's magnetosphere, and the surfaces and
atmospheres of Europa and Ganymede. The possibility of a sub-surface ocean on
Europa makes it all the more important to describe the radiolytic production of
oxidants in its relatively young surface. This project will build practical
models using the latest computational tools in materials science, so as to use
gas or plasma observations to determine the composition of materials embedded in
a radiation environment. Work will focus on the commonality of the physical and
chemical processes occurring in a number of space
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will impact the physics and
chemistry of the radiation-induced processing of materials, and affects the
teaching of introductory materials science. The cross-disciplinary program also
has interactions with neighboring undergraduate institutions and high schools
that primarily serve minority populations.