* 0908011
* Collaborative Research: Waves and Fronts in Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Alexei Novikov, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 313,686.00

Numerical simulation of the microscopic details of wave propagation in random
media is still beyond the reach of modern computers: a typical propagation
distance may be on the order of hundreds of wavelengths and as many correlation
lengths of random fluctuations. This necessitates the use of various approximate
macroscopic models, of which kinetic equations constitute an important class.
However, the passage from microscopic wave equations to large-scale kinetics is
a complicated problem in itself. The goal of the first part of the project is to
develop new tools and better understanding of kinetic limits, especially in the
regime when random media have long range correlations that lead to multiple
temporal and spatial scales for various wave phenomena. The second part of the
project investigates the qualitative behavior of solutions of reaction-
diffusion-advection equations, with the main focus on the effect of a fluid
flow. The interaction of the mixing, dynamic, and geometric properties of the
underlying flow and the effects of diffusion and reaction will be investigated.
The problem becomes especially complex in the situations where the feedback from
the reaction process on the fluid flow cannot be ignored. The project addresses
the quantitative study of the transport of the energy, momentum, and reactants
in a Boussinesq reactive system, other reaction-diffusion systems with feedback,
and flame-front propagation in random media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
carries out mathematical studies of wave propagation in cluttered environments
and of reaction-diffusion processes in fluids. These studies are relevant to
several branches of science, ranging from biomedical imaging to geophysics,
fluid dynamics, and astrophysics. Imaging in a cluttered environment, whether it
is a human body, earth interior, or foliage, is inherently unstable because of
media complexity. One objective of this project is to develop imaging methods
that are less sensitive to unpredictable fluctuations of the clutter. Another
area of this project concerns the mathematical description of the effect of a
fluid flow on chemical reactions. Turbulent fluid flow plays an important role
in many chemical phenomena: it may drastically enhance the rate of reaction,
leading to higher efficiency, or, in some situations, extinguish the chemical
process. The project will address these issues in simpler mathematical models to
illuminate the mechanisms present in the full problem.&lt;br/&gt;