* 0908440
* The Life Cycles of Interacting Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Mercedes Richards, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 298,522.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Mercedes Richards
of the Pennsylvania State University will use spectroscopic analysis, synthetic
spectra, tomography, and hydrodynamic simulations to study the early stages of
the life cycle of interacting binary stars. The evolutionary sequence for close
binaries begins with the formation of two detached stars and ends with evolved
systems containing at least one compact object (e.g., novae, supernovae, X-ray
binaries, binary pulsars). The transition from the early to late stages depends
on the initial mass transfer rate, which is influenced by the structure of the
star when it fills its Roche surface, the degree to which orbital angular
momentum and system mass are assumed to be conserved, and the response of the
companion star to the accretion of gas. Binary evolution models require
knowledge of this initial mass loss rate since the donor will lose gas at this
rate until the initial mass ratio has been reversed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Richards will use direct measurements of the gas stream and other accretion
structures to determine reliable estimates of the mass transfer rate, gas
densities, and gas temperatures for binaries in the slow mass transfer phase.
She will apply a new approach to isolate the separate spectroscopic
contributions of the gas stream, accretion disk, and any hot spots. Synthetic
spectra will be calculated with her synthesis code and compared with observed
spectra to derive the physical properties of the separate components of the
accretion flows. The derived gas properties will be used to generate
hydrodynamic simulations of the binary. Finally, Doppler tomography will be used
to visualize the transferred gas and to examine the quality of the derived
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research are expected to
have implications for the entire field of interacting binaries. Dr. Richards has
already released her new spectrum synthesis code freely to the astronomical
community, and other astronomers have published papers after using this code.
She also has extensive outreach experience, and she will continue her commitment
to outreach activities and maintain numerous interactions with graduate
students, undergraduates, K-12 students, teachers, summer high school enrichment
programs, and the general public. She also has opportunities to travel around
the country to talk about her research and popular astronomy topics.