* 0908390
* Investigations of ram pressure stripping in realistic cluster environments with a multiphase ISM
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Greg Bryan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2012
* USD 302,302.00

AST-0908390 Bryan

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Interactions between the interstellar medium (ISM) of a disk galaxy and the
intracluster medium (ICM) of a massive cluster of galaxies will strip gas from
infalling galaxies and can lead to color and morphological changes. These
interactions can be used as a probe of both ISM and ICM physics. A recent wealth
of new data includes observed tails and wakes, and although simulations have
shed some light, much remains to be understood, including a mismatch between the
predicted and observed width of wakes, the way in which dense, molecular gas is
stripped, and the fate of the stripped gas. To answer these questions, this
project will increase the realism of stripping simulations, first by adding
radiative cooling to idealized galaxies with constant density and velocity
winds, using a high-resolution, adaptive-mesh refinement hydrocode. Secondly,
those systems will be placed in realistic cosmological simulations of cluster
formation and evolution. Finally, the team will add important extra physical
processes such as viscosity, heat conduction and magnetic fields into their
simulations. Every stage will stress direct observational comparisons.

The work will form the core of a PhD thesis, includes a number of projects
suitable for undergraduate students, and will involve New York high school
teachers and students through the Science Research Training Program. The growing
realism of simulations enables high-quality visualizations to convey up-to-date
research results to students and the general public, as the PI has done before,
in collaboration with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications and
the American Museum of Natural History.