* 0908472
* Collaborative Research: Global Response of the Martian Thermosphere to Energetic Pickup Ions
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Xiaohua Fang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2014
* USD 177,751.00

AST-0908472/0908311&lt;br/&gt;Fang/Liemohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project will apply coupled state-of-the-art numerical models to
consider the global response of the Martian thermosphere to energetic pickup
ions. In particular, the research will study the bombardment effects of oxygen
ions on composition and energetics. The neutral constituents of the atmospheric
corona can be ionized, picked up by the solar wind, and ultimately returned to
interact with the atmosphere, causing neutral particles to escape from Mars.
This sputtering loss and associated heating effects have not yet been included
in any global models to consider the coupling among the Mars system components.
This project will treat the Mars environment as a single system, including
pickup ions within the mass and energy budget of the Martian thermosphere. The
work will apply a magneto-hydrodynamics field-based pickup ion transport model,
along with a different model for the interaction between incident energetic
particles and the thermosphere below the exobase, and build the sputtering and
heating effects into the state-of-the-art Mars Thermosphere General Circulation
Model. The escape rate estimate for direct pickup ion loss and sputtering loss
will be used to advance understanding of the non-thermal processes governing
atmospheric erosion, and the quantification of long-term atmospheric
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will permit extrapolation of the
history of the Martian atmosphere and climate, the possible presence of liquid
water, and planetary habitability. Comparison with spacecraft measurements will
constrain understanding of the Mars-solar wind interaction. The results will be
important for future Mars probe spacecraft, and the research involves graduate
students. For the broader community, Mars sciences capture the excitement of
scientific exploration and adventure. Because this project helps to understand
oxygen loss and thus water loss, it provides an ideal opportunity to advance
scientific literacy through the public interest in water, and perhaps life, on
Mars.