* 0908779
* Materials World Network: Study of Lattice Dynamics and Phonon, Magnon and Electro-Magnon Interactions in Rare Earth Manganite Multiferroics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Samuel Lofland, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2013
* USD 90,000.00

This multidisciplinary international effort, comprised of three institutions,
Moscow State Steel and Alloys Institute (MISIS), National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, and Rowan University, aims to investigate
multiferroic manganites of the form RMnO3 (R a rare earth), magnetoelectric
compounds possessing simultaneous long-range magnetic order and
ferroelectricity. Not much is understood about the underlying physics of
magnetoelectrics. While there have been mostly phenomenological models put
forth, there have been few attempts to correlate the magnetic and phonon
excitations to the observed properties. This work seeks to eliminate the
sometimes apparently contradictory results reported on these materials by
performing various spectroscopic, structural and magnetic measurements on a set
of well characterized high quality crystals.

With this Materials World Network award, we seek to use the results on the
magnetoelectric properties and electromagnon spectra of the RMnO3 compounds to
develop materials with enhanced magnetoelectric coupling by substitution on the
rare-earth site. In addition to the obvious benefits related to the scientific
advancement for the technological application of multiferroics, American
undergraduate and Russian graduate students will be introduced to an
international research environment and to new cultures, which will prepare them
for other worldwide activities during their careers.

This project is cofunded by the DMR Condensed Matter Physics Program, the DMR
Office of Special Programs, and by the Office of International Science and
Engineering, Russia and Eurasia region.