* 0908868
* Observational Study of the Rotation Rates of Very Small Near-Earth Asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Eileen Ryan, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2012
* USD 287,379.00

AST-0908868&lt;br/&gt;Eileen Ryan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by our lack of knowledge
of the physical properties of the very smallest Near-Earth Asteroids (NEAs) now
being discovered. This is particularly true for rotation periods, which can
provide information about an asteroid's internal composition, degree of
fracture, and collisional history. Current data suggest that NEAs smaller than
200 meters in diameter rotate faster than 2.2 hours, which is the theoretically
derived critical rotation limit for strengthless ellipsoids, while larger bodies
rotate more slowly. This suggests that the small fast rotating objects are solid
and so are likely to be individual fragments that once made up a rubble pile
parent body that was disrupted by a catastrophic impact. However, the sample
size of small asteroids with known rotation periods is small and a more robust
statistical sample is needed. The state-of-the-art 2.4-meter telescope at the
Magdalena Ridge Observatory will be used to determine rotation periods (through
light curves) and material classifications (through spectrophotometry) for 15-20
small NEAs per year. By the end of the three year project, the number of
characterized small NEAs is expected to have more than
doubled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If, as suggested by preliminary observations by
the PIs, a large percentage of slowly rotating small bodies exists, it may well
be the case that "rubble piles" (versus monolithic or coherent bodies) are
common at the low-mass end. Such a result is important in assessing and planning
for the threat posed by these objects. The project will be carried out at a
minority serving institution and provide research and training experiences for
these students (though no direct support is included here). The researchers will
include Near-Earth Asteroid observations and the concepts involved in this
research as part of a Masters of Science Teaching program for K-12 educators,
and they routinely give public talks on these topics.