* 0908444
* Collaborative Research:  Effects of warming  induced increases in shrub abundance and changing seasonality on migratory songbirds in Alaskan arctic tundra.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Natalie Boelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2015
* USD 631,995.00

As a consequence of global warming, arctic North America has been ?greening?
over the past several decades, with increases in relative abundance and size of
shrubs documented in numerous locations. Much of the research on this topic
examines how this shift toward more woody species affects element cycling,
particularly carbon, with potential feedbacks to the atmosphere regionally and
globally. To date, the response of higher trophic levels to such shifts in
vegetation in the Arctic has not been well studied. One group that has been
almost completely ignored is migratory songbirds; they have a complex
relationship with shrubs that provide both shelter and food, both of which are
directly affected by weather patterns. This research will characterize the
interactions between tundra vegetation and migratory songbirds in habitats that
differ in shrub dominance for five consecutive growing seasons that will differ
in timing and severity of weather events. The team will 1) identify and
characterize interactions between shrub dominance and weather to determine how
these affect food and shelter availability for migratory songbirds; 2) examine
how reproductive success of populations of two songbird species responds to
variation in both shrub dominance and timing of spring snowmelt, and; 3) measure
how both variation in shrub dominance and timing of spring snowmelt affect
composition and size of the entire songbird community. The multi-year approach
will allow for examination of how interannual variability in arctic seasonality,
particularly the timing of snowmelt, impacts songbird communities. Because the
increasing shrub dominance is occurring too slowly for organisms to respond to
during the time period of a grant, the researchers will examine habitat usage in
open tundra plots, moderate shrub dominance plots, and high shrub dominance
plots, at each of four study sites on the North Slope of Alaska. These include
Atigun Valley, one of the first tundra stops made by migratory songbirds as they
travel north, and at Toolik Lake, farther north, including two additional sites
farther north to increase the spatial scale of sampling. In five project years,
they will sample intensively at all four field sites to investigate spatial and
temporal variation in plant resources, arthropod abundance, songbird community
composition, and the arrival, settlement and reproductive success of two
songbird species. During five years they hope to capture a range of interannual
variability in weather, onset of spring snowmelt, and biotic responses to
provide and understanding of current relationships and to predict how future
changes in climate and vegetation may affect these organisms. They also intend
to verify the use of remote techniques for monitoring bird community attributes
via bioacoustic recordings for conducting automated bird community censuses.