* 0908767
* Materials World Network: The Magnetostructural Response in Heterostructured Systems: A US - UK Collaboration
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Don Heiman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

This Materials World Network award by the Metallic Materials and Nanostructures
program and the Office of Special Program in the Division of Materials Research
to Northeastern University is to synthesize and study heterostructured films of
equiatomic Iron-Rhodium (FeRh) compound, and to map out its multi-dimensional
phase space and identify low-energy pathways to tailor the first-order
antiferro- to ferromagnetic phase transition and associated functional responses
that are found in this compound. While first-order magnetic transitions are
known to underlie an assortment of extreme functional phenomena with important
technological attributes (colossal magnetoresistance, giant magnetocaloric
character and giant magnetic shape memory), knowledge concerning key materials
factors controlling these responses remains elusive. In this project, the
researchers plan to modify the phase boundaries in model-system FeRh epilayers
by: (1) employing additional magnetic layers to amplify or offset the applied
magnetic field that drives the transition; (2) applying stress via substrate
selection; and (3) exploiting interphase ferromagnetic exchange coupling. Unique
educational features of the project are extended scientific student exchanges
between the U.S. and the U.K. teams, as well as providing training to students
in the application of advanced probes to the research such as synchrotron x-ray
scattering, neutron scattering and transmission electron microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project features fundamental research focused on a
member of a very rare class of materials -?magnetostructural materials? - that
exhibit intimate interactions between the electrons in the material and the
atoms that constitute its crystal lattice. This unique arrangement lends the
material an extraordinary responsiveness to physical perturbations such that
very small changes in temperature, magnetic/electric field or strain can drive a
very large response in the material. Thus this class of materials is poised for
development and potential application in advanced sensors to monitor
environmental conditions and enable, via computer networking, so-called ?smart?
networks with relevance to energy management and efficiency. To facilitate
experimental clarity, the simple magnetic compound FeRh will be made in thin
film form and studied at the partner laboratories in the U.S. (Northeastern
University, Brookhaven National Laboratory) and in the U.K. (University of
Leeds, ISIS/Rutherford Appleton Laboratory). Students from the educational
institutions involved will participate in transatlantic research exchanges and
will have the opportunity to be trained in fundamental science as well as in the
use of advanced probes such as synchrotron x-ray scattering, neutron scattering
and transmission electron microscopy.