* 0908238
* Force Chain Fluctuations and Jamming in Dense Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 05/31/2010
* USD 12,950.00

0908238&lt;br/&gt;C. O'Hern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI requests support for
international travel from NSF-CBET Division, Particulate and Multiphase
Processes Program, to cover travel-related expenses for approximately 20 invited
participants that will present their research on dense granular materials (DGM)
at a mini-symposium "Force chain fluctuations and jamming in dense granular
flows" at the 7th EUROMECH Solid Mechanics Conference (ESMC 2009) in Lisbon,
Portugal September 7-11, 2009. The mini-symposium is organized by the PI and
Prof. Lou Kondic from the Department of Mathematical Sciences at NJIT. This
mini-symposium at ESMC 2009 will strengthen collaborative ties between
researchers in physics, mathematics, and the engineering sciences who study
dense granular media in Europe and the U.S. A large fraction of the invitees
will be recent CBET grantees in DGM, junior scientists, and researchers from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of current studies of DGM is to
develop a quantitative and predictive description of the structural and
mechanical properties given a spectrum of preparation histories and particle
properties. In particular, there is a significant effort to understand the role
of force chain networks in DGM. However, much of the recent research in the
field of DGM has been performed via uncoordinated efforts of physicists,
mathematicians, and engineers in the U.S. and Europe. By organizing this multi-
disciplinary and multi-national symposium, we seek to bring together the most
active researchers, including experimentalists, simulators, and theorists, in
the field of DGM to allow the exchange of innovative ideas, the fostering of new
collaborations, and the strengthening of international knowledge transfer among
scientists in the U.S. and Europe. This mini-symposium promises to increase the
pace of research breakthroughs in the filed of
DGM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaches that combine techniques from mathematics,
physics, and engineering are required to solve the next generation of problems
in the filed of DGM. In addition, there are only limited opportunities for
interaction between researchers in DGM from the U.S. and Europe. An important
goal of the proposed mini-symposium is to bring together a multi-disciplinary
group of scientists at various stages of their scientific careers to brainstorm
and discuss current open questions in DGM. This mini-symposium at ESMC 2009 is
the first step in establishing lasting connections between participants. The
organizers of this mini-symposium will also organize follow-up international
symposia and workshops focusing on DGM, for example the workshop "Computational
Homology Tools Applied to Jamming and Flow in Granular Materials" will be held
at Yale University in the early spring 2010.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regime where granular materials transition
between flowing and jammed states is of great relevance to many industrial
processes, including those in chemical engineering, pharmaceuticals, and oil
production. A quantitative and predictive understanding of how to model granular
materials as they yield, flow, or respond to applied stresses has not yet been
reached. While significant research efforts in DGM are being performed by a wide
array of scientists, often the researchers are not aware of related work being
carried out in different disciplines and on different continents. The proposed
mini-symposium will bring together physicists, mathematicians, and engineers to
encourage new collaborations across disciplines and nationalities that will
stimulate intellectual breakthroughs in DGM in the coming decade. In addition,
the mini-symposium will allow junior scientists to present their work to the
international community and interact with leaders in the field of DGM. Many of
the invited speakers will be recent grantees from NSF-CBET and researchers from
under-represented groups.