* 0908270
* Stabilization and Control in Nonlinear Structural-Acoustics, Magnetic Imaging, and Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Toundykov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 96,436.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project centers on control of dynamical systems governed by nonlinear
hyperbolic partial differential equations: (i) stabilization of electromagnetic
fields via nonlinear feedbacks restricted to a subset of the boundary or the
interior of the domain; (ii) boundary control of structure-acoustic interactions
with the elastic component described by the Reissner-Mindlin plate model; (iii)
stabilization of acoustic noise from structures vibrating under influence of
electromagnetic fields; (iv) stability and attractors for wave equations with
memory terms and nonlinear damping. One of the primary goals is to investigate,
in the context of these systems, control and energy dissipation mechanisms that
are restricted in some sense: Either geometrically to a portion of the physical
domain, and/or in the "strength" of the feedback as in under- and over-damped
systems. The work will also address equations with non-dissipative controls
(e.g. sheer force feedbacks for Euler-Bernoulli beams and Kirchhoff plates)
which, in some cases, are more suitable for implementation, but whose energy-
damping effects are not apparent and can only be studied via specialized
techniques. The project is aimed at establishing the conditions on geometry,
initial data, and structure of the controls necessary to steer/stabilize the
system or, at least, ensure certain properties of the global attractors.

This research is expected to constructively impact engineering design in control
of distributed parameter systems (e.g. acoustic and mechanical vibrations,
thermal effects, electro-magnetic fields). Maxwell equations and stabilization
of electromagnetic radiation arise in antenna design, nonlinear optics,
semiconductor-superconductor modeling. Structure-acoustic interaction problems
show up in a variety of areas ranging from active noise control to design of
smart materials. In particular, study of acoustic-magneto-elastic coupling helps
understand how to minimize noise from the gradient coils in magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) devices. It is desirable to engineer controls that are minimally
invasive and convenient for implementation, thus, prompting investigation of
actuators and energy dampers that are restricted in space and their strength.
The goal is to establish conditions under which such mechanisms provide
sufficient control over the system, or to quantify their deficiencies when full
effectiveness is unattainable. This work will also connect with applied
numerical analysis both in research and in education: Supplementary projects for
undergraduate and graduate course will be developed offering a lower-level
introduction to numerical methods for studying partial differential equations; a
longer-term objective will be to augment some aspects of the above research with
numerical algorithms in order to facilitate practical applications of these
theoretical results.