* 0908158
* Modeling and analysis of nematic liquid crystals in thin geometries: Bistable configurations and free surface instabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Lou Kondic, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,283.00

Cummings DMS-0908158

This project centers on developing new analytical models for nematic liquid
crystals (NLCs) in two basic configurations. The first concerns NLCs
"sandwiched" between two solid boundaries, subject to an applied electric field.
This geometry is directly relevant to a number of liquid crystal display
devices. By investigating the response of the NLC layer to an external electric
field, the investigator and her colleage develop new models relevant to the
design of bistable LCD devices. Advances here could lead to the development of
new, easily-manufactured, energy-saving technologies. The second configuration
considers free-surface dynamics of NLC films and drops, relevant to numerous
manufacturing processes. Mathematically, the problem is complicated by the need
to model carefully the liquid crystal behavior in the vicinity of any contact
lines. This, in addition to the known unstable behavior, leads to a very complex
problem, about which little is known theoretically. Systematic asymptotic
reduction of the complex Ericksen-Leslie equations for nematic media, to the
appropriate thin-film geometry, is made. The formulation includes the effects of
finite anchoring strength of the liquid crystal director field at the
boundaries, and the effects of liquid-solid interaction energy (via a disjoining
pressure). The theoretical investigations are augmented by an experimental
program, comprising simple table-top experiments carried out by summer students
at NJIT, and more sophisticated investigations carried out by an experimental
collaborator, Peter Palffy-Muhoray, at Kent State University.

The project has two strands: A theoretical investigation into optimal design of
low-energy (so-called "bistable") Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) devices, for use
in applications such as e-paper; and an investigation into the dynamics of
nematic liquid crystals spreading on surfaces, a process known to be unstable in
certain situations. The development of a theoretical base for a workable,
easily-manufactured, low-energy LCD device would have undeniable economic and
environmental impact if it proved competitive, in terms of cost or performance,
with the small number of such low-energy LCD microtechnologies presently
available. The investigations into free-surface spreading lead to a better
understanding of coating processes and, particularly with the inclusion of an
electric field, offer potential for new ways of controlling the evolution of
spreading films in manufacturing processes. This project is carried out in
coordination with educational efforts that include invaluable research
experiences for undergraduate students.