* 0908870
* A Survey of Nearby Stars for Extrasolar Planets: Towards a Galactic Census of Terrestrial Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Steven Vogt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,264,545.00

Dr. Steven Vogt will continue a long-term effort to discover and characterize
planets around nearby stars. He and his group will obtain high-resolution
spectra at the W. M. Keck Observatory, the Anglo-Australian Telescope, and the
Magellan Telescopes of the Carnegie Observatories to measure precise radial
velocities. The study will reveal the presence of unseen planets around stars by
detecting periodic variations in the radial velocity of the host star due to
gravitational acceleration induced by the unseen planet. The goal of the project
is to identify new planets in multi-planet systems and also around stars not yet
known to harbor planets. In cases where a planet also transits its host star,
infrared and optical light curves of the primary and secondary transits will
yield further information about mass, density, structure, temperature, and
atmospheric conditions on the planet. The long-term goal of the research is to
push the planet detection threshold into the terrestrial-mass regime, and
determine the occurrence frequency of habitable terrestrial planets.

This effort aims to provide fundamental observational data about the origins and
evolution of planetary systems, and determine whether our own solar system (with
low-mass rocky planets in the inner zone, and massive Jovian gas giants in the
outer zone) is common or rare in the universe. Dr. Vogt's group will continue
outreach efforts with K-12 students and the general population; they will also
work with amateur and professional astronomers, who can perform orbit
determination using a web-based tool.