* 0908030
* Collaborative Research:   Mitigating Disaster and Terrorism Impacts to Critical Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 08/31/2008,02/28/2011
* Timothy Matisziw, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 111,620.00

Critical network infrastructures, such as transportation, communication, and
utility systems, are designed to facilitate the movement of essential goods and
services over geographic space. Many of these vital infrastructures are
geographically extensive; increasing vulnerability to disruption by natural
disasters, accidents, and/or sabotage. Planning for and managing the
vulnerability of critical infrastructure to extreme events is a challenging
task. This is particularly true given the uncertainty associated with the timing
and severity of these events and the network components involved. Effective
planning therefore is reliant on the ability to rigorously characterize
potential disruptions. This collaborative research project will develop several
new approaches for assessing network vulnerability to interdiction, which is
broadly defined as the debilitation of network elements due to disaster,
accident, or intentional harm. To support broader analysis of potential
interdiction impacts to networked systems, the investigators will develop a
general spatial optimization modeling framework for addressing the interdiction
of system flow. They also will refine and further develop the general framework
to address a number of practical planning concerns. Such concerns include
additional planning objectives involving attributes of network components,
interdiction cost, and system efficiency. The ultimate aim of modeling
interdiction impact is to better inform mitigation and remediation efforts. A
final goal of this research project will be the operationalization of a modeling
framework to support system recovery in the event of interdiction. This research
will be rooted in theoretical developments applicable to any networked system,
with the analytical framework being designed for cross-cutting use over a broad
spectrum of infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding, assessing, and
managing threats to critical network infrastructures is essential for ensuring
the continuity of these complex systems. To address these needs, this research
project will advance work in geographic information science and network modeling
to facilitate identification of infrastructure risks and vulnerabilities.
Modeling techniques developed to identify interdiction vulnerabilities will be
useful for informing planning efforts and allocating resources for reducing risk
in existing network infrastructure through fortification, recovery, and other
such strategies. The most significant implication of this research may be the
ability to consider multiple planning goals in the analysis of network
vulnerability within a unified interdiction modeling framework. Such efforts
will result in a more robust and realistic description of interdiction risk,
enabling a more comprehensive assessment of recovery and fortification options.
The results of this research will be of interest to the scientific community as
well as to governmental and private-sector agencies involved in planning for the
continuity of critical infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;