* 0908781
* Materials World Network: The Subtle Balance Between Rigidity and Swelling in Functional Nanoporous Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2013
* James Runt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 616,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Materials World Network project integrates and maximizes the interrelated,
but distinct, areas of expertise of two research groups from the United States
and three research groups from the United Kingdom to train undergraduate and
graduate students in modern methods of experimentation, equation-of-state model
development, and molecular simulation in a global environment. These research
groups include researchers from Penn State in the U.S., and three different
groups at the University of Manchester and Cardiff University in the U.K. The
ultimate aim of this project is to develop fundamental understanding of
structure-property relationships for nanoporous polymer-based materials trough
experimental and computational procedures for use in applications that exploit
their surface chemistry, that can range from catalysis, sensors and gas storage
to separations, and hence to generate a sufficient knowledge base to develop
polymer-based porous materials with controlled properties at the nano and
macroscopic scales.

This research relies on the expertise of the research team that consists of: a)
synthesis and characterization of NPs, including X-ray characterization of the
microporous structure and evolution of the microporous environment when
different molecules are adsorbed; b) modeling fluid/polymeric properties at
molecular and macroscopic scales, to understand their structure, morphology, and
properties. This combination of expertise allows us to generate the knowledge
and know-how to develop appropriate structure-property relations that enables us
to exploit the rigidity/softness relation and swelling properties of NPs to
develop new technologies. Students are receiving significant training during the
course of this program through close interactions with the PIs, regular
attendance at group meetings, and discussions with other groups. Students are
benefitting from the interaction and immersion in a global collaborative
research with international experts that complement the intensive training in
theory, simulation, and/or experiment that they receive at their home
institutions.

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate (Polymers program and the Office of Special
Programs).