* 0908302
* Collaborative Research: An integrated experimental and observational study of cosmic silicate astromineralogy
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Alan Whittington, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 280,630.00

AST-0908302/0908309&lt;br/&gt;Speck/Hofmeister&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicate dust is an important component of many
astrophysical environments. Spectral features due to "amorphous" silicates have
been observed in diverse settings ranging from our solar system and the
atmospheres of comets, to the circumstellar ejecta of dying stars, to the
environments of active galactic nuclei. Dust plays an essential role in star
formation processes, and contributes to several aspects of interstellar
processes such as gas heating and the formation of molecules. Since mass-loss
from evolved stars is radiation driven, it is intimately linked to the precise
nature of the circumstellar dust. However, the effects of composition and
structure on the spectra from dust are poorly constrained, leading to
ambiguities in interpretation. This project will investigate the laboratory
infrared spectra and glass transition temperatures of "amorphous" silicate
minerals, providing the necessary spectral and physical property data to
constrain dust models. These data will allow a better understanding of the
conditions under which various silicates form and are processed in many
astrophysical environments, including dying stars of all masses, young stellar
objects, and the interstellar medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of
laboratory investigations will explore the variation in spectral signatures of
well-characterized suites of pyroxenes and melilites, including changes due to
solid-solution behavior and variable iron oxidation state. A key outcome will be
to determine whether grain types such as glasses, polycrystalline samples, and
glass-crystallite mixtures, can in fact be distinguished spectroscopically. The
work will provide physical data for silicate glasses and melts, such as glass
transition temperature and heat capacity, giving a better understanding of the
conditions under which various silicates form and are processed, and the effect
of transient heating events. The results will then be used to study the
mineralogy of the ejecta of asymptotic giant branch and red supergiant stars,
gaining insight into competing dust formation mechanisms, and to find the
formation sites of interstellar silicates by testing whether they are glassy or
poly-crystalline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a cross-disciplinary study
involving an astrophysicist, a mineral physicist and an experimental
petrologist. The data to be collected are important for studies of silicate
melts, which pertain to magmatism on terrestrial planets, and not
insignificantly to the glass industry. The cross-fertilization of ideas and
techniques provides a broad, interdisciplinary education for the involved
graduate students, expanding horizons and promoting thinking outside the box.
The female PIs (an under-represented group) are strong role models for women in
these fields, and active mentors to younger researchers.