* 0908267
* Applications of Variational Fracture: Enhanced Geothermal Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Blaise Bourdin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 314,139.00

Bourdin&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0908267&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under
the American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Enhanced geothermal systems represent a virtually
untapped,&lt;br/&gt;clean, renewable, economically viable, and widely
available&lt;br/&gt;source of energy. They rely on harvesting heat by
circulating&lt;br/&gt;water through artificially stimulated fracture systems in
deep&lt;br/&gt;hot dry rocks. This project provides a predictive
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the mechanisms commonly used to generate these
systems:&lt;br/&gt;pressure- and temperature-driven fracture. The modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;analysis are based on a variational fracture formulation,
which&lt;br/&gt;has been developed over the last ten years or so and has
strong&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and mechanical foundations. The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;extends this formulation to dynamic fractures and
improves its&lt;br/&gt;implementation on parallel supercomputers. He extends its
scope&lt;br/&gt;by studying and implementing two approaches to the
penalization&lt;br/&gt;of material interpenetration along crack lips. He
develops&lt;br/&gt;variational models for the pressure- and temperature-
driven&lt;br/&gt;fracture problems, approximates them using the idea
of&lt;br/&gt;Gamma-convergence, implements the regularized models on
parallel&lt;br/&gt;supercomputers, and conducts large scale realistic
validation&lt;br/&gt;experiments that are compared with existing
engineering&lt;br/&gt;literature. This project is a first step in a
nascent&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary initiative fostered through the Center
for&lt;br/&gt;Computation and Technology at LSU, involving
mathematicians,&lt;br/&gt;computational scientists, and engineers. It supports
the&lt;br/&gt;participation of two undergraduates and one graduate student
per&lt;br/&gt;year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As the Nation strives to reduce its
carbon footprint,&lt;br/&gt;protect its economy from fluctuating oil prices, and
increase its&lt;br/&gt;energy independence, Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS)
represent&lt;br/&gt;a virtually untapped, clean, renewable, economically viable
and&lt;br/&gt;widely available source of energy. They rely on harvesting
heat&lt;br/&gt;by circulating water through artificially stimulated,
highly&lt;br/&gt;connected fracture systems in deep hot dry rocks. A
recent&lt;br/&gt;MIT-led interdisciplinary assessment panel commissioned by
the&lt;br/&gt;Department of Energy estimates that even without major
technical&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs EGS could cover 20% of the estimated US
electricity&lt;br/&gt;needs by 2050, in an economically viable way and with
only&lt;br/&gt;marginal carbon emission and land use. A major technical
issue&lt;br/&gt;identified in this report is the creation of
sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;connected fracture systems. The investigator develops
a&lt;br/&gt;predictive understanding of two mechanisms commonly used
to&lt;br/&gt;generate these systems: pressure- and temperature-
driven&lt;br/&gt;fracture, based on a mechanically faithful and
mathematically&lt;br/&gt;sound variational formulation of fracture developed
over the last&lt;br/&gt;decade. This model is extended to account for the
specifics of&lt;br/&gt;EGS, then implemented on parallel supercomputers. Large
scale&lt;br/&gt;numerical simulations are performed using the
cyberinfrastructure&lt;br/&gt;provided by the TeraGrid, to allow EGS designers
to devise&lt;br/&gt;stimulation patterns maximizing the efficiency and
sustainability&lt;br/&gt;of new systems. This project is a first step in a
nascent&lt;br/&gt;multi-disciplinary initiative fostered through the Center
for&lt;br/&gt;Computation and Technology at LSU, involving
mathematicians,&lt;br/&gt;computational scientists, and engineers. It supports
each year&lt;br/&gt;the participation of two undergraduates and one graduate
student.