* 0908190
* Periodic and Large Amplitude Solutions for the compressible Euler equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Robin Young, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 124,454.00

This project focuses on the propagation of nonlinear waves in the inviscid Euler
equations, which describe conservation of mass, momentum and energy in a
continuous medium. The dominant feature of solutions is the presence of shock
waves, which present both physical and mathematical difficulties. Two
fundamental problems are considered: first is the extension of the Glimm-Lax
existence and decay theory to solutions having large amplitude. This problem
necessitates an analysis of multiple wave interactions up to and including the
vacuum, where the system is singular. The second problem concerns the existence
of shock-free periodic solutions which do not dissipate energy. These arise from
multiple reflections of nonlinear waves together with a nonlinear superposition
principle, and lead to problems of small divisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shock
waves are characterized by an abrupt, nearly discontinuous change in the
characteristics of the medium. Across a shock moving, for example in the air
there is always an extremely rapid rise in pressure, temperature and of the
flow. Shock waves occur naturally in many physical systems, and are closely
associated with the decay of solutions and dissipation of energy; a well-known
manifestation of a decaying shock wave is a sonic boom. The celebrated Glimm-Lax
theory precisely describes this decay for small amplitude solutions of two
equations, neglecting higher order effects such as viscosity and heat loss; the
theory is routinely assumed to hold in much wider contexts. The first part of
this project extends and confirms the Glimm-Lax theory for waves of arbitrary
strength described by systems of two equations. The second part of the project
reveals the surprising conclusion that there are solutions which do not form
shock waves and thus do not decay. In particular, this research indicates that
in larger systems multiple wave reflection effects slow down the formation of
shocks and the subsequent dissipation of energy. Controllability of these
effects would have many consequences, including applications to long-range
signaling and airplane design.&lt;br/&gt;