* 0908439
* MSPA-AST:  Multilevel Modeling of Active Galaxy Populations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ira Wasserman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2013
* USD 668,600.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Loredo and his team will develop
Bayesian multi-level modeling for astrophysical problems. Bayesian multi-level
models decompose the random variation in measured quantities into distinct
layers, each representing a different contribution: layers 'close' to the data
might describe the uncertainty in the measurements, while layers 'farther away'
typically describe cosmic scatter arising from unobserved variables. Their first
project aims to account for two common sources of bias in estimating the
distribution of luminosities within a sample of objects: bias from the way that
the sample is selected, and bias stemming from the fact that the 'measured'
brightnesses of objects are not in fact independent of each other. Astronomers
often neglect the second of these, although it can be significant. Dr Loredo and
his team will apply their methods to data from the Two-Degree Field quasar
survey and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. In their second project, the team will
use a Bayesian multi-level model to test whether the active galactic nuclei seen
near the directions from which ultra-high energy cosmic rays are observed are
truly associated with the cosmic-ray sources, or whether the alignment is likely
to be coincidental. The team will apply their methods to cosmic-ray measurements
from HiRes and the Auger observatory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
includes experts in both astronomy and statistics. Dr Loredo is an associate of
the Center for Astrostatistics at Penn State University, where he lectures at
the annual Summer School. At that summer school, he will offer topical sessions
on statistical methods for astronomical surveys and multilevel models. The
research should produce significant innovations in both disciplines, and will
improve the science return from large astronomical surveys.