* 0908675
* Arctic Research Using the Community Climate System Model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Peter Gent, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 776,475.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Very rapid change has been observed in the Polar Regions and is projected to
continue for the foreseeable future. This change is ubiquitous across the system
occurring within the atmosphere, terrestrial and marine components and
encompassing the physical, chemical and biological spheres. However, many of the
linkages and feedbacks that determine the future trajectory of the polar systems
are poorly constrained, which limits our ability to predict their future state.
A systems perspective is required to further our understanding and determine
what changes imply for the future. Global climate models explicitly synthesize
across the atmosphere, terrestrial and marine components and many now
incorporate biogeochemical and ecosystem processes into the physical system. As
such, they are a critical tool for assessing polar system behavior and for
studying linkages among various components and polar processes and feedbacks.
These models also allow us to project future arctic conditions and investigate
interactions between the polar and global systems. Traditionally global climate
models have been developed at national centers, and had limited access by the
broader scientific community. The Community Climate System Model (CCSM), which
is based at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), has been unique
in being a true community model that is built and used by a broad community of
scientists. The CCSM source code and simulation output are freely available
through the internet, and CCSM working groups, including the Polar Climate
Working Group, that design the model system and experiments are open to all
participants. To facilitate use of the CCSM by the polar scientific community
requires in-house support. This effort will enable use and development of the
CCSM by the broad polar scientific community through the funding of a dedicated
polar community liaison in the Climate and Global Dynamics Division at NCAR. The
functions performed by this liaison involve two primary tasks. The first is to
facilitate the development of the sea ice component of the CCSM, which
incorporates new parameterizations and software engineering requirements agreed
upon by the Polar Climate Working Group. The second is to provide diagnostic
assistance for the polar scientific community involved in the analysis and
design of CCSM experiments, and act as a liaison to the greater polar system
science community. This will ultimately lead to the improvement of polar
processes in the CCSM, and enable model experiments to investigate polar system
behavior.

