* 0908894
* Measuring interstellar temperature and ionization variations using observations of faint diffuse [OII] emission
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Edwin Mierkiewicz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2013
* USD 403,153.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The interstellar medium (ISM) plays a vital role in the ongoing cycle of stellar
birth and death, and galactic evolution. However the role of interstellar
matter, from how its properties are influenced by stars to how, in turn, its
properties influence star formation is poorly understood. Dr. Edwin Mierkiewicz
and his team will carry out a program of [OII] observations which will (1)
provide the only opportunity to separate unambiguously variations in temperature
from variations in ionization conditions in the warm ionized medium (WIM) of our
Galaxy and (2) confirm whether H-alpha, [NII], and [SII] data can provide
reliable temperature information about diffuse ionized gas in our own and other
galaxies. This research uses innovative spectroscopic techniques to address
outstanding questions of heating, and of temperature and ionization variations
in the WIM raised by Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM) observations, but which
WHAM and other available astronomical instruments are not suited to address.
Beyond its intrinsic interest, a thorough understanding of the WIM is important
for understanding the composition and nature of the interstellar medium, and the
primary sources of ionization and heating within the disk and halo of our
Galaxy.

Dr. Mierkiewicz and his team have a long history of student training in
astrophysics instrumentation and observational techniques. Graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in all phases of this work. The graduate
student involvement will lead to a Ph.D. thesis. Dr. Mierkiewicz is the director
of the separately NSF-funded University of Wisconsin Astronomy Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program. This program values diversity
among its participants and works to involve students from underrepresented
groups and small colleges in astrophysics research. Summer REU students will
participate in this work.