* 0908015
* Local Tomography and Microlocal Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2014
* USD 234,941.00

The main goal of this project is to solve problems in tomography. Professor
Quinto will develop and test local reconstruction algorithms and apply them to
electron microscopy (ET), single photon emission tomography (SPECT), Sonar, and
X-ray tomography. Professor Quinto is developing his fully three-dimensional
tomography algorithm, and collaborators at Sidec and the Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, are testing it on electron microscope data of biological specimens.
He is adapting and testing the algorithms on new scanning geometries (ways of
taking the data) in ET and SPECT. With Andreas Rieder and Thomas Schuster, he is
developing local algorithms for three-dimensional Sonar, and he is applying it
to more general data acquisition geometries. Professor Quinto is developing
X-ray tomography algorithms for novel X-ray source curves and applying them to
medical tomography. In each case, he will develop pure mathematics to analyze
what the algorithms do to boundaries or singularities, and he will improve the
algorithms using this information. The PI will develop the microlocal analysis
behind the physical models and his algorithms. Along with Hans Rullgard, he will
quantify the strength of singularities of objects and their tomographic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will solve specific
mathematical problems and apply them to practical problems with scientists in
industry. His electron microscopy project is undertaken jointly with biologists
and mathematicians, and his algorithm is being used to help scientists better
image and understand the structure of individual molecules. The X-ray tomography
(CT) project is motivated by a novel X-ray CT scanner for the operating room,
and his algorithm can be used to image the inside of the body as doctors
operate. His research on measuring strength of singularities from Radon data
could help researchers quantify what is visible from tomographic data, much as
the principal investigator's previous research on qualitative singularity
detection shows where these singularities are located in the body. The work in
this proposal also supports the mathematical education of Prof. Quinto's
students. He will use some of his NSF support to work with at least two
undergraduate students on his proposed research projects.