* 0908663
* Some elliptic and hyperbolic problems arising in mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Daniel Spirn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2013
* USD 100,376.00

Chen&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0908663&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the
American Recovery and&lt;br/&gt;Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The
investigator&lt;br/&gt;studies some mathematical models that occur in three
specific&lt;br/&gt;areas: electromagnetism, solid mechanics, and fluid
mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;In the first project on electromagnetism, the investigator
and&lt;br/&gt;his collaborators establish an identification of the self-
dual&lt;br/&gt;Chern-Simons vortices, as well as study the electric and
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;effects on the stability of the dually charged vortices.
The&lt;br/&gt;second project concerns the dynamics of gel swelling.
The&lt;br/&gt;mathematical construction of well-posedness of classical and
weak&lt;br/&gt;solutions is proven in the context of hyperbolic
conservation&lt;br/&gt;laws. The third project involves the well-posedness
and&lt;br/&gt;stability of various nonlinear dispersive equations arising
from&lt;br/&gt;solid and fluid mechanics. Methods of mathematical analysis
are&lt;br/&gt;the primary tool employed in the investigations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Physical phenomena are usually well modeled via
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations. Such equations are
exceedingly&lt;br/&gt;difficult to study, both theoretically and numerically,
yet their&lt;br/&gt;understanding is important to further progress of many areas
of&lt;br/&gt;physics and engineering. One of the objectives of this
project&lt;br/&gt;is to study the behavior of electrically and magnetically
charged&lt;br/&gt;particles in the classical field theory. Another
objective&lt;br/&gt;concerns the study of soft condensed matter, which is
relevant to&lt;br/&gt;drug manufacturing and bacterial motility. The third
objective&lt;br/&gt;is to understand a new type of transonic wave arising in
solid&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, which is different from the context of transonic
flow&lt;br/&gt;in gas dynamics. The fourth objective is to study water
waves&lt;br/&gt;that may occur in the ocean that are affected by the
earth's&lt;br/&gt;rotation, and to understand how they can form tsunamis and
how&lt;br/&gt;they can become turbulent. The results of this
project&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the identification of physical problems of
great&lt;br/&gt;scientific importance that offer new opportunities for
the&lt;br/&gt;integration of applied analysis in research and in the
training&lt;br/&gt;of graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;