* 0908668
* Structure Flows, AGN and the WHIM
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Thomas Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2013
* USD 653,852.00

Dr. Jones and Dr. Rudnick will conduct a coordinated program of
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations and radio observations to study the Warm-
Hot Intergalactic Medium (WHIM). In the early Universe, low-density gas is mixed
with dark matter. As over-dense regions collapse to form the filaments of the
'cosmic web', the gas falls supersonically into these filaments, where it is
shock-heated and ionized to form the WHIM. Magnetic fields will be amplified in
the shocks, and electrons accelerated to relativistic speeds. This team aims to
detect the filamentary WHIM by its polarized radio synchrotron radiation. They
will concentrate on a redshift z ~ 0.1, just distant enough that the WHIM
filaments appear narrow enough to distinguish them from the Galactic foreground,
which predominates on angular scales larger than a degree across. The team will
use MHD simulations to follow outflows from giant radio galaxies over megaparsec
scales as they impinge on the WHIM, including a self-consistent treatment of
cosmic ray acceleration and transport. The simulated objects will be compared to
observed structures over the whole spectrum from radio to gamma-rays, to test
models for the WHIM and the origin of intergalactic magnetic
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two graduate students will be trained by
participating in the research, along with undergraduate students. The team will
visit schools, churches, civic organizations and state parks to share
information about basic astronomy as well as their own research.