* 0908269
* Magnetohydrodynamics of Protoplanetary Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roman Rafikov, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 633,320.00

AST-0908269&lt;br/&gt;Stone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the gas dynamics of
protoplanetary disks, and the interaction of disks with planets. The work
includes (1) studies of angular momentum transport by the magnetorotational
instability (MRI) in protoplanetary disks, (2) studies of the propagation and
damping of, and gap opening by, density waves excited by disk-planet
interaction, and (3) fully global models of protoplanetary disks that can
investigate the structure and evolution of disks over a wide range of radii.
Realistic models of protoplanetary disks are challenging because of the diverse
range of physics that must be included, and these calculations will be the most
sophisticated yet attempted. These simulations will follow the turbulent mixing
and settling of dust grains in the disk self-consistently with the gas dynamics
by integrating the motion of millions of particles drawn from a realistic size
distribution. Effects to be added are recombination on grains, as part of a
twelve-species non-equilibrium ionization and recombination network, all of the
relevant non-ideal magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) processes, and radiative diffusion
and optically thin cooling to follow the thermodynamics of the gas. All of the
necessary code elements have been implemented and tested within Athena, a new
and powerful grid-based code for astrophysical MHD. The result should be the
most realistic and accurate models of the non-ideal MHD of protoplanetary disks
possible, and a deep understanding of the environment of planet formation and
the interaction of planets with the disk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes training of graduate students, and animations and visualizations for
dissemination of the results to the wider public. The team is vigorously engaged
in involving women and under-represented groups in theoretical and computational
astrophysics through a Princeton summer undergraduate research program. The work
continues to foster interdepartmental and international collaboration by
providing access to the Athena code to the astrophysics community through an
open-source software philosophy.