* 0908629
* Materials World Network: Electronic Doping in Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Wayne Gladfelter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

This project involves a collaboration between two research groups at the
University of Minnesota (UMN) and one from the University of Duisburg-Essen in
Germany (UDE). The goal of the research is to synthesize and study nanometer-
scale semiconductor crystallites (or nanocrystals) in which impurities (or
dopants) have been incorporated by design. Even without such dopants,
semiconductor nanocrystals can exhibit unusual and useful physical phenomena due
to their small size. The critical role that dopants play in semiconductor
devices such as the transistor provides a strong motivation to study doped
semiconductor nanocrystals. Doping can also address key problems in nanocrystal
applications from solar cells to bio-imaging. As semiconductor nanocrystals
already have commercial applications (e.g., in bio-imaging) and more on the
horizon (e.g., tunable lasers, light emitting diodes, and solar cells), the
research should provide further control over the properties of a useful class of
materials. The collaboration includes researchers at UMN who are experts in
solution-based synthesis of nanocrystals and at UDE who are experts in the
chemical vapor synthesis of nanocrystals and their characterization using the
extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) technique. Project objectives
include (i) the development of solution- and chemical-vapor-synthetic-methods to
prepare doped nanocrystals and (ii) the use of EXAFS in conjunction with reverse
Monte Carlo (RMC) simulations to determine the location of the dopant. A better
understanding of the doping process should result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the scientific goals, a major aim of this Materials World Network
project is to provide future scientists with unique international research
experiences. Students with such experiences benefit firsthand from observing how
science bridges international differences. During the course of the project, 6
undergraduates and three graduate students from UMN will travel to Germany to
perform research at UDE. For the undergraduate students, this will be
incorporated into a research abroad summer program. For the graduate students,
this can be arranged at a convenient time during their thesis project.
Similarly, students from UDE will travel to UMN. These exchanges can also be
facilitated by visits of UDE researchers to the US to perform EXAFS experiments
at central beam lines (e.g., at Argonne National Laboratory). These visits will
allow additional interactions between team members as well as analysis of
samples prepared both at UMN and UDE.