* 0908295
* Stochastic Modeling of Risk Aversion and its Implications for Derivative Pricing and Risk Management
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Siu-Tang Leung, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 02/29/2012
* USD 168,753.00

In many financial applications, investors are inevitably exposed to unhedgeable
risks due to, for example, hedging constraints or other market frictions. The
value of derivative securities naturally depends on how risks are managed, as
well as the investor?s preferences between risk and return. This project will
systematically investigate some recent problems that involve incorporating the
investor's risk preferences into the valuation of derivatives, with a focus on
employee stock options (ESOs) and credit derivatives. The project objective is
to design efficient and robust valuation models that can be calibrated given
market data and applied to construct the optimal risk management strategies
consistent with the investor?s risk preferences. The research involves
developing applicable mathematical tools to model, estimate, and analyze the
complex risk structures of these derivatives, which have a significant bearing
on their values. Moreover, the project includes the analytical and numerical
studies of a number of stochastic control and optimal stopping problems that
naturally arise in these valuation problems. By quantifying their risks and
returns, the research will also shed light on some optimal contract design
problems for these derivatives.

Employee stock options are an important component of compensation in the US.
Concerned about their cost to shareholders, the US Financial Accounting
Standards Board since 2004 has required firms to estimate and report the
granting cost of ESOs. The central challenge of ESO valuation lies in the
uncertain timing of option exercises, which depends on the employee's risk
aversion and various contractual restrictions of the options. On the other hand,
credit derivatives are financial instruments whose payoffs are contingent on the
occurrence of default event(s), such as the bankruptcy of a firm. The trading
volume of credit derivatives has grown dramatically in the past decade, but the
valuation and risk management technologies have not kept up. The recent crisis
in the credit markets reflects ineffective risk management of complex credit
derivatives by major financial institutions. Hence, this research aims to
develop a valuation framework that explicitly accounts for the investor's risk
preferences, contractual features and market conditions, so as to accurately
quantify the risks of these derivatives. These valuation problems are important
not only for individual or institutional investors, but also for regulators.