* 0908575
* Neptune's Global Atmospheric Dynamics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Imke de Pater, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 456,663.00

AST-0908575&lt;br/&gt;de Pater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neptune's atmosphere is one of the most dynamically
active atmospheres in our solar system, and yet it is still poorly constrained.
This project will gain a better understanding of the global circulation in this
atmosphere using new sets of observations at near-infrared and radio
wavelengths. The adaptive-optics (AO) assisted integral-field spectrometer
OSIRIS at Keck will be used to determine the average cloud altitude as a
function of latitude, which can then be compared to AO spectra. The team already
has a long-term database of broadband infrared images which will be used to
investigate possible changes in the appearance of the planet since the Voyager
spacecraft flyby. The spatial distribution of hydrocarbons, determined from mid-
infrared data, and the spatial distribution of CO, measured with the Combined
Array for Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy (CARMA), together will yield
important information on Neptune's global dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
sorts of data often stimulate cross-disciplinary collaborations across
astronomy, geo-physics, chemistry, and mechanical engineering, and between
institutions. The observers make use of cutting-edge instrumentation, and help
engineers debug and improve the instruments. Impacts beyond the planetary
community come from the strong visual appeal of AO images, and their use when
discussing the atmosphere, the origin of turbulence, and techniques to overcome
blurring. As well as the usual dissemination to the scientific community, group
members regularly give talks to the general public, in the US and abroad,
featuring their research within a broader context.