* 0908288
* Collaborative Research: Intermittent and Steady State Processes in Orographic Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Colle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 296,811.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved forecasting of orographic
precipitation requires continued integration of theory, field studies, and long
term observations. While much of the previous work on orographic precipitation
has focused on steady-state processes, little work has been done on intermittent
precipitation cells embedded in broad regions of precipitation. Current
numerical models cannot consistently reproduce orographic precipitation patterns
at time scales of individual storms and spatial scales corresponding to
individual terrain ridges. The working hypothesis is that these problems are in
large part a result of errors in the representation of steady state and
intermittent processes within the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated
modeling and observational study will be conducted in coastal Oregon.
Observations from the National Weather Service weather radar network and upper
air sounding network, and observations from specially-deployed vertically
pointing radars and disdrometers will be used to characterize intermittent
precipitation cells and to evaluate model output. As a result of the study
intermittent orographic precipitation and its relative importance compared to
total orographic precipitation will be quantified. The numerical model
configuration needed to realistically model intermittent orographic
precipitation will be defined, along with the subset of variations in
environmental conditions needed for capturing the forecast ensemble uncertainty
in the Oregon region. The proposed work also will address the parameterization
of ice microphysics in numerical weather prediction models and mesoscale
predictability of orographic precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
long-term goal of this joint orographic precipitation research is to improve
winter quantitative precipitation forecasts in mountainous terrain, which is a
broad impact. Improved quality of these forecasts also has broader impacts for
flood forecasts and mitigation, avalanche control, fresh water resources
management, and climate change impacts. Other broader impacts include support
and training of graduate students as research assistants. Several undergraduate
research assistants will also be trained to do data analysis. Results will be
presented by students as posters at research symposia such as the ones held by
North Carolina State University and SUNY Stony Brook each spring and summer. The
real-time forecast model runs centered on Stony Brook, NY will be regularly used
as part of forecast discussions during weekly student meetings on campus and by
the regional offices of the National Weather Service. Educational modules on
evaluation of model output with operational radar data to be used in
undergraduate and graduate classes will be created under this proposal. Project
funds will be used to enhance campus research infrastructure in terms of
upgrading data server storage capacity and maintenance of field instruments.
Results will be disseminated in conference presentations and journal articles.