* 0908653
* Materials World Network: Solving Longstanding Problems of Density-Functional Theory with Quantum Monte Carlo
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Cyrus Umrigar, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

This Materials World Network (MWN) award supports a joint research project
between Cornell University and Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg to use quantum
Monte Carlo (QMC) methods to answer the longstanding question of the size of the
difference of the Kohn-Sham band gap and the true fundamental band gap of a
semiconductors and insulators. This difference is the so called derivative
discontinuity -- the discontinuity of the exchange-correlation energy at integer
electron numbers. This is a question that is not only of great fundamental
importance in density functional theory (DFT) but also of great practical
significance for band-gap engineering of materials. For example, accurate
predictions of the bandgaps of inorganic semiconductors and of inexpensive
organic semiconductors is important for designing photovoltaic cells. Another
goal of this proposal is to determine nearly exact exchange-correlation
potentials for a number of materials that would constitute a reference in the
development of new density functionals. Such a reference, so far, is missing for
periodic systems.

This project involves training US and the German graduate students and visits by
the students and faculty to their partner institutions as well as exchanges at
international conferences. Both the US and the German graduate students will
receive a thorough grounding in state of the art QMC and DFT methods. The German
graduate student will be a member of the newly founded Graduate School for
Molecular Science at the University Erlangen-Nuremberg and the US graduate
student will have the opportunity to attend summer and winter schools offered
there. There will also be exchanges with faculty and graduate students at the
University of Paris. The computed nearly exact DFT quantities will be
dissminated widely via the web.