* 0908634
* Materials World Network: Quantum Electro-Mechanical Properties of Graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Harold Craighead, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 540,000.00

This Materials World Network award supports an experimental program to
investigate whether the mechanical quality factor, Q, of graphene resonators can
be made sufficiently large so that the thermal motion of these inherently low
mass structures can be observed at low temperatures e.g. 50 mK. Our goal is to
demonstrate a Q of 10,000 or discover why it is not possible to reach this Q
value. New techniques for measuring the amplitude of motion will have to be
implemented. Methods to obtain high Q such as tension, defect reduction and
elimination of surface artifacts will have to be invented to achieve the goal of
observing thermal motion. The technology to fabricate synthetic few-layer
graphite has been developed at Cornell and the NRL, and will allow comparison to
natural graphene. The Materials World team funded by this research program
brings together expertise in nano-mechanics, synthetic growth of graphene (and
few layer-graphite), high frequency signal recovery and low temperature physics,
the latter two areas being important to probe the potential quantum nature of
the material. Understanding non-linear behavior will also play a role in the
success of the program, and non-linearities usually regarded as being
undesirable, may actually be beneficial for future quantum information
applications. The research program will be integrated with partner programs at
Helsinki University and NRL. Graduate students will have the opportunity to work
with their counterparts by spending a semester in Finland and by hosting
counterparts at Cornell.

Graphene is a unique material - a self supporting two-dimensional material that
can be completely defect free. What are its mechanical properties? Particularly
at low temperatures where the non-classical behavior is expected to become most
apparent will graphene display mechanical behavior that is classical or quantum-
mechanical? The Materials World team funded by this research program brings
together expertise in nano-mechanics, synthetic growth of graphene (and few
layer-graphite), high frequency signal recovery and low temperature physics.
Quantum mechanics is usually associated with small objects (e.g. atoms) and
classical behavior with large objects (e.g. baseballs). Somewhere between lies a
no man's land, and the team at Cornell University, Helsinki University and the
US Naval Research Laboratory seeks to answer whether a graphene sheet,
consisting of approximately 10 to 100 billion atoms is quantum or classical in
nature. This understanding will help to determine if the material properties
will be useful for new types of electro-mechanical devices, which has
implications for the future communications and electronics industries. This
research provides a demanding experimental environment that will educate and
train graduate students for successful careers in the Nation's scientific and
technological infrastructure.