* 0908661
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:     Miconia affinis in a tropical forest and coffee landscape mosaic: the population genetics of a buzz-pollinated understory tree
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Shalene Jha, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,480.00

Despite efforts at conservation, tropical forests continue to face land
conversion, threatening many tropical trees, especially those that are dependent
on specialized pollinators for reproduction. The proposed research investigates
pollen dispersal patterns for a "buzz-pollinated" tree species. Buzz-pollination
occurs when bees grasp a flower and vibrate pollen free of specialized pores.
Because this mechanism excludes pollen dispersal by exotic honeybees, tracking
pollen movement will yield a uniquely powerful indicator of native bee movement.
Native faunal biodiversity and plant gene flow patterns will be examined in
undisturbed habitats and in highly fragmented shade coffee plantation habitats
and will provide mechanistic insight into the capacity of shade coffee farms to
serve as biodiversity refuges and habitat corridors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
agricultural areas continue to expand, it is critical that the impacts of land
management on pollinator communities and pollen dispersal processes are
understood. By focusing on international collaboration, this research
strengthens understanding between scientists, students, and managers in the
United States and Mexico in order to build local and international leadership in
the study of tropical forests and sustainable agroecosystems. Thus far, this
research has provided the opportunity to communicate with coffee farmers about
land management, pollination services and erosion control within their farms. As
deforestation continues, it is essential to understand how to maintain key
ecological processes required by tropical plant and pollinator communities.