* 0908266
* RUI: A Multi-University Study of Rapid Variations and Transient Events at Radio Frequencies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Dennison, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2013
* USD 472,103.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brian Dennison (University of
North Carolina at Asheville) and his team will use the Dedicated Interferometer
for Rapid Variability (DIRV) at the Pisgah Astronomical Research Institute
(PARI) to observe intraday variability (IDV) of compact extra-galactic radio
sources, and simultaneously search for rare extreme scattering events (ESEs).
These events are caused by intervening structures in the interstellar medium
with significant density enhancements on quite small (approximately astronomical
unit) scales. Interleaved with observations of extragalactic sources, a single
26-meter antenna of the interferometer will be used to monitor the intensities
and rotational dynamics of pulsars. Both 26-meter antennas will host an
unpointed, simultaneous search for dispersed millisecond bursts (DMBs). The
research program involves commissioning DIRV, developing and installing hardware
for the simultaneous "piggyback" search for DMBs, and carrying out the overall
observational program. This research addresses several outstanding problems in
astrophysics. The physical nature and origin of the interstellar structures
responsible for ESEs are unknown. Only by discovering additional events, can the
team then pursue specific concurrent observations designed to elucidate the
nature and likely origin of these structures. Another major astrophysical
problem arises from the single DMB discovered and credibly documented. Although
theories are now being put forward to explain this event, there is a lack of
observations of additional DMBs necessary to confirm the phenomenon, and
elucidate its properties. Because the sole documented burst was rapid, strong,
and evidently extragalactic in origin, it suggests an extremely energetic,
compact source. Both ESEs and DMBs are unexplained astrophysical phenomena and
this research program aims to gain insight into both. In either case, the
potential exists for a transformative insight expanding our understanding of the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-intensive radio observations are not
feasible within the national observatory system, in which time on highly
versatile telescopes is apportioned among a large international user community.
The observations to be carried out under this program add a unique and necessary
component to the overall national effort in astronomy. This work also
complements the setting provided by the national observatories by providing
undergraduate students with an intensive hands-on research experience in which
instrumentation problems are solved in the context of overarching scientific
goals. Undergraduate students from three universities (University of North
Carolina-Asheville, Furman University, and University of North Carolina-
Pembroke) will participate in all phases of this research through an established
intern program. They will work in a multi-disciplinary, collaborative
environment in which instrumentation issues are central to the scientific goals.