* 0908106
* Collaborative Research: Gaseous Halos of Nearby Galaxies as Clues to Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Rand, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Knezek
* 08/31/2013
* USD 272,524.00

Dr Rand and Dr. Walterbos will search for warm ionized and neutral gas away from
the mid-plane of a couple of dozen nearby edge-on spiral galaxies. This diffuse
gas rotates more slowly than the denser cool gas in the equatorial plane of the
disk; this lag is still not understood, and may hold a clue to the origin of the
gas. The team will use the new multi-slit mode of the ARC 3.5-m telescope to
measure emission lines of ionized hydrogen from this gas in 7 edge-on galaxies
that have vigorous star formation and two with lower rates of starbirth. They
will also complete and analyze maps in the 21cm line of neutral hydrogen for
four galaxies observed in B and C arrays with the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory's Very Large Array, and will use the Westerbork array in the
Netherlands to make deep observations for a further eight galaxies. The velocity
information in these 'data cubes' will be used to distinguish off-plane gas from
a warp or other structure, and to determine its rotation. The aim is to use the
velocity information to determine whether the off-plane gas is newly falling in,
or has been ejected from the star-forming disk.

This research would form the basis for two PhD theses. Both the University of
New Mexico and New Mexico State University are Hispanic-serving institutions,
and the astronomers at New Mexico State University are particularly active in
public outreach.