* 0908553
* Theoretical Studies in Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Richard Klein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 05/31/2013
* USD 431,707.00

In this project, Dr. McKee will undertake a theoretical study of magnetic fields
and their role in star formation. Magnetic fields extract angular momentum from
the gas that forms a star, thereby determining whether a gas cloud forms a
single star or a binary. The radiation emitted by stars as they form can
suppress fragmentation, thereby enabling just one or two stars to form in a
region that would have formed many in the absence of thermal feedback. For the
first time, frequency-dependent radiative transfer will be used to study the
effects of thermal feedback in the formation of low-mass stars. Previous
theoretical research has shown that ionized regions associated with the first
stars are of particular importance since they determine the masses of these
stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will explore the
formation of stars in groups and clusters. Most stars form in clusters, and
indeed it is likely that the Sun formed in a large cluster that contained high-
mass stars as well as low-mass stars like the Sun. The formation of star
clusters is affected by the powerful feedback mechanisms that accompany star
formation, including protostellar outflows and, for massive stars,
photoionization and radiation pressure. Both semi-analytic theory and simulation
will be used to investigate the formation of clusters of high-mass stars. The
results will be compared with observations of star clusters in the Galaxy and of
super star clusters in other galaxies. Star formation on galactic scales is
determined by the properties of the interstellar medium of the galaxy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Star formation is central to contemporary astrophysics. As
the process by which gas is transformed into stars, it determines the structure
and evolution of galaxies. By tapping the nuclear energy in the gas left over
from the Big Bang, it determines the luminosity of galaxies and, quite possibly,
leads to the reionization of the universe. Most of the elements, including those
that make up the world around us, are formed in stars. Finally, the process of
star formation is inextricably tied up with the formation and early evolution of
planetary systems. A theory of star formation must address both the formation of
individual stars and the formation of systems of stars, ranging &lt;br/&gt;from
clusters to galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund the education
of one or more graduate students who will contribute to education and add to the
diversity of the scientific work force. Developments in computational
methodology will be published for use by the community.