* 0908484
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Project 1640: Hyperspectral Imaging Survey of Nearby Stellar Environments
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Rebecca Oppenheimer, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 402,615.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Ben Oppenheimer of
the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) and Dr. Lynne Hillenbrand of the
California Institute of Technology will conduct a survey of nearby stars to
detect planetary companions. They have previously developed a new instrument
which has unprecedented sensitivity in the direct detection of planets near
bright stars. The instrumentation is fully functional and initial observations
on the Palomar 5-m telescope have already demonstrated a factor of 100
improvement in speckle suppression relative to other coronagraphs. With this
project, they will begin a three-year survey with over 120 nights of guaranteed
time on the Palomar telescope. There are two main goals: first, they will
observe fainter and younger stars than current systems can track utilizing a new
type of speckle suppression technique recently demonstrated from Palomar;
second, with the implementation of Palomar's 3000 actuator adaptive-optics
system in 2010, they will begin a survey of the brightest (youngest) stars in
the Northern hemisphere to find exoplanets and measure their spectra. The
project should yield a significant sample of exoplanets and other objects (from
brown dwarfs to disks) in orbit around nearby stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will involve undergraduates through programs at AMNH and at
Caltech's SURF Program, as well as high-school students from under-represented
groups, through the museum's high-school research program. They will also bring
the Museum's AstroBulletin program of biweekly news items and twice-yearly
documentaries to the Palomar Observatory's Visitor Center, so that current
science is continuously presented to that museum's more than 100,000 visitors
per year. These AstroBulletins reach over 11 million people through AMNH and 45
partner institutions around the world. Palomar would be the newest partner
institution under this program.