* 0908149
* SGER: Self-Activating Amino Acids in Peptide Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Clifford Berkman, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2011
* USD 134,000.00

The overall objective of this small grant for exploratory research is to
demonstrate that N-phosphorylated amino acids can be self-activated during
peptide synthesis through the formation of a cyclic carboxylic-phosphoric mixed
anhydride. The known regiochemical preference for aminolysis at the carboxylate
of carboxylic-phosphoric mixed anhydride is a key element to this approach. No
technology currently exists for the self-activation of N-protected amino acids
in peptide synthesis and the pioneering work in this area has been largely
theoretical and aimed at understanding the central role that N-phosphorylated
amino acids may have had in the pre-biotic assembly of peptides and
oligonucleotides. This project is grounded in the translation of these
theoretical studies into a practical and unique methodology for stepwise
chemical peptide synthesis through the use of N-phosphorylated amino acids but
without the need for additional coupling reagents.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Clifford Berkman of the Department of Chemistry at
Washington State University. Professor Berkman's research efforts revolve around
the preparative methods and the chemistry of phosphorus-containing
peptidomimetic structures. This chemistry, as it relates to this project, is
expected to lead to a green process for peptide synthesis in which a reaction
sequence for self-activation, peptide bond formation, and dephosphorylation will
require only mild pH cycling. Successful development of this methodology will
have an impact on peptide synthesis in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
industries.