* 0908365
* Spinning, Eccentric Black Hole Pairs:  Black Hole Scattering and Binary Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2015
* Janna Levin, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 01/31/2015
* USD 365,800.00

AST-0908365&lt;br/&gt;Levin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In dense regions, stellar mass
black holes can tidally capture another comparable mass black hole into a highly
eccentric binary. Recent estimates of the merger rates of stellar mass binaries
in dense galactic nuclei have sparked interest in a class of such highly
eccentric black hole pairs. This project will include the effects of spin and
orbital precession in a relativistic framework, to analyze the scattering,
mergers, and gravitational waves from this interesting source. Another part of
this project will consider "supermergers", double-event candidates, which are
black hole binaries that emit a burst of gravitational waves on formation and
merger, in the bandwidth of ground-based observatories, and then fall into the
super-massive black hole at the galactic center, to emit gravitational waves in
the bandwidth of space-based observatories. Thus, this work will (1) calculate
relativistic scattering of spinning black holes and detection rates in galactic
nuclei with a central super-massive black hole; (2) compute the gravitational
wave spectra from the distribution of relativistic, spinning orbits; and (3)
compute event rates for "supermergers", tidally captured black hole pairs that
scatter toward the super-massive black hole at the galactic center within an
observable timeframe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Barnard College is a women's college
in New York City affiliated with Columbia University, and each year a Barnard
undergraduate will intern with this research group. The plan includes
development of a publicly accessible interactive simulator of black hole orbits,
offering a research tool to the wider community. Such integration of direct
scientific research into undergraduate education promotes Barnard's commitment
to increasing the presence of women in the sciences. A complementary aspect
involves outreach in NYC high schools.