* 0908118
* Orbital studies of interplanetary and Interstellar dust  upgrading a sophisticated meteor radar
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

AST-0908118&lt;br/&gt;Janches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly expand our
knowledge of the dust environment of our solar system by tracking the speeds and
directions of incoming meteors, thereby allowing their orbits to be
reconstructed. This will be enabled by an upgrade to the Southern Argentinean
Agile Meteor Radar now operating in Rio Grande, Tierra del Fuego, Argentina. The
modifications will allow the system, already ten times more powerful than
traditional meteor radars, to operate continuously, to detect particle masses as
small as one microgram, and more accurately to determine meteoroid orbital
parameters for millions of extraterrestrial particles. The four year scientific
research project focuses on high resolution studies of the interplanetary and
interstellar dust environment. The new capabilities, combined with new software
for determining orbital parameters and a more detailed method of mass
determination, will provide data that will greatly advance the scientific state
of the art in characterizing interplanetary dust. Of particular significance is
the improved low-mass detection limit, which has the potential to probe the
origin of interstellar grains. The detection of these grains, for example the
confirmation of the beta Pictoris dust stream, would have important implications
for our understanding of the material between stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research to be carried out is an international collaboration between Argentina,
Canada, and the US. The radar is maintained by personnel from the Estacion
Astronomica Rio Grande (EARG) and the Department of Astronomy and Geosciences of
the National University of La Plata (UNLP), who will participate as full
research collaborators. The work also involves collaboration with the University
of Western Ontario in Canada and the University of Colorado, adding a strong
educational component. Graduate students from the US and Mexico will be trained
in meteor orbital science, interplanetary dust environment and data analysis and
interpretation.