* 0908053
* Activities of the U.S. National Committee for Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 422,127.00

Activities of the U. S. National Committee for Psychology&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. National Committee for Psychology
(USNC/IUPsyS) represents the U.S. psychological science community to the
International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS) on behalf of the National
Academy of Sciences (NAS). The USNC/IUPsyS provides a valuable network through
which the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the NAS enhance their capacity
to contribute to global research in psychological science. It is also a vehicle
through which the NAS reaches out to the U.S. scientific community through
international union activities that are designed to further develop the fields
of psychology both nationally and internationally, thus helping to create a
diverse and globally-oriented U.S. scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S participation in IUPsyS fulfills a unique role in the
national science infrastructure. The national committee:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; -
provides a forum for dialogue between U.S. scientists and foreign colleagues;
&lt;br/&gt; - develops programs for building human and research capacity in
developing countries; &lt;br/&gt; - fosters research cooperation by sponsoring
conferences and workshops on topics of interest and by initiating
pilot/demonstration projects for bilateral or regional research collaborations;
and&lt;br/&gt; - organizes travel grant programs for young scientists and
scientists from underrepresented backgrounds to participate in international
scientific congresses.&lt;br/&gt; - interacts with union officers to ensure
strong governance and sound financial management; &lt;br/&gt; - identifies and
supports the best candidates for election to union offices;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this proposed program encourages cooperative
research and education efforts across disciplinary and international boundaries,
and positions the United States to benefit from global investment in science and
technology. The proposed activities of the USNC/IUPsyS are 1) a workshop and
report addressing institutional impediments to cross-national psychological
research, 2) a website with resources to foster international collaborations,
and 3) two Advanced Research Training Seminars (ARTS) held in conjunction with
the IUPsyS General Assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The national committee's
impact is the result of the work of the members of the committee, who represent
a variety of psychological science disciplines and have strong international
interests. Several current and past members of the committee exercise leadership
at the international union level. The work of the committee -- whether as an
organizer of scientific initiatives with impact in both domestic and
international arenas or as a leader at the union level -- ultimately contributes
to U.S. scientific diplomacy activities.