* 0908406
* Collaborative research:  Nearby M dwarf stars as  high-priority targets for exoplanet searches
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Sebastien Lepine, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2014
* USD 659,323.00

In this collaborative proposal, Drs. Sebastien Lépine and Eric Gaidos will
complete the largest and most complete census of nearby, low-mass stars, which
are called M dwarf stars. They will identify the highest priority targets for
planet searches, especially for Earth-mass planets in or near the habitable
zones of their parent stars. Many previous surveys have been biased against
these targets because they are faint or incompletely cataloged; furthermore,
some M dwarf stars may have flares and spots that render them unsuitable for
planet searches. The SUPERBLINK stellar motion survey, now being completed by
Dr. Lépine, includes more than 95% of the estimated 50,000 low-mass systems
within 50 parsecs of the Sun. The research team will carry out a large-scale
spectroscopic survey of 10,000 stars to monitor atmospheric activity, estimate
heavy element abundances, determine space motions, and infer ages, in order to
select for targets with the highest potential for exoplanet discoveries. They
will also build and maintain a comprehensive database of exoplanet search
targets that will include each star's fundamental parameters (luminosity,
distance, composition, activity level, estimated mass and age) and will track
the results of any effort to identify exoplanets in each of those systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The list of exoplanet targets will be made publicly
available and updated on a regular basis to track down targets of current
exoplanet survey programs, and those around which planets have already been
discovered. This will allow for exoplanet researchers to coordinate their
efforts, and for the public to be kept informed of the latest discoveries.
Undergraduate interns (two per year) will be involved at all stages of the
research project at AMNH. One graduate student at the University of Hawaii will
participate in the spectroscopic and photometric investigations. Results of this
research will be incorporated into the American Museum of Natural History /
Hayden Planetarium database (the Digital Galaxy), which is presented to 1
million visitors each year as part of the Planetarium's immersive 3D Space Show.
A short video for public outreach will be produced each year on some aspect of
this research, extrasolar planets, or habitability.