* 0908299
* Distributions for Optical Design
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Hicks, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 264,000.00

Hicks DMS-0908299

Until approximately ten years ago, it was only possible to machine optical
quality mirrors and lenses that were surfaces of revolution. Due to advances in
optical machining technology it is now possible to essentially machine a surface
of any shape. This increase in design possibilities calls for new design
techniques. Traditionally, partial differential equations and differential
geometry did not play a role in optical design because of the restrictions of
what surfaces could actually be made. Now, using these methods, and in
particular the viewpoint of exterior differential systems, we have a framework
to attack these complex problems. Additionally, new models for optical systems
are developed based on functional differential equations.

In recent years a plethora of difficult new optical design problems have
appeared. Energy conservation has become a problem of global concern, and in
particular the problem of efficient lighting. Significant advances are currently
taking place in illumination technology, due to the rise of the light emitting
diode. Yet the design problem for illumination systems has proven to be
notoriously difficult, and is currently more of an art than a science. The
investigator and his colleague develop new mathematical methods to deal with
these challenges in optical design. The project provides a framework for
illumination design. Another application is to automotive safety. The principal
investigator has already designed a driver-side mirror without a blind spot,
that has no distortion. The problem of designing a similar mirror for the
passenger side of a car is more complex, and is pursued in this project.
Finally, the investigators disseminate this work through interactive exhibits
based on the project that are hosted by The Franklin Institute, a major US
science museum located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, which is visited every
year by over 750,000 people.