* 0908253
* Fundamental Stellar Parameters from the CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Harold McAlister, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 894,115.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Harold McAlister
will continue research in stellar properties using the technique of
interferometry. Georgia State University's Center for High Angular Resolution
Astronomy (CHARA) operates an optical/near infrared interferometric array on
Mount Wilson, California. The CHARA Array has six 1-m aperture telescopes in a Y
configuration providing 15 baselines from 33 to 331 meters. In terms of the
number and size of its telescopes, the length of its baselines, the broad range
of wavelength regimes and spectral resolutions covered by its beam combiners,
its imaging capabilities, and broad group of collaborators and users, the CHARA
Array is among the most powerful facilities of its type and is unique in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous publications from CHARA data include:
measuring the oblateness and other physical parameters (including gravity
darkening) for the rapidly rotating stars Regulus, Alderamin and Vega; detecting
the inner-most regions of Vega's circumstellar disk; discovering that cool, low-
mass stars of solar composition are larger in diameter for a given mass than
lower metal abundance stars of the same mass, suggesting the presence of
additional opacity sources not accounted for by current models; measuring the
angular separation between the components of the binary star 12 Persei to an
accuracy 0.05% of the separation, which significantly improves the accuracy of
the masses for the component stars; K band measurements of the angular
dimensions of circumstellar disks; a measurement of the diameter of the
transiting exoplanet HD 189733b; imaging the surface of the rapidly rotating
star Altair, the first time this has been done for a dwarf apart from the
Sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two newly commissioned beam combiners will leverage
the Array's limiting resolution by extending the operating regime from the near
IR to the visible region of the spectrum while providing high spectral
resolution and improved sensitivity. Broader impact beyond the scientific and
intellectual goals exists in three areas. First, CHARA is actively training the
next generation of scientific and technical experts in the field of
interferometry. A significant fraction of astronomy graduate students at Georgia
State University are pursuing their PhD research with the Array. CHARA staff
members have participated in many of the NASA/JPL Michelson Summer Schools, and
CHARA has published on its website ninety-four Technical Reports available to
the international community. Second, CHARA is enhancing science awareness in the
large and diverse undergraduate community by incorporating results from the
Array in undergraduate astronomy courses, which enroll approximately 700
students per semester. Third, CHARA actively participates in informal science
education through such efforts as the collaboration with the American Museum of
Natural History as well as through CHARA's own Exhibit Hall located in the CHARA
Operations Center on Mount Wilson.