* 0908414
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Soil Cracking on Watershed Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2010,03/31/2014
* Christine Molling, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 03/31/2014
* USD 99,216.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT Title: Collaborative Research: Impact of Spatial and Temporal
Heterogeneity of Soil Cracking on Watershed Hydrology Clay-rich soils that crack
on drying and swell on wetting cover a considerable fraction of the Earth?s land
surface. The goal of this research is to improve the hydrological response of
watershed models used in regions that have such soils. To accomplish this goal,
the ability to spatially and temporally partition precipitation into
infiltration and runoff must be improved. Partitioning of precipitation into
infiltration and runoff is highly dependent on the spatial and temporal
distribution and size of cracks in these soils. When a cracking clay soil is
very dry, precipitation is partitioned nearly all to infiltration via the large
physical capacity of the cracks. When a cracking clay soil is very wet and
infiltrating water must travel through the fine pores of the clay matrix,
significant amounts of precipitation are partitioned to runoff. What happens
between these two soil moisture extremes is essential in predicting
hydrological, agronomic, and environmental responses of watersheds with clayey
soil to rainfall events, but has not been adequately characterized by
hydrologists or soil scientists, and is the focus of this research. Recent
developments in technologies to electromagnetically sense, collect, and manage
spatial soil and environmental information support quantification of the state
of a cracking soil at any given moment and location, and allow an improvement in
the ability to track the spatial distribution and size of cracks. In our
research effort, we will measure and characterize the spatial heterogeneity and
temporal dynamics of soil cracking as a function of terrain attributes, soil
water dynamics, and basic chemical, mechanical, and physical soil properties.
Measurements will be made in a highly instrumented experimental watershed in
Central Texas. Focusing our understanding of crack behavior on basic information
and properties we will promote transfer of knowledge to other watersheds. In
addition to being able to track the degree and distribution of cracking, the
scale that this information needs to be addressed in hydrological models to
improve their accuracy must be determined. To address this need, a hydrological
model composed of a two-dimensional, diffusive wave runoff module and a one-
dimensional, point-column biophysical module will be used to evaluate cracking
as a function of landscape position, soil characteristics, and antecedent
moisture conditions; allowing a dynamic partitioning of rainfall between
infiltration and runoff during precipitation events. The model operates on a
3-dimensional grid and includes the ability to handle spatial variations in soil
properties, moisture content, and other factors that may be used to predict the
instantaneous size and water holding capacity of cracks. Equations for crack
distribution, size, and capacity distilled from the observations in this study
will be added to the model. The model will link the behavior of cracking within
each grid cell to watershed hydrographs via runoff to surrounding grids cells in
the field, the sub-basin, and the watershed. The contributions of each cell to
infiltration and runoff are calculated, yielding spatial patterns of the fate of
precipitation. By comparison of measured hydrographs from the experimental
watershed with hydrographs generated from the model as the size of the grid
cells are increased, the scale that information on soil cracking needs to be
addressed to produce a degree of accuracy will be characterized. This research
is collaborative, combining a soil hydropedologist, an environmental physicist,
and a landscape hydrologic modeler; and bridges scales from millimeter to
kilometer by linking soil microenvironments, field scale heterogeneity, and
watershed hydrology. The research findings will be fully integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses in soil hydrology, soil morphology,
environmental physics, and spatial statistics taught by the investigators.
Collaboration with a local school district will provide outreach exposing rural
students to the sciences and real-world, field-based science problems.