* 0908435
* Wave Propagation in Nonlinear Acoustics, Viscoelasticity, and Heat Transfer
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Petronela Radu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2014
* USD 137,054.00

This research investigates the qualitative behavior of solutions to nonlinear
wave equations in nonlinear acoustics, viscoelasticity, and hyperbolic
diffusion. The project studies existence, uniqueness, and long-time behavior of
large-data solutions in four problem areas: (1) quasilinear wave equations (the
Kuznetsov equation, together with its simplified version, the Westervelt
equation) with degeneracy of the differential operator; (2) problems in
nonlinear viscoelasticity; (3) the damped quasilinear wave equation as a model
for unsteady heat conduction; and (4) development of a new non-local theory in
solid mechanics, called peridynamics, an extension of classical continuum
mechanics to allow effective modeling of fracture in materials. Among other
methods, the PI proposes an original approach based on physical considerations
to study existence of solutions for quasilinear hyperbolic equations. This
approach enables one to show existence of solutions with arbitrarily large
initial data starting from existence of solutions with small initial data. The
ingredients needed (finite speed of propagation, uniqueness, energy identity)
are available for many hyperbolic systems, hence the approach has potentially
wide applicability.

Nonlinear wave propagation phenomena appear in vibrations of elastic bodies, in
theories of acoustic pressure, plasmas, and semiconductors, and in quantum
mechanics. The investigation of nonlinear wave equations poses great difficulty
since the interaction of waves does not follow the principle of superposition.
Instead, the waves can generate new waves, blow up in finite time, or vanish at
infinity. The project involves developing new mathematical tools to determine
the factors that play a dominant role in these interactions and to predict the
long time behavior of solutions.

The problems under study model important phenomena in science and medicine: the
lithotripsy model appears in shock wave propagation used in breaking up kidney
stones; hyperbolic heat conduction is relevant in phase change transitions and
superconductivity; and peridynamics is very promising in predicting fractures in
material science. Progress in these areas will benefit both academic research
and industrial applications. The PI has integrated her research efforts into the
development of an interdisciplinary course, Math in the City, which attracts
undergraduate students to study partial differential equations. Under this
program, students work in collaboration with local businesses and research
centers to develop and analyze mathematical models that use real data. The
project also involves graduate students and a postdoctoral associate in the
research.