* 0908125
* Completing the WIYN Speckle Survey: Toward the Thin and Thick Disk Binary Populations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Elliott Horch, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 183,447.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous NSF-funded work, Dr. Horch
and his group have developed a unique instrument for observing stars at high
angular resolution. This project will use this instrument at the WIYN telescope
in Arizona to complete an extensive survey of suspected and probable binary
stars in various stellar populations of the Milky Way. The resulting data on the
stellar mass-radius relation will provide many potential tests of stellar
structure and evolution theory. The data will be used in combination with
information from recent spectroscopic surveys, particularly the Geneva-
Copenhagen Catalog, to make substantial progress in empirical knowledge of
stellar astrophysics as well as galactic structure and evolution. In combination
with existing and forthcoming spectroscopic survey data, robust comparisons
between the observations and stellar evolution models can be completed with many
binary systems. Importantly, the new data will permit the measurement of such
quantities such as the system age and the helium abundance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Horch will also create a regular series of physics and
astronomy seminars in the Department of Physics at Southern Connecticut State
University (SCSU). He will work work with high school physics teachers in the
area and with the well-established Physics Club at SCSU to help promote careers
in science to underrepresented groups in Connecticut through these talks. The
advising of undergraduate Physics students at SCSU through the proposed work
will help serve the need for highly-trained, research-capable science and
engineering professionals in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;