* 0908625
* Materials World Network: Investigation of Coherent Spin Transport in the Persistent Photoconductor AlGaAs Using All-Electronic Spin Injection and Detection
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Stephan von Molnar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin coherence and spin transport are
two of the core issues facing semiconductor spintronics and quantum information
science today. The central aim of this project is to examine in detail the
electronic spin transport and spin coherence in a semiconductor as a function of
its carrier concentration. This investigation is expected to yield a precise and
definitive view of these mechanisms in semiconductors, which will inspire new
theoretical understanding and provide useful guidelines for spintronics devices.
The results may even provide a new approach to deciphering various spin
decoherence processes in semiconductors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Materials
World Network (MWN) award supports a collaborative effort between the Florida
State University (FSU) and the Institute of Semiconductors (IoS), Chinese
Academy of Sciences, which is the first formal MWN partnership with China.
Heterostructures with ferromagnet/semiconductor junctions and a semiconductor
spin-transport channel will be grown by MBE and their structural and magnetic
properties characterized at IoS; the device fabrication and spin detection
measurements will be performed at FSU. A unique aspect of this research is the
use of a semiconductor channel with tunable carrier densities, which will allow
all the measurements to be carried out in situ and in only one sample at varying
carrier concentrations, even through the metal-insulator transition. One of the
broader impacts of this joint venture is that it will provide extensive
experience in condensed matter experimental techniques in both semiconductor
physics and magnetism to the graduate students involved. The planned exchange
program will afford the trainees first-hand exposure to materials research in a
premier Chinese institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is supported by
DMR-CMP and DMR-OSP.