* 0908757
* Collaborative Research: On the Origin of Abundance Inhomogeneities in Globular Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Graeme Smith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2015
* USD 328,609.00

In this collaborative program, Dr. Michael Briley (University of Wisconsin -
Oshkosh) and Dr. Graeme Smith (University of California - Santa Cruz) will
undertake a detailed study of the abundances of various elements in globular
cluster stars. It has long been known that stars in an individual cluster all
have the same abundance of iron and other heavier elements, but have
inhomogeneous abundances in a handful of light elements such as carbon,
nitrogen, oxygen, sodium, magnesium, and aluminum. Astronomers now realize that
these variations result from an abundance altering process which operates during
red giant branch ascent (i.e., some form of deep mixing missing from canonical
stellar models) superimposed on primordial variations from the era of star
formation. The research team will obtain spectra of CH and CN absorption bands
in the violet spectral region, as well as absorption lines from sodium,
magnesium, and aluminum at visible-red wavelengths. There are three main goals
to the project: to examine the onset and extent of mixing-induced carbon
depletion as a function of iron abundance; to measure the fraction of CN-
enhanced stars as a function of cluster mass and apparent shape, thereby probing
the effects of environment on primordial abundance variations; and to broaden
the range of globular clusters in which light element variations have been
studied.

This project will directly support the training of a graduate student at UCSC
and undergraduate students at UW Oshkosh (an undergraduate research
institution), who will be directly involved in all aspects of the project.
Public outreach and education will be enabled through public talks to schools,
clubs, and civic organizations, as well as the development of a presentation for
the visitor's gallery of the Lick 3-m telescope that will describe how
spectroscopy is used to determine the chemical abundances of stars, and why
globular clusters in particular yield an astronomical fossil record of the
chemical evolution of galaxies.