* 0908688
* Wave Transport of Angular Momentum: A New Spin on Massive-Star Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Richard Townsend, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 428,021.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Townsend will undertake an
exploration of the incidence, characteristics and evolutionary impact of wave
transport by oscillation modes in massive stars. The foundation for this
exploration will lie in a new Self-Consistent Spectrum (SCS) method for
incorporating the transport into stellar evolution calculations. At the heart of
the SCS method is a pair of numerical codes: a non-radial, non-adiabatic
pulsation code, which will be developed as part of the project's initial
activities, and an evolution code, which will be derived from an already-
existing code. As massive stars evolve across the main sequence, they pass
through one or more instability strips where oscillation modes are excited by an
opacity-regulated heat engine. During these phases, the unstable modes can alter
a star's rotation profile by transporting angular momentum from one part of the
interior to another. This wave transport has potentially far-reaching
consequences for the star's subsequent evolution and ultimate fate, but in
studies so far it has largely been overlooked. The SCS method will first be used
to explore various wave-transport phenomena discovered during an earlier pilot
study: the self-limitation of mode amplitudes via the angular velocity gradients
that they establish; the acceleration of surface layers by retrograde gravity
modes, and its relation to the Be-star phenomenon; and the mixing of molecular
weight gradient zones due to the interplay between wave transport and shear
instability. Subsequently, the method will be applied in a comprehensive survey
of massive-star evolution with the full inclusion of wave transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This survey, based around the calculation of a large grid
of evolutionary tracks, will be used to address many important questions
relating to the wave transport, ranging from its observational diagnostics
through to its impact on final evolutionary outcomes. The project results will
be disseminated in the form of journal papers, presentations, calculation data,
parametric models, and a browser-based stellar evolution code for research and
education. The pulsation code will be released under an open-source license, to
encourage other groups' involvement in exploring wave transport, and also as an
analysis tool for asteroseismology of massive stars. A graduate student and
postdoctoral researcher composing part of the project team will benefit from
training in topics with steadily growing scientific visibility and relevance.
This training will in turn stimulate the development of new curriculum materials
for undergraduate/graduate courses. The project results will be broadly
disseminated through papers, presentations, data and models. Moreover, with the
release of source code and the development of on-line tools, the project will
enhance infrastructure for research and education.