* 0908047
* Mathematical Aspects of Some PDE Models for Granular Matter and Fish Harvest
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Wen Shen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 130,000.00

This research project conducts analytical and numerical investigation of
mathematical questions in the theory of partial differential equations that
arise in two models motivated by applications. The first project concerns
mathematical models for granular flow that are based on systems of balance laws.
Results to date concern primarily one spatial dimension, for the case where the
PDE system is weakly linearly degenerate. Further theoretical issues in one
space dimension will be addressed, including well-posedness of the system in the
space of functions with bounded variation and effects of the source term. Models
in two space dimensions will also be studied, starting with radially-symmetric
solutions. The second project deals with the harvest of marine resources by
several competing companies. Due to the nature of the model, optimal strategies
are defined in a space of positive Radon measure. Research topics include
existence of optimal control, necessary conditions and regularity of solutions,
uniqueness of optimal control measures, and optimal location of marine parks,
for a model in two space dimensions.

Both projects aim at problems that are not well understood. Results of study of
the slow erosion limit for granular flow promises to provide new techniques for
analysis of the underlying partial differential equations. The study of optimal
fishery management will yield new results on measure-valued solutions to optimal
control problems and differential games in two space dimensions.

Models of important phenomena in materials science, ecology, and economic
systems are naturally formulated in terms of the partial differential equations
that are the subject of this research project. Understanding the dynamic
evolution of a snow avalanche (or landslide) and the effects of slow erosion
could enhance the ability to plan for or mitigate such natural disasters.
Research on optimal harvest of marine resources will aid in understanding how
marine resources can be preserved in a competitive economic environment. The
results of this project will apply to analysis of the equations underlying
models of both of these important processes.