* 0908201
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Polynomial Dynamical s Systems Over Finite Fields: From Structure to Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Abdul Salam Jarrah, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2013
* USD 277,935.00

Progress in our understanding of increasingly complex engineered and natural
systems depends crucially on the use of mathematical models as the basis for
computational analysis and prediction. Such models allow the simulation on a
computer of dynamic processes that are driven by several different interacting
forces. This is true in particular for systems studied in the life sciences,
which form the basis for advances in biomedicine and bioengineering. Molecular
networks inside human cells which process external signals and drive cellular
metabolism provide important examples of such processes. Relatively little is
currently known about the design principles of such networks. One approach to
gaining increased understanding is to study properties of the mathematical
models that capture their key features. An understanding of the relationship
between structural features of the models and the constraints these features put
on model dynamics will allow the formulation of hypotheses about design features
of biological networks based on observed dynamics. These hypotheses can then be
tested in the laboratory. The goal of this project is to study the relationship
between structure and dynamics for a type of model that has proven to be very
useful in capturing key features of a variety of intracellular molecular
networks. Beyond molecular networks, aspects of this model type have been used
in electrical engineering and computer science, so this project might have an
impact beyond the life sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-discrete dynamical
systems models are ubiquitous not only in engineering but also the life
sciences. Especially during the last decade finite dynamical systems, that is,
time-discrete dynamical systems with a finite state space, have been used
increasingly in systems biology to model a variety of biochemical networks, such
as gene regulatory networks and signal transduction networks. In many cases, the
available data quantity and quality is not sufficient to build detailed
quantitative models such as systems of ordinary differential equations, which
require many parameters that are frequently unknown. In addition, discrete
models tend to be more intuitive and more easily accessible to life scientists.
The premise of this project is that polynomial dynamical systems over finite
fields form a unified, mathematically rich class of dynamical systems that are
increasingly used in systems biology. The goal of the project is to establish
results that relate their structure to their dynamics. To obtain strong results
it is necessary to focus on specific families of such systems. The choice for
this project is the class of Boolean networks constructed from so-called nested
canalyzing functions, and their multi-state generalizations. Many regulatory
mechanisms in molecular biology can be described by such functions, and the
resulting networks have good dynamic properties.&lt;br/&gt;