* 0908114
* Collaborative Research: Open Clusters at the Interface of Stellar Evolution and Stellar Dynamics
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Imants Platais, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 06/30/2013
* USD 196,648.00

Astronomers have long used stellar clusters to learn about the orbital motions
of stars in bound groups and as laboratories for testing ideas of star formation
and stellar evolution. The two fields of dynamics and stellar evolution have
developed independently, but with advances in detector technology and computing
speed, it is now possible to integrate these two areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative study, Dr. Robert Mathieu
(University of Wisconsin - Madison) and Dr. Imants Platais (Johns Hopkins
University) will undertake a series of observational and theoretical
investigations to address several outstanding questions in stellar evolution and
dynamics. The first objective is to obtain a comprehensive census of the single
star and binary star populations in seven rich open clusters which have ages
from 100 million to 7 billion years. This will be accomplished through precise
measurements of minute apparent tangential motions and multi-epoch measurements
of radial velocities. These data will provide highly reliable three-dimensional
kinematic membership determinations for the entire evolved cluster population.
The second objective is to characterize the populations of nearly 100 blue
stragglers and other newly discovered anomalous stars in these clusters,
focusing on their binary, rotation and stellar activity distributions. The third
objective is to compute an array stellar motion simulations for open clusters
with initial conditions, especially the binary population, guided by
observations of young stellar clusters. The simulations will be performed in
collaboration with Dr. J. Hurley (Swinburne, Australia), and Dr. A. Sills
(McMaster, Canada) will collaborate on the production of anomalous stars through
collisions. The union of comprehensive rotational, stellar activity and binary
data for a large set of anomalous stars of different ages and masses will allow
new insights on formation mechanisms, internal structures, and ages of these
stars at the interface of stellar dynamics and stellar
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will have a broader impact
through enhancement of the research and teaching skills of future astronomers,
both within and beyond the borders of the United States. This research will
include students and a postdoctoral fellow, and is expected to yield three
graduate dissertations, several undergraduate theses, and research experiences
of summer undergraduate students. This work will be associated with the Center
for the Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning, an NSF Center for
Learning and Teaching directed by Mathieu. Platais, through his association with
the trilateral Taiwan-Baltic collaboration, will assist in the education,
training and research of students and young researchers in recently
disadvantaged countries that have fast developing infrastructure and
intellectual potential.