* 0908816
* A Complete Census of the Deaths of Massive Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Todd Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 750,632.00

AST-0908816 Kochanek

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will undertake a unique, wide-ranging, and systematic study of the
deaths of massive stars in the local universe, including supernovae, failed
supernovae, and the properties of their progenitors. The first part is a new
survey to monitor massive stars in nearby galaxies using the twin 8.4m Large
Binocular Telescope (LBT). This is the first practical means of detecting black
hole formation through the disappearance of a massive star without a supernova,
that is, a failed supernova. Second is a new search for nearby supernovae
(within about a hundred million light years), using the operating All-Sky
Automated Survey (ASAS). A systematic and complete survey is essential to
finding more supernovae, to finding them earlier and in all types of galaxy, to
identifying progenitors, and to calculating correct local rates. Last is a new
effort to connect specific supernovae and supernova-like transients to their
massive-star progenitors, using the LBT and ASAS data, and building on
pioneering work using mid-infrared data from the Spitzer satellite. The LBT data
will provide light curve histories of future supernova progenitors that, with
the mid-IR investigations, constitute a search for signatures of imminent death,
a question for which there are observational hints but no systematic studies.

A very significant part of the research will be carried out by graduate students
and a postdoctoral researcher, and the systematically collected data on the
supernovae, massive stars, and galaxies of the local volume, will be a valuable
resource for future supernova studies. The team will continue to use established
effective platforms to share their science with children, teachers and members
of the public.