* 0908018
* An Infrared Radial Velocity Search for Young Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/11/2008,12/31/2010
* Russel White, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 12/31/2010
* USD 92,866.00

High precision radial velocity studies over the last decade have demonstrated
that nearly 12% of nearby main-sequence stars harbor Jovian-like planets. The
unexpected properties of many of these extrasolar planets (e.g. the 'hot
Jupiters') have resulted in many proposed revisions to the once well-accepted
theory of how planets form. Unfortunately, there are few observational
constraints to test these new theories. The most direct way to establish these
constraints would be to conduct a sensitive search for planets orbiting low mass
stars with ages comparable to the predicted planet formation timescale (less
than about 10 million years). Unfortunately, traditional optical spectroscopic
techniques are not able to accomplish this because of the relative faintness of
young stars at optical wavelengths and, more critically, because of the large
star spots associated with young stars that can mask the radial velocity reflex
motion caused by a planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study to be carried out
here by Dr. White involves a novel technique to overcome both of these
observational challenges using high dispersion infrared spectroscopy. First,
infrared wavelengths are much closer to the peak in the energy distribution of
young low mass stars, so the target stars are effectively brighter than they are
at optical wavelengths. Second, at these longer wavelengths, the contrast
between the stellar photosphere and cool star spots is diminished significantly,
and this translates (almost linearly) into reduced radial velocity 'noise'
caused by these spots; predictions suggest a gain of a factor of about 5.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by this, Dr. White has begun an infrared radial
velocity survey of approximately 80 young (age less than 20 million years)
stars. With the data in hand, a precision better than about 100 m/s can already
be demonstrated, sufficient to find the most massive known extrasolar planets,
if present. Conservative estimates show that refining the analysis techniques
alone should improve the precision by a factor of 2 or 3. This award will
support both the continuation of this first-ever spectroscopic infrared search
for young planets, and the further development of this pioneering high precision
infrared technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this work will
influence how the next generation of infrared spectrographs is designed and how
future planet searches will be conducted; the results so far have already helped
guide plans for future high dispersion infrared spectroscopic facilities. A
graduate research assistant at the University of Alabama in Hunstville will also
be supported and trained in infrared observing through this project.&lt;br/&gt;