* 0908278
* Physical properties of hot Jupiters from ground-based secondary eclipse photometry
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mercedes Lopez-Morales, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 317,290.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. LÃ³pes-Morales, along with her
collaborators and students, will undertake a three-year project to measure
thermal emission from over a dozen Hot Jupiter extrasolar planets at optical and
near-infrared wavelengths. The main goal of the project is to characterize the
atmospheric properties of these planets as individual objects. Measurements of
over a dozen hot Jupiters will also enable comparative exoplanetology, where the
atmospheric properties of different planets will be compared and contrasted. Hot
Jupiters are giant planets orbiting extremely close to their host stars,
typically with orbital periods of less than three days, and are heated by their
parent stars. It has been recently realized that these planets can emit
significant amounts of thermal radiation at optical and near-infrared
wavelengths, and could therefore be detected using ground-based instruments.
Thermal emission of exoplanets at mid-infrared wavelengths has already been
successfully detected from space with the Spitzer Space Telescope. This project
extends those detections to wavelengths between 0.9 and 2.2 microns, to more
accessible ground-based facilities, and to a larger sample of planets. The
project will also allow continuation of exoplanet atmosphere studies after
Spitzer's cryogenic mission has ended. Thermal emission from the planets will be
measured using transiting systems, where the planets cross the stellar disks, as
seen from Earth, producing what is called a primary transit, where a small
fraction of the stellar light gets temporarily blocked by the planet producing a
small eclipse. These observations will yield the temperature of the planets, and
other parameters such as their albedos (the fraction of stellar incident light
that gets reflected back to space, which gives information about the presence of
clouds), and information about energy circulation mechanisms in their
atmospheres. By measuring the secondary eclipses of the planets in more than one
wavelength, they will also be able to estimate the chemical composition of their
atmospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study and characterization of exoplanet
atmospheres is a novel and very active endeavor, which is driving large efforts
among the scientific community in different fields, such as astronomy, physics,
planetary science, atmospheric chemistry, biology and material science. The
field also attracts wide attention from the public, a fact that facilitates
broad dissemination of the new discoveries this project will produce. The
results of this project will be promptly communicated to both to the scientific
and the public community. To this last group results will be transmitted via
public lectures and a review of the subject in large-circulation popular
astronomy magazines. The results will be also used to promote the interest in
science careers among minority groups, a task that the PI of this project has
been promoting in recent years.