* 0908155
* A Comparison of Informal Networks in Two Labrador Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Bilal Khan, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2013
* USD 560,166.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes 30 months of
interdisciplinary research aimed at understanding how people in Arctic
Communities form social connections in response to high levels of social change.
The research will take place in the communities of Nain and Goose Bay, located
in Labrador, Canada. There, as in many Arctic towns and villages, resource
development, land settlements, and new governing mechanisms have prompted
significant adjustments in how people earn a living and deal with outside
interests. While individual, personal accounts of these changes are available,
there has been little systematic investigation of the local patterns of social
interconnection. This is important because social connections play a significant
role in influencing individual perspectives on change. This project investigates
patterns of social connectedness - called social networks - as they are made and
remade by Northern residents. It seeks to understand how network connections
influence peoples' lives, livelihoods, and understandings of their political and
economic opportunities/challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails 800
interviews with residents of the two communities. Interviews focus on the links
people make use of as they go about finding housing and jobs, or securing
household health and traditional food harvests. Sometimes, as with the sharing
of traditional foods, these connections ensure the movement of necessary and
important goods and staples. In other cases, connections facilitate the movement
of information relating to the economy or government programs. In such cases,
the pattern of connections is bound to be quite different. Yet taken together,
social networks influence a range of important factors, from public opinion
about development projects to local health outcomes and educational
attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project researchers are using new methodologies
aimed at producing composite models of large networks from individual accounts.
These models allow the research team to do more than simply represent these
networks. Using methods from Network Theory, the models provide an opportunity
to render the flows of resources and information in mathematical terms, which
can then be compared with similar structures in other places. Precise knowledge
of these networks will allow local residents and policy makers to better
understand and manage the pace of change in the North, and to understand how
local communities continue to react and change in their interaction with
governing bodies and outside interests (such as health providers and resource
developers). The project is undertaken with cooperation and support of the
Nunatsiavut Government (the Inuit administrative body for Labrador) and the
Labrador-Grenfell Health Authority, and is being carried out by team of
researchers from the City University of New York that specialize in projects
that integrate ethnography, network science, sociology, and public health. The
research for the project is expected to be complete by August, 2010