* 0908941
* High Sensitivity Array Studies of Stellar Radio Coronae
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Mutel, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 09/30/2013
* USD 409,122.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Robert L. Mutel of the University
of Iowa and his students will undertake a research program to image the radio
coronae of several active late-type binary stars at multiple epochs with
unprecedented sensitivity, angular resolution, and positional accuracy. The
systems will be imaged using the High Sensitivity Array (HSA), the world's most
powerful radio imaging long-baseline array. The program will combine the imaging
power of the HSA with observational strategies that optimize positional
accuracy, allowing registration of the component star positions on the radio
maps with an absolute accuracy approximately one stellar radius. These images
will reveal, for the first time, the relationship between extended radio coronae
and the parent star system: Whether the radio emission originates on a single
star or is generated in the inter-binary region, whether large-scale coronal
loops exist, and if radio flares arise near the stellar surface or perhaps at
the top of loops. In addition to stellar astrophysical results, fundamental
parameters such as distance, proper motion, and binary orbital orientation will
be determined with an accuracy significantly better than current ground- or
space-based optical surveys. The multi-epoch HSA radio maps will allow the first
detailed, systematic determination of the morphology of the radio coronae of
late-type active stars. This is vital in testing existing models of stellar
coronae, which are largely based on spectral measurements of the integrated
radio and/or x-ray corona, with little or no spatial information. One key test
will be to resolve competing hypotheses of radio coronal geometry, such as polar
models, dipole traps, and accretion disk-driven inter-binary emission regions.
Another will be to establish whether large-scale magnetic loops or other
structures are a common feature in active stellar coronae, and if so, to
establish their sizes and temporal evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-fidelity
radio maps, combined with accurate overlaid stellar positions, will
significantly guide development of comprehensive models of stellar coronae which
incorporate x-ray, optical, and UV observations in a unified theoretical
framework. Also, since the target stars are all optically bright, the ability to
measure stellar radio positions with high accuracy will be very useful in tying
the optical and radio coordinate frames together with sub-milliarcsecond
precision. This is a long-standing goal vital to many astrophysical disciplines,
including future astrometric space missions such as Gaia and PlanetQuest.