* 0908070
* Materials World Network:Control of the Electron Nuclear Interaction in Nano-Electronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bertrand Halperin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2013
* USD 700,000.00

This award supports an international collaboration for research and education
among Harvard University and University of Florida (UF) in the USA, University
of Basel and ETH (Zurich) in Switzerland, and University of Regensburg in
Germany. The main goal of the project is to understand, control, and utilize the
hyperfine interaction of electron spins, confined in low-dimensional condensed
matter systems, with the nuclear spins of the host lattice. Four emerging themes
in condensed matter physics draw particular attention to this topic, making a
Network-scale activity timely. Those themes are: i) advances in nanoscale
control of matter, e.g. , quantum dots, where electrons interact with far fewer
nuclear spins thereby greatly enhancing the effectiveness of hyperfine coupling;
ii) emergence of spintronics devices employing the electron's spin rather than
charge for future prospects of quantum repeaters, quantum computers, and quantum
memory for secure communication and enhanced computation, iii) engineered
interactions in novel materials, such as gating and tailoring of band structure,
and iv) availability of high-quality fabrication facilities. There are three
main thrusts in this Network: i) control of spin and electron-nuclear
interaction in III-V semiconductor quantum dots [experiment: Harvard; theory:
Harvard, Basel]; ii) coupling of nuclear spins via itinerant carriers (RKKY
interaction) and nuclear magnetism in p-doped heterostructures [experiment: ETH,
Regensburg; theory: UF, Basel, Harvard]; and iii) electron-nuclear interactions
in 13C-enriched nanotubes [experiment: Harvard, theory: Harvard, Basel, UF]. By
investigating the interface between fundamental and applied problems in an
international environment, this Network contributes to the kind of cross-
training of graduate students that is needed for the next generation of device
engineers and scientists, perhaps working with quantum-coherent devices.
Exchange of students between experimental groups at Harvard and ETH and between
theoretical groups at Harvard, Basel, and UF will take place over the course of
the project