* 0908462
* Trade Relations in Northwest Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Douglas Anderson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 262,449.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The proposed project, PI Anderson, will examine changing economic relations in
northwestern Alaska over the past 3600 years.

This research project will investigate changing social and economic
relationships in northwestern Alaska over the past 3500 years through the
regional integration of archaeological, oral historic, and geological data sets.
The research team will trace changes in networks of exchange among the peoples
of northwest Alaska by mapping distributions of raw materials from source to the
archaeological site and by collecting oral histories of social-economic
exchange. It is hypothesized by the researchers that changes in economic and
social relationships that are implied by the direction and flow of raw materials
appear to have been, at least in part, due to changing local environmental
conditions; environmental changes that brought different social groups together
during their annual subsistence harvesting and materials procurement rounds. One
of the more exciting aspects of the project will be teasing out the meaning of
common exotics (raw materials such as cherts and slates that have an origin
outside of the region) in ancient households. The archaeologist, working closely
with oral histories, hope to shed light on issues such as trade, conflict, and
the evolution of identity in northwestern Alaska.

Working on the assumption that annual subsistence rounds are closely tied to
environmental conditions, any environmental or climatic change that favored one
food-resource area over another could potentially require readjustments in the
entire network of seasonal rounds and inter-group contacts in the region. To
understand this web of relationships, this project incorporates four integrated
research goals: 1)refining the regional chronological framework through the
acquisition of new radiocarbon and tree ring dates, which will allow the
research team to compare sites of the same age across the region; 2)
archaeological excavation in one late prehistoric village site (on the Kobuk
River) to complete the PI's sampling of northwestern Alaskan sites by sub-region
and time period and to investigate differences in intensity of trade by family
household; 3) obtaining an oral history of Kobuk River peoples that focuses on
tales and recollections of inter-group contacts throughout the region; and 4)a
geological component to identify source areas for the major raw materials, in
particular slate, chert and to a certain extent obsidian, that were involved in
exchange.

The oral history portion of the research project will also investigate local
knowledge about climatic change and how it impacts subsistence resources and
annual food-gathering activities. Data collected on the local impacts of
changing environmental conditions can potentially provide insight into past
adaptations under similar conditions and provide information about local impacts
of climate change that can be added to an emerging Arctic-wide data base on
impacts of global warming.

This project has substantial local community involvement through the close
collaboration with local assistants, the training and participation of high
school students in the oral history and archaeological excavation portions of
the project, and assistance provided to the Kiana traditional council with their
project to develop their own cultural heritage programs. This is all part of the
research teams' continuing dedication to collaborate with local residents in
interpretation and presentation of information about the history of the region.