* 0908177
* Analysis of Non-Linear Flows in Heterogeneous Porous Media and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Akif Ibragimov, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2013
* USD 221,626.00

Ibragimov&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0908177&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Almost all off-the-shelf
industrial simulators of the&lt;br/&gt;process of filtration in porous media
utilize the linear Darcy's&lt;br/&gt;approximation of the momentum equation. On
the other hand,&lt;br/&gt;deviations from the assumed linear relationship
between the&lt;br/&gt;pressure gradient and fluid velocity occur even at low
Reynolds&lt;br/&gt;numbers, and in porous media containing fractures. Though
these&lt;br/&gt;deviations are commonly attributed to inertial forces, the
actual&lt;br/&gt;nature of this phenomenon is not adequately understood.
The&lt;br/&gt;objective of this project is to arrive at a model that
transforms&lt;br/&gt;current understanding and prediction of fluid flow
in&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous porous media. Approaches and methodologies
from&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, computational fluid dynamics,
and&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry are deployed to attain this goal.
The&lt;br/&gt;models and methods involved include the following: a family
of&lt;br/&gt;generalized nonlinear flow models, which spans existing
models&lt;br/&gt;and forecasts new ones; a mathematical theory of the
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;Darcy equation where the permeability tensor depends on
the&lt;br/&gt;gradient of pressure; a thorough study of the dynamics
and&lt;br/&gt;robustness of the equations; analysis of solutions
to&lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes-Forchheimer equations; applications of the
methods&lt;br/&gt;of differential geometry to nonlinear hydrodynamic flows;
a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model for coupled flows in discontinuous
fractured&lt;br/&gt;media; computational methods to investigate the stability
and&lt;br/&gt;convergence of the multigrid algorithm for coupling
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;multiphase flows in highly irregular porous media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project aims to better understand the complex
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;of fluid filtration observed in nature or arising in
modern&lt;br/&gt;technology and industry. The work provides a novel
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;and numerical framework to explore a wide class of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;flows in porous media. The methodology is based on
modern&lt;br/&gt;research in nonlinear partial differential equations,
real&lt;br/&gt;analysis and geometry, as well as new numerical methods
in&lt;br/&gt;computational fluid dynamics. The mathematical models
and&lt;br/&gt;methods are novel, and their applications are not limited
to&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear fluid filtration in porous media. The research
is&lt;br/&gt;integrated in educational programs spanning various
special&lt;br/&gt;topics. The results of this project are disseminated not
only&lt;br/&gt;through professional meetings and journal publications, but
also&lt;br/&gt;through a network of collaborations and partnerships
with&lt;br/&gt;industrial and reservoir engineering companies interested
in&lt;br/&gt;employing the tools developed in the course of the project. On
a&lt;br/&gt;larger scale, results of the project bear on the prediction
and&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of complex bio-hydrodynamic processes in the lumen
and&lt;br/&gt;arterial walls, transport of microorganisms in soil,
new&lt;br/&gt;techniques for image processing, and management of the
nation's&lt;br/&gt;groundwater and energy resources. &lt;br/&gt;