* 0908998
* Collaborative Research: Coupling Human Choice and Biogeochemical Cycling in Urban Ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kristen Nelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 998,121.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are increasingly living in
urban ecosystems. Cities cover only one to two percent of Earth's surface, but
they are important hotspots of biogeochemical cycling because they concentrate
the consumption of food and energy that are produced beyond their boundaries.
Cities therefore are largely unsustainable, requiring large imports of fossil
fuels, food, and water. Furthermore, cities are important sources of greenhouse
gas emissions and other pollutants resulting from fossil fuel combustion and
waste generation that lead to nutrient loading downwind and downstream. Little
is known about the socio-ecological coupling between human behavioral factors
and biogeochemical cycles, however. This collaborative research project seeks to
understand the coupling between household biogeochemical fluxes and
socioeconomic factors along an urban to exurban gradient in the Minneapolis-St.
Paul (Twin Cities) metropolitan region in Minnesota. The investigators will
focus on household consumption because it contributes substantially to urban
biogeochemical cycling and because it is potentially flexible and therefore
amenable to reduction in response to changes in factors that influence household
choices. As part of the ongoing Twin Cities Household Ecosystem Project (TCHEP),
a social survey of 3,100 households was conducted along an urban-to-exurban
gradient, and landscape characteristics were surveyed for a subset of
households. Survey data about key behaviors that influence biogeochemical
fluxes, such as motor vehicle travel, air travel, diet, pets, and lawn care, are
used as input to a Household Flux Calculator to generate total and component
carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P) fluxes for each household. The
survey also gathered demographic data and linked behaviors with household
attitudes, norms, and perceived control. This project will use the TCHEP
database to examine how behavioral, demographic, and biophysical factors
influence household decisions and, thus, the fluxes of C, N, and P through
households along a gradient of housing density. The investigators will determine
the effect of consumption and pollution produced by single family households on
fluxes of C, N, and P at the scale of the urban study region, and they will
examine how behaviors can be influenced by messages exchanged through social
networks to change consumption choices and elemental fluxes. The project
therefore will examine the feedback loop between household choices and elemental
fluxes. Elucidating the nature of such socio-environmental coupling should
stimulate novel approaches to making cities more sustainable, reducing urban
pollution, and reducing urban contributions to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to advance
understanding of integrated human-biophysical interactions in urban ecosystems
towards improved knowledge and management of urban biogeochemical cycles. The
study will quantify the effect of behavioral flexibility and its underlying
behavioral controls on elemental fluxes through households. Enhanced
understanding of the coupling between human behavior and biogeochemistry is
expected to transform approaches to reducing pollution through identification of
behavioral changes that reduce pollutant sources. The project will provide
extensive education and training of numerous undergraduate and graduate fellows
s well as post-doctoral researchers. It will develop an interactive web page for
non-scientists in collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota's Science
Buzz web project. The investigators will use the HFC model as a teaching tool in
undergraduate courses and disseminate the TCHEP survey tool, the TCHEP database,
and the HFC tool through the world-wide web. Project outcomes should facilitate
the development of new paradigms to pollution control that are based on source
reduction, information feedback loops to guide adaptive management, and greater
citizen involvement. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;