* 0908802
* Stability in Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Atanas Stefanov, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Curry
* 08/31/2013
* USD 183,849.00

The PI will apply the techniques of modern analysis to some outstanding open
problems in the stability theory of breathers in the discrete Schr\"odinger
equation and Klein-Gordon equation context as well as special solutions for
dispersive partial differential equations. The project concentrates on the basic
questions concerning stability as well as the existence and the precise
description of stable manifolds for solutions, with a few unstable directions.
While the stable scenarios have received a great deal of attention in the last
twenty years or so, the behavior close to unstable solutions has been less well-
studied. One reason is that unstable structures present themselves in a more
challenging environment in terms of the mathematical techniques that must be
used. This is especially true in the presence of a marginally stable spectrum,
resonant edges of the essential spectrum and in the low dimensional cases, all
of which will be of primary interest in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on the study of nonlinear dispersive equations, which model
mathematically important processes, such as propagation of light in optical
medium. Some of these models arise in the study of quantum mechanical systems
and nonlinear optics, while others find their roots in fluid dynamics. These
problems can also present themselves as a control problem in stabilization
theory. Roughly speaking, if one starts close to an unstable configuration, how
does one make only small adjustments along the way, in order to stay close to
the initial configuration? Better mathematical description of the behavior of
the solutions of these equations, especially their asymptotic behavior in time
and space, will greatly improve our understanding of the underlying physics and
it will help in the development of technologies that use them.