* 0908971
* CNH: Paleoclimate Shocks: Environmental Variability, Human Vulnerability, and Societal Adaptation During the Last Millennium in the Greater Mekong Basin
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,401,351.00

Water is the essential element upon which societies depend. Its use,
distribution and management are major functions of human societies. During times
of scarcity or excess, for example as a result of changes in climate,
populations can select from a diverse range of possible responses and adaptive
strategies. Failure may lead to conflict and societal collapse. In addition to
understanding the ways in which societies may try to adapt to excess or limited
water supply, it is important to assess the particular climatic, social,
political and economic conditions under which a selected strategy will succeed
or fail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify the full range of
cultural responses, including economic and political activity, resource
management and engineering strategies, acquisition and conflict, demographic
shifts and migration, and to identify thresholds of hydroclimatic shifts that
are associated with the probability of adopting particular adaptive
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project scientists will develop quantitative
models of the interaction between societies and hydroclimate variability over
the last millennium for mainland Southeast Asia and the Greater Mekong Basin.
This long-term focus will be made possible by two unique data sources: long,
annually resolved and drought-sensitive paleoclimate information on drought and
river flow from the Greater Mekong Basin (GMB), and the long archaeological and
documentary record from urban societies across Southeast Asia. Bringing together
these sources of proxy data enables the identification of significant
hydroclimatic and sociopolitical events during the last thousand years and will
allow the project team to explore societal response to paleoclimate variability
and change within the theoretical framework of modeling vulnerability, risk, and
adaption in human systems. Two related questions will be
investigated:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What types and scales of drought events in
Indochina are of sufficient magnitude to need a social adjustment from the
affected human societies? &lt;br/&gt;- What factors influence the success of
specific responses or strategies to mitigate the consequences of climate
variability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected in this study will provide
a unique record spanning several centuries. This has the potential to greatly
improve decision making about future management and allocation of water
resources in the six countries through which the Mekong River flows, by
revealing the range of natural variability and how it is associated with climate
variability. Recent significant changes in the flow of the Mekong further
emphasize the need to better understand its long-term history and the processes
underlying its variability. The water level of the Mekong exceeded its highest
recorded level during the most recent flooding in August 2008. Whether such
extremes are consequences of global warming or the inevitable natural swings of
dry-wet periods is a question of both public and scientific importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly involves undergraduate, graduate and
post-graduate level research in the USA, and in the GMB. Students from Columbia
University?s internship program will gain experience in an international
research initiative with applications in both the social and physical sciences.
Graduate students will work on social science and policy problems related to
conflict and water. Project participants from Vietnam and Thailand will
supervise graduate students from the Greater Mekong region, to develop climate-
related events timelines from the various chronicles from the region, for use by
project scientists. For this purpose the Southeast Asia Paleo Environments
Consortium (SAPEC) was organized in order to provide the framework for training
and educational opportunities for scientists and students throughout the Greater
Mekong region who have an interest in long-term perspectives on tropical
environments and sustainable development. Capacity building efforts will also be
achieved through engagement and collaboration with regional scientific partners
in Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. Regional workshops will include the
project team, social and physical science collaborators from the region, and
students from both Southeast Asia and Columbia University. These workshops will
provide an opportunity to disseminate the results of this project, and to
provide a focal point for additional capacity building and outreach.