* 0908124
* Pathways and Properties of Atlantic Waters in the Western Arctic Ocean
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2016
* Rebecca Woodgate, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/29/2016
* USD 385,599.00

Atlantic Waters (AWs) are volumetrically the largest inflow to the Arctic Ocean.
They form the major subsurface circum-arctic oceanic transport system and
ventilate the interior basins. They are the greatest pan-arctic reservoir of
oceanic heat, which may influence upper layers and the sea-ice, for example
through slope upwelling and mixing. Circulation of AW carries tracers and
contaminants through the Arctic, and the pan-arctic distribution of AW offers a
warm corridor for invasive species. Globally, arctic-modification of AW
contributes to the North Atlantic overflows and is a high-latitude (climate-
sensitive) part of the meridional overturning circulation. Yet, despite the
urgent focus on the changing Arctic, fundamental questions about the major ocean
current in the Arctic remain unanswered. It is generally believed there is a
cyclonic, equivalent-barotropic pan-arctic boundary current, topographically
steered along slopes and ridges. However, especially in the western Arctic,
despite a large increase in observations in the last decades, there is still
little published confirmation of the physical properties of this flow, the
importance of various possible pathways, or quantification of exchange processes
between the boundary current and the interior or the arctic shelves.

There is open disagreement (both from observations and modeling) about the flow
direction in some regions, most notably the interior Canada Basin. An
observational description of AW circulation (especially information on flow
pathways and properties) is essential for verifying emerging theories of the
driving mechanisms of the AW flow and for ground-truthing numerical arctic and
global models (whose circulation patterns may be reversed by tuning basic model
parameters). At a time of dramatic, topical Arctic change, our inability to
answer fundamental physical questions about Arctic Ocean circulation is
hindering modeling and theoretical advances and observational planning. Thus, in
collaboration with national/international observational, modeling and
theoretical partners, this effort will conduct an observationally-based
synthesis of the Atlantic Water circulation in the western Arctic, using
available historic hydrographic, mooring, and drifting buoy data collected since
the late 1980s. The analysis will include several underutilized data sets, and
exploit a new technique of tracing water pathways using characteristics of
double diffusive temperature-salinity structures. The goals are: (1) to define
the pathways and variability of Atlantic Waters in the Canadian Basin, including
both the boundary current and the interior flow; (2) to describe key features of
flow (e.g., flow direction, magnitude and variability, vertical and horizontal
structure, topographic steering, isobath range); and (3) to study exchange
processes between the boundary current, the interior and the shelves.