* 0908718
* Materials World Network: New Insights into Ferroelectric Domain Walls:  Extended Nanoscale Structure, Bloch-Like and Neel-Like Character, and Spatially Resolved Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2013
* USD 584,000.00

This MWN research focuses on new insights into the fundamental nature of
ferroelectric domain walls developed by this joint US/Ukraine team over the past
two years. In particular, the team leverages the comprehensive theory,
simulation and advanced experimental framework they have developed for
quantitative piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM). Using this framework, they
have discovered unexpected broadening of ferroelectric domain walls over tens of
nanometers. Analytical theory and phase field modeling, predicts that even a few
nanometers of broadening can dramatically change the macroscale properties such
as threshold fields for wall motion, by many orders of magnitude. The team
predicts unusual magnetic-like domain walls in ferroelectrics. Such walls can be
engineered to be extremely broad, (100's nm), and their dynamical properties
under electric fields, and hence their impact on macroscale properties are
presently unexplored. Using Scanning Spectroscopy Piezoelectric Force Microscopy
(SSPFM), and optical second harmonic generation-near field scanning optical
microscopy (SHG-NSOM), the team is exploring this mysterious new world of domain
walls. Broadly speaking, the US team (Penn State and Oak Ridge National Labs)
focuses on the experimental and phase-field simulations of such ferroelectric
walls, while the Ukranian team (National Academy of Sciences, Ukraine) is
developing the theoretical framework.

The development of quantitative PFM and SHG-NSOM imaging techniques that combine
theory, numerical simulations and cutting-edge experimental techniques are
expected to have a much broader impact that extends beyond ferroelectrics, to
other fields of materials science, chemistry and life sciences. This US/Ukranian
team is an excellent example of a genuine international collaboration that
started rather spontaneously a few years ago between the PIs, and has been very
productive. This proposal will provide funds to energize and sustain this
spontaneous effort by supporting undergraduate and graduate students to work and
collaborate in a global context, support extended visits across the Atlantic by
PIs and students alike, further interactions between a university (Penn State),
a national lab (Oak-Ridge National Lab) and a national academy (NAS-Ukraine),
support organization of an annual international workshop on Piezoelectric Force
Microscopy and summer workshops in nonlinear optical microscopy, and provide
research opportunities for women and underrepresented groups.

This MWN award is co-funded by DMR-EPM, DMR-OSP, and OISE Eurasia Region.