* 0908690
* Like a candle in the wind: Microquasars and their interaction with the circum-binary medium
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sebastian Heinz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 286,111.00

AST-0908690 Heinz

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Relativistic jets are collimated beams of ultra-hot, magnetized plasma, shooting
away at very close to the speed of light from black holes and neutron stars.
Microquasars are X-ray binaries (neutron stars or black holes in orbit around a
normal star) that fire off such relativistic jets, and hold great promise for
new insight into jet and black hole physics. One of the best ways to measure
important jet parameters is to study their interaction with the environment they
must run into. This project will investigate the interaction of microquasar jets
with the circum-binary medium in order to understand the effects of winds and
radiation drag on the kinematics and stability of jets, and to construct self-
consistent models of radio and high-energy emission from microquasar jets. These
will be the first three-dimensional simulations of jets propagating through
stellar winds and radiation fields, starting with non-relativistic hydro,
relativistic hydro, and non-relativistic magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations.
Adding a sub-grid particle transport module to the FLASH code will track
populations of relativistic particles and allow calculation of emission and
absorption within the jet and the effects of radiation drag on the jet. A
turbulent diffusion algorithm will permit study of both microscopic and
macroscopic mixing. Finally, the results will be used to calculate the predicted
TeV gamma-ray and neutrino flux for the simulated jets.

The work includes graduate student training. Results will also be used to
enhance the public outreach program at the university?s Space Place, and
lectures will be archived for both professional and general audiences at the
project web-site. All analysis and simulation tools developed will be publicly
released through the same web-site, and any enhancements created will be
incorporated in the publicly available FLASH code used in the research.