* 0908508
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Couplings, Network Dynamics, and Stability of Multi-Agent Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2013
* USD 280,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop mathematical tools to analyze the
stability of distributed coordination algorithms for complex engineered systems.
In a multi-agent system, a coordination algorithm can be seen as a set of
dynamical systems coupled through basic interaction rules. This apparent
simplicity is deceptive as it hides the inherent complexity associated to the
rich class of interconnection topologies, their dynamic nature, and the
spatially distributed character of agent interactions. This project sets out to
study emerging network behaviors by analyzing the mutual influence between the
inter-agent coupling and the agent dynamics. In particular, the project seeks to
understand the effects on stability of directed information flows (when the
transmittal or acquisition of information is nonsymmetric across the network)
and switching interconnection topologies (when changing neighboring
relationships induce discontinuities in the dynamic evolution of the network).
Our innovative technical approach brings together ideas from set-valued
dynamics, nondeterministic systems, nonsmooth analysis, graph theory, and
geometric optimization, and has the potential to provide broadly-applicable
tools for complex engineered systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motion coordination
is a remarkable phenomenon in biological systems and an extremely useful tool in
man-made networks of mobile sensors and embedded robots. An important
engineering reason to study motion coordination stems from the recent interest
in multi-agent systems. The emergence of low-cost, highly-autonomous devices
with control, communication, sensing, and processing capabilities has paved the
way for the deployment of sensor networks in a wide range of scenarios. A lot is
known about the design and use of the individual components of these networks,
and yet the science of integrating the components into complex, self-organizing
networks with predictable behavior is at a primitive stage. There is a need for
tools, abstractions, and models that allow to reason rigorously about complex
networks, and for techniques that help design truly autonomous and adaptive
networks. The results from this project will help engineers design autonomous
and adaptive networks in a variety of scenarios, including disaster recovery,
environmental monitoring, and ocean sampling.&lt;br/&gt;