* 0908947
* US-Turkey Advanced Study Institute on Biomedical Engineering Grand Challenges, September 20 -27, 2009,  Antalya, Turkey
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Metin Akay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2010
* USD 49,919.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: OISE-0908947&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Metin Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: US-Turkey Advanced Study Institute on
Biomedical Engineering Grand Challenges, Anatalya,
Turkey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is organizing an advanced study institute to
highlight the use of artificial intelligence in understanding brain function.
The National Academy of Engineering announced the 14 Grand Challenges for
Engineering at the annual meeting of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. Included among these 14 challenges were Reverse?Engineer
the Brain, Engineer better Medicines, and Advance Health Informatics. Reverse-
Engineering the Brain is an emerging discipline that promotes understanding of
how the brain works. Advanced computer intelligence should enable automated
diagnosis and prescriptions for treatment. To highlight these emerging
disciplines, the First Advanced Study Institute on Biomedical Engineering will
be devoted to Grand Challenges-Reverse Engineering the Brain and related
research. It will be held Istanbul, Turkey and will introduce the attendees with
biology backgrounds to the latest developments in the neural engineering. It
will also be helpful to students in computer science and mathematics who are
interested in doing research in neuroscience and neural engineering, as the
advanced study institute will provide insights into the fundamental challenges
in neuroscience and biology. In terms of the broader impacts, further
development of these topics may lead to the development of methods that allow
doctors to forecast the benefits and side effects of potential treatments or
cures. The Advanced Study Institute is an opportunity for students to meet with
leaders in the field. This study institute will further stimulate
interdisciplinary research and collaborations among engineers, mathematicians,
computer scientists, neuroscientists and medical researchers. In addition the
study institute will aid in the understanding of complex neural systems and
signals and in identifying the new directions of neuroscience and neural
engineering. Options will be discussed for collaboration among researchers and
students internationally. This award is co-funded by Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Biomedical Engineering
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;