* 0908889
* NSF-RET Site at Engineering Research Center on Structured Organic Particulate Systems (C-SOPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kwabena Narh, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2013
* USD 474,522.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This award provides funding for a 3 year standard award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at New Jersey
Institute of Technology (NJIT) entitled, "NSF-RET Site at Engineering Research
Center on Structured Organic Particulate Systems (C-SOPS)", under the direction
of Dr. Kwabena A. Narh.

This program hosted by NJIT and Rutgers University will provide a 6 week summer
research experience under the guidance of faculty supervisors with follow up
programs during each school year for a total of 54 teachers, 12 in-service high
school teachers from local school districts and six NJIT/Rutgers University pre-
service teachers (18 per year for 3 years).

The major objectives of the program are to: 1) Provide the RET teachers with six
weeks of discovery-based research experiences in carefully selected scientific
research projects, inter-connected via technology driven ERC test beds from
which they can develop basic knowledge and skills in the area of pharmaceutical
particulate and composite systems that they can incorporate into their teaching
practices; 2) Collaborate with the in-service teachers to develop age-
appropriate modules/lessons, and other teaching materials to be implemented in
their classrooms during the Academic Year; 3) Offer follow-up programs including
workshops and classroom visitations by the NJIT faculty and graduate mentors;
and 4) Utilize the evaluation instruments, developed or adapted for such
activities by the Center for Pre-College Programs.