* 0908651
* Materials World Network: Controlling Properties of Polymers in Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ophelia Tsui, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

This Materials World Network brings together world-expertise on the experimental
characterizations of polymer films (Boston University, USA and Universit√§t
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany on the film stress and viscoelasticity,
respectively) and computer simulations on the dynamics and structure of confined
polymers (Institut Charles Sadron, Strasbourg, France) to seek for the
possibility of a unified picture that can account for all the unusual properties
observed of polymer films to date (namely the dynamics, residual stress and
thermal expansivity), and at the same time attempt to relate these properties to
the (out-of-equilibrium) polymer structures therein as well as the fabrication
and/or post-fabrication processes producing them. By establishing such
structure-property and processing-property relations, the Network aims to
ultimately institute a strategy that can predict, design and tune the properties
of polymer films. Because the structures of the polymer films that allegedly
cause the unusual properties are metastable and change with time, a cross-
linkable copolymer of polystyrene are used to freeze-in the structures and
whereby their properties. This research is largely guided by several published
experiments and a model conjectured by Reiter (the PI from Germany) and de
Gennes portraying how a non-equilibrated polymer network structure engendered by
rapid solvent evaporation could explain negative thermal expansivity. The
results of this program are expected to substantiate this model, and
additionally expand its relevance to the dynamical behaviors of the films. The
resultant, more encompassing model will provide a pivotal platform upon which
the structure-property and processing-property relations can be portrayed and/or
formulated.

Applications of polymer films are widespread. Success of this program leads to a
simple strategy to design and fabricate polymer films with premeditated thermal
expansion and/or dynamical properties. Having such ability significantly
enhances our leverage to adapt these materials in a cost effective manner to the
ever-changing demands on their properties by the applications employing them.
Six PhD students are trained in this program, providing them an excellent
training ground in the academically challenging and technologically relevant
problem concerning the unusual properties of spin-coated polymer films. Members
of the Network benefit from the international setting of the program. In
particular, there are regular meetings and physical exchange between the PhD
students besides frequent video conferences. This program actively engages
undergraduate and high-school student participants. This award is jointly funded
by the DMR Polymers Program and the DMR Office of Special Programs.