* 0908280
* Uncovering the Nature of Lyman-alpha Nebulae in the Distant Universe
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Ann Zabludoff, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2013
* USD 312,216.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr Zabludoff will study Lyman-alpha
blobs, large clouds of glowing gas in the distant Universe that may represent
the adolescence of today's brightest galaxies. She and her team will complete
two complementary, blind surveys to search for Lyman-alpha blobs so distant that
we see them as they were only 3 billion years after the Big Bang. These surveys
will use a narrow-band filter with the wide-field imagers on the Steward
2.3-meter telescope and the two 4-meter telescopes of the National Optical
Astronomy Observatory. The shallow but ultra-wide survey with the smaller
telescope targets the rarest, most luminous blobs, while the survey with the
4-meter telescopes will be deeper to detect the more numerous fainter blobs. Dr
Zabludoff will then take spectra of the brightest blobs at optical and infrared
wavelengths, to measure the gas motions and to constrain the temperature,
density and chemical composition. Comparing profiles of the different spectral
lines will show whether the glowing gas is falling in, or blowing out as a
galactic wind. Comparing these observations with models will show whether the
Lyman-alpha blobs are likely to be gas-accreting nascent
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student and an undergraduate will be
trained by participating in the research. Dr Zabludoff will incorporate results
from the research into classroom exercises for undergraduate students.