* 0908745
* Collaborative Research: Materials World Network: III-V Bismide Materials for IR and Mid IR Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joanna Millunchick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2013
* USD 255,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project, involves investigators
from Arizona State University and the University of Michigan in the US, the
University of Victoria and Simon Fraser University in Canada, the University of
Surrey in the UK, and Philipps-Universit√§t in Germany, and focuses on a
relatively unexplored family of III-V semiconductor alloys containing the
heaviest naturally occurring group V element, bismuth. Bismuth is non-toxic,
relatively inexpensive, and the heaviest non-radioactive element in the periodic
table. Furthermore, Bi-alloys have a very large spin orbit splitting and a
smaller temperature dependence of the bandgap when compared with conventional
semiconductor alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
international collaboration is to theoretically and experimentally develop study
III-V bismide compound semiconductors for IR and mid IR optoelectronic devices
and other small bandgap devices at the readily available lattice constants of
GaAs, InP, InAs, and GaSb. The research activities include molecular beam
epitaxy growth of III-V bismide materials; structural characterization and
property measurements aimed at developing an understanding of dopant
incorporation, bandgap energy, band offsets, materials performance, and
radiative efficiency of these materials and related devices; and theoretical
analysis of the electronic and optical properties of quantum-well structures and
optical devices based on Bi-containing compound semiconductors. The theoretical
and device-level research will be performed mainly by the overseas scientists.
The networking objective of this project is to link this Materials World Network
with the larger global scientific research community by hosting two
international workshops, one at the University of Michigan during the summer of
2010 and one at the University of Surrey during the summer of 2011, and by
developing cyberinfrastructure to enhance data sharing and analysis between Bi-
alloy investigators and the broader scientific community. These activities,
promote sample exchange and tool sharing for the development of III-V bismide
materials, enhance science and technology through broader dissemination,
understanding, and face-to-face interactions between students and researchers,
and advance data sharing and information exchange, which may well inspire
further innovation and change the way data is managed and material challenges
are addressed.