* 0908920
* Chemical Abundances in the Intergalactic Medium: Evolution and Constraints on Feedback From Galaxy Formation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Simcoe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 374,968.00

Dr. Simcoe will use instruments on the Magellan telescopes in Chile to study the
buildup of carbon and oxygen in the intergalactic gas early in cosmic history,
before and during the period when the galaxies made most of their stars. These
'heavy' chemical elements are produced inside stars, and released into
interstellar gas as the stars die. In young galaxies, both their active nuclei
and violent starbirth can eject heavy-element-rich gas into intergalactic space.
Thus the amount of carbon and oxygen in the intergalactic gas traces the
formation of the galaxies. The strongest spectral lines of highly-ionized carbon
and oxygen are in the ultraviolet. But in the spectra of distant quasars, cosmic
expansion means that we observe these lines at wavelengths longer by the
redshift factor 1+z, so they are seen at visible or even infrared wavelengths.
Dr. Simcoe will take high-quality optical spectra to derive carbon and oxygen
abundances for gas that lies between us and luminous quasars in the redshift
range 2.5<z<4.5. Studies of the 14 known quasars with z>5.8 that are accessible
from the Southern-hemisphere Magellan telescopes will be a first science project
for the FIRE infrared spectrograph, which Dr. Simcoe has built under an earlier
NSF grant. FIRE should be ready to go to the telescope in late 2009.

A graduate student will be trained by working on this project. Dr. Simcoe will
continue to train undergraduate students through MIT's UROP program; he has
already mentored five students through this program, four of whom were members
of groups under-represented in the physical sciences. During this early science
project with FIRE, Dr. Simcoe and his team will optimize the reduction and
analysis tools, and make them available to the Magellan user community.