* 0908449
* Materials World Network: Polymers Dynamics in the Presence of Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

This research helps provide a fundamental understanding of polymer dynamics in
the presence of nanoparticles using a coordinated experimental and theoretical
approach. This Materials World Network team from the University of Pennsylvania
and Durham University has considerable experience in polymer nancomposites and
dynamic properties, and is working together in exploring polymer diffusion and
rheology in these fascinating and complex materials. This team recently found a
dramatic example of how polymers behave differently in the presence of
nanoparticles, wherein polymer diffusion first slowed and then recovered with
the addition of nanoparticles. Research efforts are focusing on three aspects of
polymer nanocomposite dynamics. (1) Establishing the underlying mechanism of
polymer diffusion in nanocomposites. A variety of studies are underway that
explore the impact of nanoparticle / polymer interactions, nanoparticle
orientation, relative size of the polymer and nanoparticle diameter, and
nanoparticle shape. (2) Relating the polymer and nanoparticle diffusion studies
to rheological measurements including linear viscoelastic measurements, zero-
shear viscosity, plateau modulus and relaxation times. Polymer diffusion and
polymer rheology are intimately related through fundamental relaxation
parameters, so our goal is to reconcile these two measures of polymer dynamics
in polymer nanocomposites. (3) Refining and extending our theoretical
description of the polymer dynamics in the presence of nanoparticles. One
critical extension is to adjust the monomeric friction coefficient near the
particles to evaluate the importance of enthalpic interactions on
diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is well-positioned for
groundbreaking insights into the physics of polymer nanocomposites that are
likely to have a positive impact on the emerging industry of polymer
nanocomposites. Interactions include meetings, bi-monthly teleconferences,
monthly reports, data sharing via a secure website, regular international trips,
and remote access to experimental equipment. This project also addresses the
needs of women in science and engineering by establishing professional problem-
solving groups for women faculty and graduate students as a means to
collectively address the challenges and opportunities in science and engineering
careers. Furthermore, undergraduates from both the University of Pennsylvania
and Durham University participate in the research activities as well as consider
the business aspects of launching new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Materials World Network research is supported by the DMR Polymers Program and
the DMR Office of Special Programs.