* 0908342
* Spectroscopy of Solar-Type Stars: Fundamental Problems in Stellar Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeremy King, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,563.00

AST-0908342 King

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr. Jeremy King and his students will utilize high-resolution spectroscopy to
address several longstanding or timely issues of fundamental stellar
astrophysics. Firstly, they will identify short-period tidally-locked binaries
in globular clusters to provide an improved estimate of the big-bang production
of lithium and thereby obtain a direct estimate of lithium destruction in the
old stars of the Milky Way's halo. Secondly, the group will participate in an
already-initiated program to investigate the large dispersion of lithium
abundances in the cool stars of the Pleiades cluster, the source of which is not
currently understood. Thirdly, they will initiate a program to identify
exoplanets using spectrographs on meter-class telescopes to detect chromospheric
flux variations due to star-planet interactions. Fourthly, they will search for
and study the properties of nearby post-T-Tauri stars, which are stars like the
Sun but with ages corresponding to the epoch of terrestrial planet formation.
Finally, the PI and his students will derive spectroscopic parameters and
abundances of stars of varying evolutionary states in an old disk moving group
to establish whether this kinematic entity exhibits chemical homogeneity.

Dr. King will actively involve physics majors and summer students at South
Carolina State University in all aspects of the program. This collaboration will
build partnerships between research-class universities and institutions like
SCSU that are successful in graduating minority students in astrophysics. The PI
will continue providing undergraduate research and publication opportunities for
Clemson University students. The fundamental nature of the research is expected
to have a broad impact on the field of stellar astrophysics and the programs of
other researchers in this field.