* 0908656
* Materials World Network:  Study at the Nanoscale of Photovoltaic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Thomas Moore, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2012
* USD 260,000.00

This Materials World Network project is a collaboration of groups from
Argentina, Canada, MÃ©xico and the US with the common goal of synthesizing and
characterizing, at the single molecule/particle level, semiconductor-
photosensitizer materials that can be used for photovoltaic and solar-to-fuel
applications. Electron injection by photosensitizers into semiconductor
materials has been studied extensively, mostly by electrochemical and
spectroscopic techniques based on conventional measurements of bulk materials.
These studies often reveal electron transfer processes that are both
thermodynamically and kinetically indicative of heterogeneity in the sensitizer-
semiconductor material. To characterize such heterogeneity we are systematically
studying the electron transfer processes using single molecule/particle
techniques. If sub-populations of sensitizer-semiconductor particles of high
efficiency can be identified, it should be possible to distinguish structural
features that make it so and thus improve the sensitizer-semiconductor material
interface and overall performance of photovoltaic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A contribution of the US team is the synthesis of
sensitizer-semiconductor nanoparticle models. Initially, we will work with
systems consisting of perylene-TiO2 and perylene-SnO2. With the experimental
techniques in hand, the aim is to develop tetrapyrrole-based semiconductor
models, which upon excitation of the sensitizer in the visible range, inject
electrons into the semiconductor conduction band and thereby generate high
oxidation potential (&gt; 1.30 V vs. NHE) sensitizer radicals. High potential is
necessary to drive water oxidation. In parallel with these systems, we plan to
develop materials for photoanodes having a highly reducing output, needed for
the reduction of H+ to H2. Conventional and novel single molecule/particle
fluorescence spectroscopy (SMFS) methods will be used to study photoinduced
electron transfer processes within the sensitizer-semiconductor nanoparticle
models. In particular, we seek to identify distributions of electron transfer
efficiencies as a function of parameters such as sensitizer-semiconductor
nanoparticle separation distance, type of linkage, geometry and assembly
methodology. Another objective of the project is to study the role played by the
occupation of the semiconductor energy levels in the photoinduced electron
transfer process. The main technique in this case will be the newly developed
single molecule/particle spectroelectrochemistry (SMS-EC). The electrochemical
aspect of the technique will be used to control the population of the energy
levels of the semiconductor particles, while the SMFS aspect will be used to
monitor the redox state(s) of the sensitizer(s) in individual molecules by
detecting their fluorescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common denominator is a
solar-to-fuel project important to securing a sustainable energy future
appropriate to each culture. Undergraduate and graduate students working on this
integrated project are thinking and communicating across disciplines and
national boundaries. This award is co-funded by DMR-EPM, DMR-OSP, and OISE
Americas Region.