* 0908930
* Compact Object Forensics: The Question of Origin
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Womack
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,846.00

Dr. Vassiliki Kalogera of Northwestern University will undertake a comprehensive
research project to address fundamental questions concerning the origin of
neutron stars and black holes. The research will take advantage of a unique
opportunity provided by recent growth in observational constraints for a sizable
sample of Galactic and extragalactic X-ray binaries harboring accreting neutron
stars or black holes. She will engage in theoretical computations which
incorporate many elements necessary for the modeling of X-ray binary
evolutionary histories: motion in the Galaxy, mass transfer and its dependence
on orbital eccentricity, evolution of detached binary systems due to nuclear
burning, stellar tides and angular momentum losses,and the effect of the core-
collapse event on binary orbital dynamics. She will also engage in statistical
analyses of known systems and binary populations to determine most likely
progenitor properties and X-ray binary formation channels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will include physical constraints on the
immediate progenitors of compact objects and statistical statements about the
likelihood of their constrained properties. These will be used as initial
conditions for core-collapse hydrodynamic simulations which will test and
further our understanding of the core-collapse process. The work will contribute
to answering currently open, basic questions about compact object formation.
What, for example, is the mass relationship between compact objects and their
progenitors? Do some neutron stars acquire natal kicks with magnitudes
considerably lower than was thought before? What are the implications for
asymmetries in the core-collapse process and the role of electron-capture
supernovae? Do most black holes require sizable natal kicks and how is their
formation different from that of neutron stars, if at all? What is the true
distribution of black hole masses, corrected for observational selection
biases?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kalogera will continue her outreach efforts
through public lectures, talks at minority conferences and institutions,
participation in school science fairs in the Chicago area and beyond. She is
working in collaboration with visualization and graphics experts at Northwestern
and the Adler Planetarium and Astronomy Museum in Chicago to develop
visualization segments appropriate for the general public telling the story of
how compact objects form and evolve in interacting binaries. The products will
be presented at Northwestern, the Adler Planetarium, and will be available
through web sites for broad dissemination.