* 0908151
* Innulluartaarneq (Having the Good Life Study)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2013
* Dionne Gesink Law, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2013
* USD 1,141,064.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of Innuluataarneq research project is to
develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate a public health intervention in
Greenland that focuses on Greenlandic ways of understanding and knowing about
healthy behavior and sexually transmitted infections (STI). The target
population for Innuluataarneq is 15 to 19 year old adolescents and their
parents. Innuluataarneq will be conducted as an interdisciplinary international,
collaborative community based participatory research (CBPR) study involving
researchers and students from the United States, Canada, Denmark and Greenland.
Innuluataarneq will be implemented in three communities in Greenland: Nuuk,
Sisimut, and Tasiilaq. There are two components to Innulataarneq: 1) Component 1
will build capacity within Greenland to conduct CBPR projects that enhance
community ownership in reducing STIs and empower communities in Greenland to
partner with academic institutions to conduct research that resonates with
Greenlandic knowledge and social and cultural practices; and 2) Component 2 will
provide a socially and culturally relevant health education intervention to
adolescents 15 to 19 years old and their parents in order to enhance awareness
of STIs and their long term consequences &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several
elements to the intellectual merit of Innulataarneq. First, little is known
about how cultural practices affect the transmission of STIs in the Arctic.
Innulataarneq builds on our current STI research in Greenland, The Greenland
Sexual Health Study, which is gathering information on the individual behaviors,
social determinants, and cultural, historical, and political factors influencing
the country?s high STI rates. Second, CBPR has not been practiced in Greenland
to address any social science or health question. Innulataarneq?s CBPR approach
advances our knowledge and understanding of the practical application of CBPR
methodologies in a socially and culturally diverse Arctic community such as
Greenland. Third, the reproductive future of Greenland is in jeopardy due to the
countries high STI rates and low birth rates. Innulataarneq will explore
Greenlandic ways of promoting educational efforts to prevent STI?s in order to
secure Greenland?s reproductive future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relevance and
importance of Innulataarneq to broader impacts in the field of social sciences
and health related fields include the following: 1) Provide experience and
training for students from indigenous populations in the United States, Canada
and Greenland in the skills, techniques and knowledge needed to carry out
community based participatory research on sexual health in Arctic communities;
2) Create a dialogue and build connections between institutions in the United
States, Canada, and Greenland to foster a greater understanding of the
importance of this health research in the Arctic; 3) Raise awareness about CBPR
methods in Greenland, STIs, and culturally relevant ways of addressing this
problem in an Arctic country; 4) Promote social science research that addresses
health issues in Arctic communities; and 5) Documents and shares Greenlandic
traditional knowledge and how it influences sexual behavior in an Arctic
community.