* 0909760
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Towards a biologically relevant interpretation of the genetic covariance matrix:   A theoretical and experimental exploration of the breeder's equation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Charles Goodnight, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,700.00

A major theoretical challenge is determining how natural selection acting within
populations translates into the patterns of evolution seen at a larger scale.
Specifically, there is no general understanding of how interactions among genes
change as a result of processes such as natural selection and mutation.
Developing the necessary theory and statistical tools to determine how these
interactions shape evolution is crucial for predicting a population's capacity
to adapt to climate change, and the ability of exotic species to invade new
environments. This study develops a new statistical method (the "selection
skewers" analysis) that identifies changes in the relationships among genetic
components of traits that would significantly alter the predicted evolution of a
population. The performance of this new statistical method will be compared to
previous methods. In addition, using laboratory populations of red flour beetles
(Tribolium castaneum) the method will be used to empirically determine when
interactions among genes are stable over time, and thus when evolutionary change
due to selection can be predicted accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
will not only provide a needed statistical and conceptual framework for basic
studies of evolutionary change, but will enable future studies examining the
capacity for natural populations to adapt to climate change and the ability of
exotic species to invade new environments. In addition, women and minority
students will be trained in the field of quantitative genetics, an area where
these groups are still underrepresented. The computer program to implement the
selection skewers method will be made freely available on the web.