* 0909387
* From Their Perspective: Alaskan Grandparents' Roles, Strengths, and Needs
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* James Allen, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,150,566.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a participatory action research
model the research team will investigate the roles, strengths, and needs of
Alaska Native grandparents residing in rural, semi-urban, and urban areas of
Alaska. The research project will explore how grandparent roles, strengths, and
needs have been shaped by larger factors, such as traditional practices,
community changes, out migration, subsistence, and others factors defined by the
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After meeting with communities and various
levels of governing authorities,the investigators hope to gain additional
insights into the factors that prove significant to lives of Alaska Native
grandparents. The research team will use those insights to modify their research
plan and instruments. This iterative process between researcher and community is
the hallmark of participatory action research. The research team has chosen the
participatory action model for this project because it gives the participant
community a stronger voice in the research and the scientific researchers deeper
insight into the project's potential. The project team believes this model is
key in the case of working with Alaska Native grandparents, a population about
which little has been written in the scientific literature. In addition the
project leaders are obligated to developing outreach documents and fully
informing communities about the research and the research results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project serves to enhance the professional
development of undergraduate and graduate students, mentor future Arctic
scientists, and develop culturally appropriate and respectful researchers, which
improves communication between scientists and Alaskan Native communities. Data
from the current project will be made available to others to enhance the
dissemination of knowledge and wisdom offered by Alaska Native elders and
grandparents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is projected that the research will bring
to light the similarities and unique aspects of grandparents in an arctic region
and contribute to the body of literature on grandparenting, grandparents rearing
grandchildren, and diversity among grandparenting, and the general literature in
these and other disciplines: Gerontology, Psychology, Human Development and
Family Science, Multicultural Diversity, and Anthropology.