* 0909132
* Petascale Computing of Thermonuclear Supernova Explosions
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2015
* Donald Lamb, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 06/30/2015
* USD 2,242,341.00

Dr. Donald Lamb of the University of Chicago will undertake a theoretical
program to comprehensively and systematically validate current models of Type Ia
supernovae, which are the explosions of white dwarf stars experiencing mass
transfer from a nearby red giant. He and his group will carry out hundreds of
high-fidelity, three-dimensional, whole-star simulations that include a wide
variety of input model parameters. They will also use an integrated simulation
pipeline to construct high-quality model light curves and spectra. The proposed
effort will leverage the emergence of the Flash Center as a leader in this field
and the extensive experience of personnel in the Center in conducting large and
complex simulations of Type Ia supernovae. The FLASH code, developed by this
group, is a highly capable, fully modular, extensible, community code that
scales to 100K processors and has been used for a variety of problems by more
than 300 scientists around the world. Their Phoenix, SEDONA, and LANL radiation
transport codes and accompanying data management software, which has also been
developed by the Flash Center, monitors the execution of the simulations,
automatically transfers the data generated by the simulations to mass storage,
incorporates a scientific data analysis pipeline, and provides an interface that
allows astrophysicists doing the simulations to keep track of and manipulate all
the data generated by the simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations using
Type Ia supernovae as "standard candles" revealed that the expansion rate of the
universe is accelerating and led to the discovery of dark energy. Understanding
dark energy ranks among the most compelling problems in physical science. The
goals of several large future projects, including the Dark Energy Survey the
Joint Dark Energy Mission and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope are, in part,
to determine the properties of dark energy. Most scientists in the field believe
this goal will require a better understanding of the explosion mechanism, more
accurate simulations of the explosions, and quantification of the uncertainties
in the predictions made by these simulations. This group will also engage in
several activities in education and public outreach. They will collaborate with
staff at Chicago's Adler Planetarium to create museum exhibits that help foster
public education about supernova science, and will continue their cooperation
with broadcast media production companies.