* 0909245
* Exploring the Radio Transient and Static Sky with the Allen Telescope Array Five GHz Sky Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Geoffrey Bower, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2013
* USD 463,926.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Geoffrey Bower of the University of
California Berkeley will undertake an extensive survey of static and variable
sources at radio wavelengths, using the new Allen Telescope Array. The new
survey is called the Five GHz Sky Survey (FiGSS), and will cover about 10,000
square degrees (one-third of the radio sky). It will also include cross-
comparisons with surveys at optical and other wavelengths. This static survey
will be considerably more sensitive than existing surveys. Two smaller fields
(100 and 10 square degrees) will be observed with rapid cadence (every 10 days
and daily, respectively). The goals of the transient survey include systematic
search for radio supernovae in nearby galaxies; discovery of orphan gamma-ray
burst afterglows, the predicted counterparts to otherwise unobservable stellar
explosions; discovery of radio emission from tidal disruption of stars by
massive black holes; and detection of stellar-mass black hole eruptions and
dwarf star outbursts. Many of these phenomena have not been characterized in a
systematic way to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on FiGSS will be
conducted by a small group centered at Berkeley, including postdoctoral fellows,
and graduate and undergraduate students, providing valuable training for the
next generation of astronomers. The results of FiGSS will be disseminated to the
larger community through the Virtual Observatory.