* 0909441
* Collaborative Research: A biotic awakening: How do invertebrates, microbes, and plants determine soil organic matter responses to release from nutrient limitation in arctic tundra?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Parton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 771,369.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this project is to determine how plants, microbes and soil
invertebrates interact to drive changes in soil organic matter and carbon
sequestration with ambient and increased soil nutrient availability in the
dominant upland arctic tundra ecosystem in northern Alaska. The proponents will
use a combination of field observation, experimental, laboratory, and modeling
approaches to address four research objectives that include: 1. Understanding
how well-documented changes in the plant community alter plant inputs to soils
(roots and litter) 2. Determining how soil microbial and invertebrate
communities respond to these inputs 3. Investigating if the loss of SOM occurs
in response to an increase in soil activities and/or a change in community
structure, and 4. Developing a model of soil pedogenesis based on the DAYCENT
model (Parton et al. 2001) that incorporates the roles of plants, microbes, and
invertebrates. This work will be conducted at the Toolik Lake Long-Term
Ecological Research site and will utilize a suite of long-term nutrient-addition
plots (some extending back over 30 years) as well as more recently manipulated
sites. A postdoctoral researcher, at least two graduate students, and several
undergraduates will be trained as part of this project. The PIs will also
conduct teacher development workshops and other K-12 outreach programs.