* 0909942
* Dissertation Research:   Regulation of plant-mycorrhizal interactions depends on the abundance and identity of limiting resources
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Emily Grman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,800.00

The proposed research explores the interactions between plants and a specific
type of soil fungi (arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi). These fungi can dramatically
improve plant nutrition, plant productivity, plant diversity, and ecosystem
function, greatly contributing to crop production, the maintenance of diversity
in native habitats, and soil health. However, fungi can be detrimental to
plants, especially in environments where soils are fertile (e.g., through
fertilization) or light limited (e.g., under a dense layer of vegetation). The
research examines the specific conditions of resource availability (soil
nutrients and light) under which fungi benefit plants, and asks whether some
plants are better at controlling their interactions with fungi than others.
Understanding what controls the interactions between plants and mycorrhizal
fungi is essential for predicting and manipulating the abundance of these fungi
as well as their effects on plant growth. The results of this research will
inform advances in low-input agriculture, restoration and management of native
ecosystems, and soil carbon storage. The co-PI will also continue her work in
Lawton Community Schools in Lawton, MI, helping K-12 students to conduct
inquiry-based science activities to learn about ecology. In collaboration with
K-12 teachers in Lawton, she develops lessons about important topics such as
carbon cycling, plant diversity, and how plants and soil organisms work together
to provide important services for our environment. The co-PI will also continue
to present the results of her research at national meetings and in peer-reviewed
publications.

