* 0909670
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The effects of removing large herbivores on the ecology of infectious diseases
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Large animals play crucially important roles in ecological systems, but they are
declining in abundance worldwide. This project will explore how declines in
large herbivores in Africa, including elephants, giraffes, and zebras are
affecting human risk of exposure to infectious diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Removing large herbivores causes a doubling of rodent
densities because large herbivores compete with smaller ones for food. These
increases in rodent density can cause increases in the density of fleas that
transmit human diseases such as plague. This project will use small-scale
experiments in Kenya to test whether these increases in flea densities result in
greater abundances of fleas infected with disease-causing pathogens. The
researchers will also test whether these associations occur in several regions
of Tanzania. The experiments in Tanzania will be carried out in landscapes in
which large mammals are protected and landscapes in which they are not. Using
this combination of careful experiments and large-scale comparisons will allow
the researchers to test first whether the effects of large herbivores on
infectious disease transmission can occur, and then whether they actually do
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will advance our
understanding of the ecological consequences of worldwide declines in the
abundance of large mammals. The project will also improve the ability of
scientists and managers to respond to such population declines by giving them
information about specific consequences that could result. In addition, three
African field assistants and two undergraduate students will be trained in field
and laboratory protocols as a result of this project.