* 0909699
* How Does Teachers'  Visual Scaffolding Support Students' Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Martha Alibali, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 999,798.00

Mathematical reasoning requires understanding connections between different
representations of mathematical information. The way mathematical
representations are linked in the classroom may determine whether students come
to understand important mathematical principles and procedures. Our past
research showed that teachers use various forms of visual scaffolding to link
different mathematical representations. The purpose of this project is to
understand how variations in teachers' visual scaffolding affect students'
learning. Our specific focus is on the nonverbal supports that teachers produce
in instructional episodes that link related representations of mathematical
information. In particular, we examine those nonverbal supports that serve to
ground ideas in the physical environment or in familiar actions, experiences or
representations. The research has three aims: (1) to investigate whether
students' learning is facilitated if teachers ground the to-be-linked ideas with
hand gestures (as opposed to using speech alone); (2) to examine whether certain
types of nonverbal supports are especially beneficial for learning
(specifically, redundant vs. complementary gestures, and pointing vs.
representational gestures); and (3) to examine whether gestures offer a
"special" way to visually scaffold ideas, in the sense that they are more
effective at doing so than other, non-gestural methods of visual scaffolding. We
will address these aims in experiments with middle school students learning
about linear equations. The experiments will involve video lessons that vary the
teachers' gestures or the medium used to highlight aspects of the linked
representations (hand gestures or digital icons). We will assess students'
conceptual and procedural knowledge of linear equations before and after the
lessons, so that we can evaluate how variations in teachers' visual scaffolding
affect students' learning. We will also conduct a pilot study to prepare us to
extend this line of inquiry to college students learning about statistics. This
pilot study will investigate how teachers link representations using speech and
gesture in instruction about confidence intervals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will contribute to our scientific understanding of learning and instruction
from an embodied cognition perspective. By experimentally manipulating the ways
in which relations between mathematical ideas are conveyed, and exploring the
consequences for learning, we will gain a deeper understanding of the cognitive
processes involved in acquiring mathematical understanding. This work will
provide an empirical basis for recommendations about how teachers can use visual
scaffolding effectively.