* 0909804
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Adaptation and historical ecology in vernal pool Eryngium (Apiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2012
* USD 12,000.00

Vernal pools are island-like depressions characterized by seasonal extremes:
flooding during winter and desiccation during summer; they are home to many
endangered plants and animals. In such habitats, plants and animals must possess
extreme adaptations. Many species of Eryngium occupy Californian vernal pools;
these plants are closely related to carrots and parsnips. In this study,
adaptations in Eryngium will be viewed from a historical perspective. DNA
sequences will be collected from related species of Eryngium from California,
Oregon, and Chile -- some restricted to vernal pools and some from normal
terrestrial habitats. Relationships between these plants will be reconstructed
from their DNA sequences. This history will give insights into how a specific
adaptation, seasonal changes in leaf form, may have arisen. In Eryngium, as well
as other vernal-pool plants, two types of leaves are produced: (1) winter
leaves, which are well suited to flooded environments but as a trade-off produce
less energy than (2) summer leaves, which are poorly suited to winter flooding.
An experiment will be conducted to determine if the shift from winter leaves to
summer leaves is triggered by increases in the amount of daylight per day during
spring, and to determine whether leaf development is tightly constrained by
genetics or if it can respond adaptively to changing environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt; An important question to biologists to be addressed is
whether specialization of habitat is irreversible: If plants adapt to vernal
pools, are they trapped by their success? Many species of Eryngium in the vernal
pools of California are in peril, and an answer to this question along with
improvements in the understanding of the life history of Eryngium will aid
conservation efforts. The experiment in this study gives opportunity for
underrepresented minorities to learn scientific research techniques otherwise
not available to undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;