* 0909976
* Empirical Study on Emerging Research: The Role of Epistomological Beliefs and Cognitive Processing on Engineering Students' Ability to Solve Ambiguous Problems
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Elliot Douglas, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 05/31/2014
* USD 805,158.00

Open-ended and ill-structured problems are inherent in engineering practice, and
a significant aspect of engineering education is to teach students how to solve
these problems. While there has been effort to understand and improve teaching
of design, less work has been done on "pre-design" problems, i.e. open-ended
problems that share some elements of design, but do not encompass all the
complexities of design problems. We argue that it is necessary to understand the
nature of problem-solving for these pre-design problems in order to ultimately
develop effective interventions for improving students' abilities to solve open-
ended and ill-structured problems. As a means of characterizing problems, we
propose a framework that classifies problems in terms of the number of decisions
that need to be made and whether the problem has a single correct answer (close-
ended) or has multiple answers which require some judgment as to which is the
most appropriate (open-ended).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research
question for this project is: What factors contribute to undergraduate
engineering students' ability to solve open-ended engineering problems? We will
address this question through a study involving junior and senior materials
engineering students at a large public university. Our project consists of both
a quantitative and a qualitative component. The goal of the quantitative
component is to identify the relative importance of various factors on students'
abilities to solve engineering problems. Specifically, we hypothesize that
students who view all knowledge as certain and absolute will have more
difficulty solving ambiguous (open-ended) problems than students who recognize
the need to justify conclusions. Similarly, we hypothesize that students with
limited ability to work with multiple items in memory simultaneously will have
more difficulty solving open-ended problems. The goal of the qualitative
component is to identify the processes students use to solve open-ended
problems. This will be accomplished by observing students solving problems,
followed by interviews of those students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
project, we will be able to identify the attributes, characteristics, and
processes of successful problem solvers, and explore specific strategies they
use. This, in turn, can lead to improved strategies for developing problem-
solving skills in STEM fields where open-ended, ill-structured problems (e.g.
design, product development, research, etc.) characterize professional practice
in the field. We expect that the results of this study will inform the
development of improved classroom materials and textbooks, classroom strategies
for teaching problem-solving, and professional development activities to equip
faculty with the tools they need to teach problem-solving.