* 0909254
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Relationship Between Pluton Growth and Volcanism at Two Active Intrusions in the Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Michael West, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,517,928.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our knowledge of how crustal magma
chambers evolve and how these magma chambers relate to plutons and eruptions is
inadequate, largely because nobody has yet conducted a comprehensive study of an
active crustal magma chamber. This project provides a unique opportunity to do
so and will provide fundamentally new insights into deep crustal magma
generation, storage, and differentiation. The PIs have designed the project
taking advantage of what may be the early stages leading up to an ignimbrite
eruption. Given that a large ignimbrite eruption has never been observed, let
alone the build-up to one, this might be a once in a many-generation
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on recent InSAR results
that show large-scale rapid uplift situated over several volcanoes in the
Central Andes. The research is focused on resolving the location, size, and
shape of the magma chambers, and the rates at which they are filling. The
combination of InSAR, GPS geodesy, and microgravity measurements will provide
the essential data for magma fluxes at present. Fluvial geomorphology will be
used to estimate uplift rates over a longer time. Seismic and magnetotelluric
studies will provide independent information about the location and size of any
magma chamber. The mechanism of magma transport through the crust is very
important for a number of issues ranging from the manner of crust formation via
magma addition to basic hazard predictions for volcanic eruptions. Investigating
the development of a large mid-crustal magma chamber while it is being built is
the best way to advance our understanding of this issue and the
interdisciplinary approach in this proposal is key. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes close collaboration with scientists from the University of
Bristol (UK) who are funded by NERC and with research groups in Chile, Argentina
and Bolivia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;