* 0909508
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Climatic Extremes, Mining, and Mycobacterium Ulcerans: A Coupled Systems Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Joseph Oppong, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2015
* USD 77,229.00

Buruli ulcer (BU) is one of the most neglected but treatable diseases in
tropical countries. It is considered to be a disease of the poor because of its
debilitating and disfiguring skin alterations that often create social stigmas.
BU typically occurs near water bodies, especially near stagnant water, such as
slow-flowing rivers, ponds, swamps, and lakes. In Ghana, more than 11,000 cases
have been counted since 1993, the second highest rate in Africa. The large
majority of BU cases are reported for children and women. While the clinical
dimensions of the development of the ulcer on the human skin are well
understood, the natural reservoir, activation, and transmission of the bacterium
remain unknown, leading the World Health Organization (WHO) to label BU as an
"intriguing disease." Several studies have confirmed the linkage between BU and
disturbed environments, especially in association with flooding. Environmental
disturbances and landscape modifications may play a major role in the creation
of stagnant water and the occurrence of the disease, but little research has
focused on the linkages between human-related land disturbance or fragmentation
and BU outbreaks. This interdisciplinary research project will focus on Ghana as
a case study and will explore role of environmental change and the emergence of
BU at multiple temporal and spatial scales. The investigators hypothesize that
BU outbreaks are triggered by increased systems vulnerability resulting from
exogenous disturbance in the form of more extreme and frequent rainfall events
and slow drivers of landscape change due to deforestation, agriculture, and
mining activities. Project objectives are to enhance basic understanding of the
role and types of land disturbance on BU outbreak; identify overlooked yet
potentially critical nonlinearities and surprises resulting from the interaction
of human and natural factors on the landscape and subsequent disease emergence;
add to the ongoing debate on BU reservoirs, host(s), and transmission; and
contribute to the growing body of literature and scientific discourse regarding
emerging infectious disease and ecological change, with emphasis on climatic
extremes. The investigators will use an innovative combination of environmental
sampling, interviews and surveys, participatory mapping activities, and complex
systems modeling to unravel the complexities of BU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have significant implications for the understanding of resilience
in coupled human-environmental systems. It will address new and important
questions regarding complex, emerging diseases in changing landscapes, with
particular emphasis on types and scales of interactions, positive feedbacks,
thresholds, and non-linear dynamics. The research will provide health benefits
for the study populations in Ghana and education and training opportunities in
the U.S. and Ghana. The U.S. investigators will work closely with researchers
and practitioners at Ghanaian partner institutions (University of Mines and
Technology, Kwameh Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, University of
Ghana, Minerals Commission, and Ghana Health Services). Through its educational
component involving cross-cultural, international "K-12 sister-schools," the
project will demonstrate how human-modified landscapes and disease patterns are
interconnected in both the United States and Africa. This project is supported
by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;