* 0909323
* Microbiological and geochemical studies along the new Greenland NEEM core: from authenticity to microbial diversity and activity
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Todd Sowers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2013
* USD 532,177.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This study will use tracer methodologies to track the origin and extent of
exogenous microbial contamination during ice-core drilling and post-core
relaxation in order to ascertain the indigenous microbial diversity and its
relationship to past climates and to nitrous oxide records. The project would be
conducted during the drilling of the North Eemian (?NEEM?) deep ice core in
Greenland. Specific objectives and methods include: (1) Testing the possible
origin of microbial contamination from different sources using the following
approaches: microbiological and molecular analyses of the drilling fluid,
tracking its penetration into the ice by mass spectrometry, and testing the
infiltration of potential contaminants by delivering fluorescent microspheres
(acting as microbial surrogates) in the borehole during particular runs and
analyzing thin sections of the microsphere coated ice cores by fluorescent
microscopy and flow cytometry; (2) Using high resolution microscopic and flow
cytometric techniques to determine the abundance, viability and diversity of the
indigenous microbial populations from different depths in relationship to
deposition climate; (3) Linking possible anomalies of the elemental and isotopic
composition of nitrous oxide in ice dated between 35,000 and 45,000 years to
microbial in-situ production by specific organisms.