* 0909085
* Materials World Network: Rational Design of Metallic and Bimetallic Nanoparticles for Opto-Electrochemical Biosensing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2009
* Sherine Obare, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2009
* USD 105,000.00

This Materials World Network award by the Biomaterials program and Office of
Special Programs in the Division of Materials Research to University of North
Carolina Charlotte is to synthesize and characterize monodisperse metallic and
bimetallic nanoparticles, and to use the nanoparticles for biosensing
applications. This award is also cofunded by the Office of International Science
and Engineering. Monodisperse metal particles within the 1 - 4 nm size regime
display discrete electronic orbital levels, which will be studied by both
optical and electrochemical techniques. With this award, Prof Obare with
collaborators from Tunisia at the University of 7 November and the National
Institute of Applied Sciences and Technology will investigate the influence of
alloying silver nanoparticles on their optical and electrochemical properties. A
fundamental understanding of the new properties that arise from these studies
may provide an opto-electrochemical detection method for bacteria that cause
food and water borne diseases in both the United States and in Tunisia. Proper
functionalization of the nanoparticles will allow for selective and specific
interactions between the nanoparticles and the bacteria.

Conventional methods for the detection of most pathogens are often costly and
time consuming. Therefore, there is a significant need for rapid detection of
bacteria directly from both food and patient samples. Rapid methods based on
nanoscale materials will lead to major advances in the field. Obare?s research
group in the United States will collaborate with a team of scientists from the
University of 7 November and the National Institute of Applied Sciences and
Technology in Tunisia will address an interdisciplinary research area in which
insights governing the optical and electrochemical properties of metals on the
nanoscale will rationally be used to develop sensitive detection methods for
pathogens. In addition to engaging graduate and undergraduate students in the
proposed research activities, the PI holds a one-week nanoscience Camp for high
school and middle school students. This collaboration will provide the
nanoscience Camp participants to join researchers live in Tunisia, via video
conferencing, and learn how international joint research projects utilize
nanoparticles to address important problems common to the United States and
Tunisia.