* 0909212
* Materials World Network: Interplay Between Quantum Size Effect and Strain Effect on Growth of Nanoscle Metal Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Feng Liu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2012
* USD 240,000.00

The strain effect is ubiquitous in heteroepitaxial growth when one kind of thin
film material is grown on a substrate material of different lattice size. On the
other hand, in the growth of metal thin films on semiconductor substrates, the
quantum size effect (QSE) effect becomes dominant when the metal film is very
thin of a few nanometers thick. In the past, however, these two important
effects have been studied alone or separately despite the fact they are both
present in many cases. This Materials World Network (MWN) project launches an
international collaboration between US and China to carry out the first
systematic study of both these effects to reveal their fundamental relationship
and interplay on affecting the growth thermodynamics and kinetics of metal thin
films on semiconductor substrates. The study will greatly expand our knowledge
base to control the growth morphology of metal nanofilms and
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MWN project encompasses a theoretical
study to investigate the quantum size effect (QSE) and strain effect on growth
of nanometer-thick metal thin films, augmented by an international collaboration
of synergistic experimental study on the same topic at Tsinghua University in
Beijing, China. Using primarily the growth of Pb thin films on Si substrate as a
model system, the proposed research aims to answer three fundamental questions:
(1) What is the relationship between the QSE and strain effect? (2) How these
two effects will interplay with each other to affect the thermodynamic stability
of metal thin films, particularly changing the surface energy and its thickness
dependence? (3) How these two effects will act together to affect the growth
kinetics of metal thin films, e.g. by changing together the surface diffusion
energy barrier? The study will bring out new insights to the understanding of
the QSE and strain effect not only individually but also as a whole, and lay the
groundwork for a new research direction that is expected to generate broad
interest. A special outcome of this project is the education and training of
graduate students not only in fundamental research but also with a global
perspective through international student exchange program between US and China.