* 0909437
* Antarctic Artists and Writers Project
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2009,12/31/2010
* James O'Leary, Maryland Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Peter T. West
* 12/31/2010
* USD 322,313.00

The Maryland Science Center (MSC) in Baltimore will hold a series of programs
centered around an exhbit of works produced by participants in NSF's Antarctic
Artists & Writers Program to coincide with the 50th anniversary convening of the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). The ATCM will be held in Baltimore
in April 2009. The MSC program will consist of the exhibit and science
demonstrations. Never before has such an extensive collection of Artist and
Writers Program works been on display.

The exhibit will feature artwork, photography and sculpture and other media
produced by Artists & Writers participants. The program makes possible Artists'&
Writers' travel to Antarctica to create works that will increase public
understanding of the Antarctic region and the research performed there. A
related science demonstration will introduce the public to the harshness of the
Antarctic environment by exhibiting the clothing and other protective gear used
by Antarctic researchers. Scientifically accurate, large-scale floor maps and
murals will give those attending a "sense of place" about the Antarctic
environment and the challenges of conducting state-of-the-art science there
under the auspcices of the U.S. Antarctic Program, which NSF manages.

The programs will be developed and managed by MSC exhibit, education and program
staff with a team of advisors encompassing scientists, art museum curators,
former participants in the Artists and Writers Program and NSF staff. MSC's
staff research into the Artists and Writers Program and its participants along
with the artists' willingness to participate provide a strong foundation on
which to build a meaningful program.

Broader Impacts

MSC plans to bring audiences in touch with artists' recreations of the continent
as well as both artists? and scientists' accounts of living and working there.
Audiences for the exhibit and science demonstration will include the general
public and school groups visiting MSC in the Spring, when it is common for more
than 2,000 students to visit on agiven day. For the 400 international delegates
of the treaty meeting, the exhibit will provide a novel view of the continent
and the Artists and Writers Program.

MSC expects audiences to become aware of Antarctica as more than a cold icy
wilderness and to understand the continent as both austere and beautiful with a
variety of landforms and life forms, and a setting for critical scientific
research.

MSC will expose underserved audiences to the program through subsidized
transportation and admission for 1,200-1,500 Baltimore City school students.

RMC Research Corporation will conduct summative evaluation efforts.