* 0909946
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Genetic Architecture of Resistance in a Coevolving Plant-Fungus Pathosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2012
* USD 11,408.00

Coevolution between organisms and their enemies is a widespread phenomenon that
may contribute to the generation of biological diversity. The genetic mechanism
believed to underlie relationships between plants and their enemies, termed the
gene-for-gene concept, is thought to involve pairwise interactions of plant
genes and herbivore genes. The genetics of a natural plant-fungus (host-
parasite) system will be examined to determine whether the evolution of
resistance in this system is accurately described by the gene-for-gene model of
plant-pathogen coevolution. Prior research on the pathology of this system will
serve as a starting point for characterizing the genetic basis of resistance.
Additional insight will be gained because the system includes multiple host
species, providing a more realistic multispecies context for host-pathogen
coevolution.&lt;br/&gt;Though the genetics of coevolution has been studied in
many agricultural plant systems, few such interactions have been studied in
natural systems. Understanding the mechanisms and impacts of natural plant-
pathogen coevolution should help in the development of strategies for long term
maintenance of resistance, which will become ever more important as cultivation
becomes increasingly globalized, and as human activity results in increased
introduction of natural pathogens to endangered or cultivated plant
populations.&lt;br/&gt;