* 0909997
* Dissertation Research:   Nitrogen Transformation and Transportation Along a Gradient in Soil Texture
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Hangsheng Lin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,540.00

Inputs to the biosphere of chemically active compounds of nitrogen, known as
reactive nitrogen, are increasing. These inputs have beneficial effects
including increased crop production, and deleterious effects such as nutrient
pollution. Forest soils can serve as sinks and sources for reactive nitrogen.
The identification of mechanisms that allow forest soils to retain this nitrogen
is an important research goal. This research will improve our understanding of
reactive nitrogen retention by incorporating soil carbon and soil texture into
an analysis of forest soil nitrogen retention. Soil carbon can promote the
transformation of reactive nitrogen into non-reactive forms. In contrast, coarse
soil texture can promote the transportation of reactive nitrogen to surface and
ground waters. The relative importance of these processes will be evaluated
along gradients of soil carbon and soil texture in a Chesapeake Bay watershed.
The results will be integrated to determine how nitrogen transformation and
transportation interact to control ecosystem losses of reactive nitrogen. An
improved understanding of the mechanisms promoting nitrogen retention can help
to determine when, where and why reactive nitrogen is transported to surface and
ground waters. Soil texture offers a broadly applicable framework for
interpreting these relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because soil texture is
well-mapped across the globe, results from this research will enable managers to
use existing soil texture maps to predict places and times where open waters are
particularly susceptible to non-point nutrient pollution and to manage
landscapes accordingly. An undergraduate student will participate in this
project, and high school students will benefit from educational materials
developed from this research.&lt;br/&gt;