* 0909832
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Hybridization, genome duplication, and chemical diversification in the evolution of Calendula (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,906.00

Plants are remarkable chemists. They produce many distinct chemical compounds,
and these compounds are different between different species. Even more variation
occurs when plant species hybridize and duplicate their genomes. The effects of
hybridization and genome duplication (polyploidy) on plant chemistry will be
explored in Calendula, a small group of Mediterranean plants rich in chemical
diversity, with polyploid species presumably created by hybridization. The
project will use DNA sequences to determine how the species are related to each
other, and will survey chemical diversity using liquid and gas chromatography
and mass spectrometry. The genes that encode the enzymes that make the various
chemicals will be investigated by examining when and where they are expressed,
and sequencing their transcripts. Understanding processes that create genetic
and phenotypic novelty and drive divergence of species is fundamental to
understanding biodiversity at all levels.

This project brings together the disciplines of systematics, molecular biology,
ecology, and biochemistry, and facilitates international collaboration and
exchange. It will increase understanding of plant diversification in the
Mediterranean and may inform treatments of the genus in Mediterranean floras.
All data and results will be disseminated widely via databases such as GenBank,
TreeBASE, and NAPRALERT, and specimens collected in the field will be deposited
at Cornell and at collaborating institutions abroad. Insights gained during the
execution of this project will enrich mentorship provided through the
PlantingScience program, which connects middle and high school students with
working plant scientists.