* 0909349
* River Plumes as Indicators for Greenland Ice Sheet Melt
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Syvitski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta N. Edmonds
* 08/31/2014
* USD 358,474.00

This project will study Greenlandic Rivers as integrated signals of a rapidly
changing Arctic hydrological cycle. Observed increased rates of melt on the
Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) are expected to have a profound impact on the runoff
of numerous rivers draining the ice sheet margin. However, there are few
observational records of water discharge of Greenlandic Rivers, or any other
observations to constrain runoff to systematically assess the freshwater drained
to the ocean. The researchers will use an innovative methodology to infer river
discharges around Greenland from the characteristics of river plumes draining
into the fjords. River plumes are prominently visible on remote-sensing imagery,
and their dimensions and reflectance characteristics can be mapped on a daily-
weekly basis over the length of the MODIS satellite record, which will amount to
a detailed reconstruction of 10+ years. Plume characteristics are related to
sediment concentration patterns and sediment removal rates by empirical transfer
functions, which will be validated against 4 years of field data. River plumes
are typically controlled by incoming river discharge and sediment load. Inverted
process-based numerical model of river plumes in fjords use the mapped plume
parameters to then quantify the associated river runoff.

This work will provide a rarely obtainable high spatial resolution record
especially in Southern and Western Greenland, where numerous rivers drain into
fjords. Runoff data will be related to observed melting rates at automated
weather stations of the Greenland Climate Network as well as to longer-term
temperature and precipitation trends of existing meteorological stations in the
fjords to enhance process understanding of runoff dynamics. Lag time between
onset and duration of melt on the ice sheet and downstream river discharge
patterns contributes to understanding of the presently hotly debated pathways of
GrIS melt water to the global ocean. A comprehensive dataset of Greenland river
discharge will be useful in better estimating the portioning of observed ice
mass lost on the GrIS, between melt water runoff and calving glacier ice
discharges. The dataset will be used to evaluate and improve melt and runoff
routines for the Community Land Model/Greenland ice sheet model component of the
Community Climate System Model by comparing MODIS reconstructions with CCSM
output. The reconstructed runoff data has the potential to expose deficiencies
in modeled Greenland runoff and will therefore serve as a validation dataset to
direct future ice sheet/land model improvements.