* 0909717
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Importance of Plant Ontogeny for Tri-trophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,12/31/2012
* M. Deane Bowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2012
* USD 8,277.00

Herbivore damage is one of the greatest sources of mortality in plant
populations. As a consequence, plants have evolved a wide array of defenses to
protect themselves from being eaten. However, the production of plant defenses
is costly. Plants are constrained in how they can allocate their resources
throughout plant development (i.e. ontogeny) to various essential functions,
including defense. While recent studies have demonstrated that plant ontogeny
can affect the expression of numerous traits relevant to herbivores, such as
nutritional content and physical and chemical defenses, less attention has been
given to investigating potential indirect effects of this variation on consumer
species. The aim of this project is to assess how variation in plant traits,
such as nutritional value, size, and chemical and physical defenses, throughout
the ontogeny of a host-plant (Plantago lanceolata), can modify its interactions
with a specialist herbivore (Buckeye butterfly, Junonia coenia) and predators of
that herbivore. The investigators will conduct three greenhouse and field
experiments examining where butterflies choose to lay their eggs, caterpillar
performance and caterpillar predation risk at four host plant developmental
stages. This research will document potential ecological and evolutionary
consequences of temporal variation in plant traits on plant-herbivore-predator
dynamics. This knowledge is important for both agricultural systems and
conservation biology. Being able to predict herbivore host selection,
performance, and predation risk on different host plant developmental stages
will help to improve pest management strategies for crops, as well as to develop
better eradication plans for invasive plant species. Several undergraduates will
be trained in ecological research methods in this study, and the researchers
will conduct public outreach to K-12 students and teachers through established
relationships with University of Colorado educational programs.