* 0909834
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Coordination of testosterone-mediated phenotypes and underlying endocrine mechanisms across divergent populations of the dark-eyed junco (J. hyemalis)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Christine Bergeon Burns, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2012
* USD 14,972.00

Hormones simultaneously mediate numerous traits of plants and animals thus
coordinating expression of size, physiology and behavior. When environments
change or new environments are colonized, this common control of traits by
hormones may or may not facilitate adaptation to the altered environment,
depending on the details of hormonal control. In vertebrate animals, the hormone
testosterone (T) has particular importance for traits related to reproduction,
such as ornamentation and aggression. The common control of traits by T may
facilitate adaptation by preserving favorable combinations (e.g., aggression
coupled with ornamentation to simultaneously deter rivals and attract mates) or
delay adaptation if control of a potentially beneficial trait is linked by the
hormone to another trait that would be detrimental. This interplay has important
implications for species evolution and response to climate change, yet we know
surprisingly little about its actual nature. This project will support field and
laboratory research to address whether relationships between T and various
behavioral and morphological traits observed in one sub-species of a songbird,
the dark-eyed junco, can be used to predict the same relationships in another
subspecies that lives in a very different environment. The project will also
examine the underlying physiological mechanisms that may contribute to potential
differences in these relationships, asking whether they vary among individuals
and subspecies. Specifically, hormone manipulations and neural studies with
captive birds will examine hormonal cascades that trigger T release, as well as
hormone receptors that affect T's influence on traits. Consistent co-variation
between T, traits, and physiological mechanisms across subspecies will suggest
that hormone systems evolve as a unit. Alternatively, absence of similarity
across populations will suggest high potential for independent evolution,
allowing hormone systems to diverge more freely or less consistently. The
research will provide numerous opportunities for effective mentorship of diverse
undergraduates, and the findings are expected to contribute to an understanding
of hormone system evolution.