* 0909788
* Dissertation Research:  Climate Change, Range Limits and Adaptive Potential: Latitudinal variation in thermal tolerance in the copepod Tigriopus californicus?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2011
* USD 14,933.00

The rapid pace of climate change threatens many species with extinction. A
species may avoid extinction if it is able to either 1) shift its geographic
distribution to track the changing environment, or 2) evolve greater tolerance
of new conditions. The ability of a species to adapt to a changing environment
will depend on the amount of genetic variation for traits like tolerance of
extreme temperatures. However, very little is known about how much variation
exists for these kinds of traits in nature. The PIs will address these issues
using the shrimp-like tidepool animal, Tigriopus californicus, as a
representative study organism. This tiny marine crustacean lives in upper shore
tidepools along the Pacific coast of North America. The PIs are collecting
Tigriopus from eight sites spanning over 900 miles to establish 30 laboratory
populations. Their experiments will expose these populations to increasing
temperatures for multiple generations, to track the course of population changes
in response to environmental change. These experiments will measure genetic
variation for temperature tolerance and will test the capacity for an
evolutionary response to warming temperatures.

The student PI has been very successful in mentoring undergraduates and will
continue to involve them in the research. This project will add to the
understanding of the role of evolution in contributing to a species' ability to
avoid extinction in the face of climate change. By describing geographic
variation in an important trait, the results of this project will also provide
managers with a valuable decision-making tool when prioritizing habitats and
populations for conservation.