* 0909546
* Collaborative Research: Degrading Offshore Permafrost and Arctic Hydrates as a Current and Potential Source of Methane on the Siberian Arctic Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Igor Semiletov, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 729,043.00

The Arctic region contains a huge amount of organic carbon, referred to as the
Arctic Carbon Hyper Pool, within the Arctic Ocean sedimentary basin. This area
has the highest documented rates of coastal sedimentation with annual
accumulation rates of about 10 million metric tons organic C per year, which
approximately equals the amount of sediment accumulated over the entire pelagic
zone of the World Ocean. Due to the specific features of sedimentation and
lithogenesis in this area, much of this organic carbon survives decomposition,
and is buried within seabed sediments. These sediments are frozen annually or
seasonally, representing a substantial reservoir of potentially labile organic
carbon. Global warming in the arctic region is predicted to be substantial, and
possibly rapid, in next few decades. Upon the melting of permafrost, old stored
carbon will be reintroduced into the modern carbon biogeochemical cycle,
possibly acting as a strong source of methane to the overlying water and
potentially the atmosphere. Additionally, extremely large amounts of more
ancient (Pleistocene) methane are trapped as gas hydrates within and beneath the
permafrost. This research aims to elucidate the present and future methane flux
potential of sediments and permafrost in regions of the East Siberian Arctic
Shelf. As a result of global warming, seafloor permafrost along the East
Siberian Arctic Shelf may experience a pronounced change in thermal regime.
Increased temperature may affect permafrost in several ways, ultimately leading
to its degradation and enhanced CH4 release. An international, interdisciplinary
research team will determine the distribution and stability of permafrost on the
East Siberian Arctic Shelf and evaluate this area as a methane source to the
arctic region. Cores from eleven locations will be obtained using dry drilling
techniques. Rates of biological methane production and consumption (oxidation)
will be quantified in permafrost and sediments at in situ and elevated
temperatures. Natural abundance stable carbon and hydrogen isotope measurements
will be used to quantify the age and source of methane collected from different
sites and depths. These data will be used as input to numerical models, which
will be developed to describe the thermodynamic and biogeochemical aspects of
permafrost methane dynamics. Using field data and modeling, the current and
future potential release of methane from offshore permafrost will be determined
and a methane budget for the East Siberian Arctic Shelf will be constructed.