* 0909800
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  How Ecological, Behavioral, and Morphological Traits have Shaped Diversification Patterns in Assassin Spiders
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,650.00

Assassin spiders have an enigmatic distribution where numerous extinct fossil
lineages are known only from the northern hemisphere and with all living species
being restricted to the southern hemisphere. This distribution could have arisen
if the spiders were once widespread and now only exist as survivors in small
habitat patches on isolated continents. Alternatively, it could be that this
distribution is a result of continental breakup or ancient dispersal. This study
seeks to determine the evolutionary relationship between living and extinct
species, which will enhance understanding of biogeographic and evolutionary
history. Morphological characters of fossil species will be examined using X-ray
scanning techniques with the purpose of placing fossil species into a phylogeny,
a branching diagram of evolutionary relationships.

The current study makes use of a unique opportunity to study a lineage of
spiders with extinct and living species, which includes species radiations that
appear to have arisen at very different periods of time and across multiple
continents. The study will allow assessment of morphological characteristics of
fossil lineages and will examine whether these characteristics can be used to
understand past behaviors in extinct taxa. These discoveries may then be
compared to patterns in other extinct and living organisms to test whether the
patterns are general for earth history. Results of this work will be used in
displays at the California Academy of Sciences.