* 0909330
* Controls on Sea Surface pCO2 Variability and CO2 Uptake in the Western Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wei-Jun Cai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2012
* USD 365,938.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This proposal seeks funding to study carbon cycling and CO2 uptake in the
western Arctic Ocean through participation in the Chinese Arctic Research
Expedition cruise in summer 2010. Surface water pCO2 measurements will be
collected continuously through a high-resolution underway CO2 analyzer that has
already been installed on the Chinese icebreaker Xue Long. Discrete water
samples will be collected and analyzed for pH, dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC),
total alkalinity, and calcium as well as oxygen isotopes, carbon isotopes,
nutrients, dissolved oxygen (and apparent oxygen utilization), chlorophyll-a,
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and particulate organic carbon (POC). These data
will be used to constrain air-sea fluxes of carbon dioxide and their spatial
variability. Key processes under investigation include the uptake of CO2 by
newly exposed surface waters following sea ice melt, and the contribution of
riverine DIC and DOC to the Arctic Ocean net carbon uptake. Each of these
processes is projected to change in a warming Arctic. Understanding carbon
fluxes and the mechanisms controlling them in the Arctic Ocean is a prerequisite
for confident prediction of future changes and climate feedbacks. This project
would build international collaborations in Arctic science and strengthen
Chinese Arctic research efforts. A Ph.D. student at the University of Georgia
would be supported for three years through this project.

