* 0909640
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH -Bird and Bat Effects on Arthropod Densities and Herbivory in Tropical Forest Restoration Sites
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Emily Morrison, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,432.00

Tropical forests are disappearing at a rapid pace. Active restoration, by
planting native vegetation, is an effective strategy to counteract this
deforestation. However, plant-eating insects could cause significant damage to
trees planted for restoration and thus limit the success of restoration sites.
Top predators in an ecosystem, like birds and bats, can have strong direct
effects on the abundance of plant-eating insects and indirect effects on plant
damage caused by those insects. This research examines the effects of bird and
bat consumption of insects in restoration sites by comparing insect abundance
and levels of plant damage between trees that are exposed to bird and bat
predation and trees that are protected. By consuming insects, birds and bats
could provide a significant ecological service which may be of particular
importance to efforts to restore tropical forest by aiding plant survival and
growth.

This research will help improve tropical forest restoration efforts, a critical
component of strategies to conserve biodiversity. restore degraded lands and
maintain ecosystem services such as hydrological cycling and carbon
sequestration. This work will also examine the role of birds and bats as
biological controls of potentially damaging insects, information that will be
relevant for many types of agricultural industries. Collaborations with local
community members and education groups will provide education and training for
the people that live in the study area. Results will be disseminated in English
and Spanish to both general and scientific audiences.