* 0909587
* New Vistas in Porphyrinoid Chemistry: Corrolazine Synthesis and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Goldberg, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports work by Professor David Goldberg at Johns Hopkins University to
carry out fundamental studies on the synthesis and reactivity of a new class of
transition metal porphyrin-like compounds known as corrolazines. Methodology is
being developed to synthesize new metallocorrolazines, focusing on manganese and
iron complexes. The corrolazine ligand is designed to stabilize high oxidation
states, and the synthesis and characterization of high-valent metal-oxo species
are targeted. The metals iron and manganese have been selected for study because
of their widespread use in synthetic catalysts as well as in biologically-
relevant environments such as heme proteins. The reactivity of these species in
oxygen-atom-transfer and hydrogen-atom-transfer reactions is under
investigation. The influence of the corrolazine ligand on the stability and
reactivity of these high-valent metal species is being examined, as well as the
role of ancillary ligands. High-valent metal-oxo complexes and related high
oxidation state species play key roles in a number of catalytic processes and
biological systems, including heme enzymes, but they are difficult to study
because of their inherent instability. The corrolazine platform is designed to
increase their stability and allow for their direct examination, providing
fundamental insights into their spectroscopic properties, reactivity, and
mechanism of action.

Through participation in this fundamental research, students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels are receiving intensive
training in state-of-the-art inorganic and bioinorganic chemical methods. They
are gaining the skills necessary to become independent scientists, such as
formulating and testing hypotheses and analyzing and interpreting experimental
data in a conceptual framework. The knowledge gained from this research should
help in the design of novel synthetic catalysts for industrial processes, and
the research should also provide fundamental insights into biologically-relevant
metalloenzymes.