* 0909762
* Beyond the Double Bind: Women of Color in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Maria Ong, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2014
* USD 899,703.00

This research extends the investigator's prior NSF supported work to develop
theoretical and empirical understanding of the double bind faced by women of
color in STEM fields. That is, their race and gender present dual dilemmas as
they move through STEM educational and career paths. The proposed study will
identify gaps in our understanding, and identify some of the methodological
problems associated with answering outstanding questions about the double bind.
The major research question is: What strategies work to enable women of color to
achieve higher levels of advancement in STEM academia and professions? The goal
is to bring a clearer understanding of the issues which confront women of color
as they pursue study of science and engineering, and what factors influence
whether they leave or remain in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will employ
a highly structured narrative analysis process to identify and quantify factors
that have been successful in broadening the participation of minority women in
STEM. The research design involves two separate tracks of work: 1) to conduct
narrative analysis of primary documents associated with women of color in
science; and 2) to conduct site visits and interviews to understand features of
programs associated with successful support of women of color in undergraduate
and graduate education. The first part is designed to inform the second, with
the narrative analysis helping to identify features to look for in site visits
and to use in development of interview protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will focus on individual and programmatic factors that sustain women of
color as they confront barriers to their career goals. It examines institutional
strategies and support structures that help women of color ultimately to
succeed, and social and pedagogic elements that influence their educational
experiences. Although women of color have made some progress over the last three
decades towards more equitable participation in STEM fields, the major efforts
made to address this issue have not produced the desired outcomes; minority
women continue to be underrepresented relative to white women and non-minority
men. The factors that account for continued lower participation rates are not
yet fully understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the Double Bind is designed
to transform the intellectual basis for building future programs that will
better enable women of color to be successful in STEM. While focused on women of
color, the results will ultimately inform strategies and programs to expand the
presence of all women and minorities in STEM.