* 0909912
* DISERTATION RESEARCH:   Effects of global climate change, loss of mega-herbivore biodiversity, and altered fire regimes on savanna grassland ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,860.00

Intellectual merit. Humans are altering the environment locally and globally
through climate and land use change. Grasslands, which cover approximately one
third of terrestrial lands, are ecologically and economically significant, thus
their responses to environmental change will have dramatic consequences for
productivity, biodiversity, and food production globally. This research consists
of two field experiments. The first investigates how changes in the three main
drivers of mesic grassland ecosystems - precipitation, grazing, and fire -
interact to affect plant community composition, structure, and dynamics in North
America (NA, Konza Prairie, KS) and South Africa (SA, Kruger National Park). The
comparable experimental designs and identical sampling protocols in both NA and
SA will permit generality of findings. The second proposed experiment will
assess how small-scale patch structure and dynamics in SA grasslands respond to
fire along a grazing utilization gradient. This experiment will provide
information to tease apart how fire and grazing intensity alter grass-forb
biodiversity in SA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This
research is directly relevant to the long-term management goals of Kruger
National Park, which has implemented a scientifically driven management plan
built around 'threats of particular concern,' including climate change, fire
management, grazing pressure and biodiversity. In addition, this research is
broadly applicable to mesic grasslands around the world where fire, grazing and
climatic variability interact to affect biodiversity and ecosystem services. All
research in Kruger occurs in collaboration with SANParks Scientific Services
ensuring close communication between scientists and managers. This research will
result in international field experience and collaborative research training for
a young female scientist.