* 0909553
* Extending Applications and Improving Methodology for Luminescence Dating of Archaeological Materials
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* James Feathers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 185,341.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Luminescence dating has become an increasingly useful chronological tool over
the last couple of decades in archaeological and geological sciences. This is
due to methodological developments and an increased perception that luminescence
can provide dating information in contexts that other dating methods cannot. The
luminescence laboratory at the University of Washington is one of the few that
specializes in archaeological applications. With National Science Foundation
support, the laboratory has explored a number of unique applications in the past
and with new support plans to further this research in four areas. 1) Throughout
the western Great Plains and adjoining Rocky Mountains, prehistoric people have
left a number of stone alignments -- some of which are the remnants of hunting
drive lines or blinds, others of which had ritual functions ("medicine wheels"),
and still others of which served as housing support ("tipi rings"). These
alignments are ubiquitous but most have never been dated despite clear
importance for understanding prehistoric settlement and subsistence in this
region. The laboratory has done basic research in dating buried soils and will
apply these methods to dating the sediments under the rocks to the time when the
rocks were emplaced. Preliminary results show great promise and a dating program
at several sites in Wyoming and Montana is being initiated, in collaboration
with University of Arizona, Colorado State University and University of Quebec
in Montreal. 2) Luminescence has recently been applied to rock surfaces to date
their last exposure to sunlight. As an exploratory project, the laboratory
intends to see if the extent of light penetration into exposed rocks, as
measured by their luminescence, can be used to date how long a rock has been
exposed. This would allow dating when a building stone still exposed to sun was
first cut, when lithic material in a quarry was last removed, or when
prehistoric tools of sufficient size were flaked to form a finished tool. This
work, using samples from a Colorado quarry, is in collaboration with a private
technological firm in Colorado and with another luminescence laboratory in
Scotland. 3) The laboratory has been trying to perfect using optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) as an improved method for dating fine-grained
prehistoric ceramics over the traditional thermoluminescence (TL). The
laboratory has been applying pulsed OSL as a way to eliminate signal components
which can lead to age underestimation, and will be undertaking analyses to
better understand the pulsed signal in ceramics. This work is in collaboration
with another laboratory in South Africa. 4) The laboratory has a multi-year
program dating paleoindian sites in Brazil as part of a larger project, in
conjunction with the University of SÃ£o Paulo, to better understand early human
habitation in South America. The dating work has employed single-grain dating in
an attempt to identify sediment mixing. Current research is aimed at better
understanding how a date can be obtained from single grains. While this research
is aimed at specific applications, the methodological developments can have much
broader implications both for luminescence dating in general and for
archaeology. All four areas of research can be applied in other areas of
archaeology. The laboratory also serves an instructional role at the University
of Washington and the current NSF support should provide a number of students
with employment.