* 0909807
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of craniodental function in Hyaenidae and Canidae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Jack Tseng, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2011
* USD 14,853.00

This research project aims to understand how living and extinct carnivores
evolved skulls and jaws powerful enough to consume the hardest parts of their
prey, the bones. The evolutionary records of hyenas and dogs are used to
document the evolution of teeth, jaws and skulls required for crushing bones.
The approach used in this research project is a novel integration of four
methods: (1) geometric analysis of the skull shapes of different types of hyenas
and dogs, (2) 3-D computer modeling of stresses occurring in the skull during
bone-cracking bites, (3) microscopic analysis of fine structures of hyena and
dog teeth and (4) documentation of surface damage done to the teeth during bone-
crushing by those living and extinct carnivores. The importance of this research
to the field of ecology and evolutionary biology include an improvement in our
understanding of the ecological roles of large bone-crushing carnivores and
information to help better manage the natural food webs remaining on Earth
through better management of top predators. The broader impacts of the research
findings and methods employed in this project include engaging students and
museum visitors in the excitement of the natural sciences through public
outreach programs. In addition, college students from different fields of study
will collaborate in team projects. Lastly, research findings on non-human
systems will allow for improved design in human craniofacial surgery and dental
replacement biomaterials.