* 0909661
* A Longitudinal Study of the Effects of K-8 Mathematics Teacher Preparation on Teacher Knowledge, Teaching Practices, and Student Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* James Hiebert, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2016
* USD 1,983,506.00

The five-year project seeks to: (1) refine a developing theory of teacher
preparation; (2) examine empirically the relationships among teacher
preparation, teacher learning, teaching practice, and student learning; and (3)
understand the conditions under which teachers use the knowledge and skills
acquired during preparation and during their first few years of teaching to
improve their practice. Utilizing a longitudinal design and following two
cohorts of teachers as they transition from mathematics teacher preparation
programs into classroom teaching, the project will study how preparation
programs, field conditions, and selected contextual variables affect the
implementation of effective classroom mathematics teaching. Research methods
will include a planned mix of controlled experiments, small-sample replications,
and case studies. Data collection will include both large-sample written
assessments and small-sample recurring observations and interviews. By focusing
on selected rational number topics and the middle grades 7-8, researchers will
compare the effects of two different preparation programs, one designed for
elementary/middle school (grades K-8) and the other for secondary school (grades
7-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the fundamental issue of how
teachers can be taught to teach effectively from the preservice to the inservice
stage. Its longitudinal aspect involves documenting growth in effective
mathematics teaching from the time participants are in schools as preservice
undergraduate education majors to many years after when they are in schools as
professional, inservice mathematics teachers. The project takes the view that
effective mathematics teaching in the schools does not only require
strengthening teachers' mathematics content but also addressing ways in which
they can be supported in dealing with contextual variables (institutional
constraints) that either hinder or support effective implementation of effective
teaching practices. The project also addresses the following controversial issue
facing mathematics teacher education research today: Does having more
mathematics content (in the case of secondary mathematics majors) than
mathematical content knowledge for teaching mathematics (in the case of
elementary and middle school majors) a sufficient condition for effectively
teaching mathematics (and vice-versa), in particular, fractions?