* 0909378
* CNH:  Towards an Integrated Framework for Climate Change Impact Assessments for International Market Systems with Long-Term Investments
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Julie Winkler, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,499,763.00

Climate change is expected to have a substantial influence on a broad spectrum
of natural and human systems, yet many of the methods and approaches currently
used to evaluate the impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability to climate change
are insufficient. The large majority of climate change assessments have focused
on how a local/regional process or system may be affected by a perturbed
climate. These traditional assessments usually have not explicitly considered
the evolution over time of individual system components, such as climate, other
biophysical factors, economic impacts, individual decision-making, and policy
formulation. Few assessments have examined temporal changes in the interactions
among these components, and traditional assessments typically have not
incorporated geographic differences in potential impacts and the interactions
among geographic regions. International market systems are characterized by
multiple production regions distributed worldwide that are likely to be
differentially impacted by climate change. Furthermore, the temporal evolution
of the linkages among production regions via international trade needs to be
realistically considered along with geographic differences in adaptation
strategies and policies. Given these demanding requirements, few industry-wide
assessments have been attempted that emphasize the need for enhanced methods for
evaluating the potential impacts of climate change on international industries.
This international collaborative research project will develop and evaluate an
integrated framework for climate change assessments for international market
systems that simultaneously and explicitly considers spatial and temporal
dynamics of natural and human systems at multiple scales from the local to the
global and from the individual to an industry. The investigators will pay
special emphasis to industries with long-term investments, with much of their
attention given to studies of the tart cherry industry in the central U.S. and
central Europe. They will combine dynamic modeling of temporally evolving system
components with static modeling for those components where dynamic modeling is
not feasible. A chain of linked models will assess the potential impact of a
changing climate on a market system for each of a series of future time slices;
succeeding time slices will be connected by projections in adaptation options,
economic factors such as consumer preferences, and regional development
patterns. The model chain will include a hybrid approach to the downscaling of
future climate projections, a production model, an individual-level decision-
making model, and an international trade model. Numerous technical and
implementation challenges will be investigated and addressed using an example
industry involving a specialized perennial agricultural commodity as proof of
concept. In addition to the technical advances made possible by the proposed
framework, this research will contribute to the development and growth of a
diverse pool of undergraduate and graduate students with expertise in
international, interdisciplinary research and will provide informal education to
the general public on potential impacts of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance basic understanding of
the potential impacts of climate variability and change on dynamic, interactive
worldwide activities and systems. It will enhance methodologies for the
assessment of climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, it will
improve the characterizations of past, current, and future climates, and it will
incorporate individual decision making and adaptation into assessment processes.
It also will provide a novel approach for evaluating the overall uncertainty, or
"meta-uncertainty," of assessment outcomes. More broadly, the framework
developed by the project can potentially be transformative in terms of how
climate change assessments are conducted, and it could help shape international
environmental policy formulation to take into account the spatial interactions
of worldwide activities. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.