* 0909139
* Materials World Network: Experimental Observation and Theoretical Modeling of Domain Evolution in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chad Landis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric ceramics have unique
properties, including piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, the electro-optic
effect, phase change, and polarization switching. These special properties make
them useful for a wide range of technological applications. For example, medical
ultrasound scanners, random access memories, infrared camera sensors, electro-
optic modulators, sonar beacons, vibration controllers, and diesel engine fuel
injectors all make use of ferroelectric materials. The proposed research program
will advance the field of experimental and theoretical characterization of the
behavior of ferroelectric materials. Experimental and theoretical methods
developed in this program will be applicable to the study of other "smart"
materials including shape memory alloys and ferromagnetic shape memory alloys.
Through this research, doctoral students will be trained in a collaborative
project with international activity: students will train at University of Texas,
Austin, and University of Oxford (UK). To broaden participation from
underrepresented groups the principal investigators will continue their track
record of leveraging institutional resources to recruit women and minority
students. The research will ultimately benefit society by developing a
fundamental understanding of the behavior ferroelectric materials, which will
support and stimulate the design of novel ferroelectric devices for numerous and
diverse technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The merit of this
Materials World Network international collaborative research program originates
from the joint application of state of the art experimental characterization (in
the UK) and theoretical modeling (in the US) of domain structure nucleation,
growth and evolution in single crystal ferroelectric ceramics. To date there
have been several outstanding experimental and theoretical studies on
ferroelectric crystals, but none of these studies has systematically integrated
experimental observations that can critically test model predictions with a
modeling framework that is, in turn, able to suggest innovative experimental
studies. The experimental component of the research uses atomic and piezo-force
microscopy, X-ray sychrotron, and birefringence methods to directly observe
ferroelectric domain structure evolution under thermal, electrical and
mechanical loadings. Each experimental configuration is also studied and
interpreted through the lens of detailed numerical solutions of the Landau-
Ginsburg-Devonshire phase-field equations. The studies focus on two categories:
(1) evolution of existing structures including isolated domain walls subjected
to static and alternating fields, and the evolution of domain needles and domain
vortices, and (2) the nucleation of domain structures due to cooling through the
Curie temperature, and from field concentrators like electrode tips and material
inclusions. During the course of the research, two doctoral students will be
trained in a strongly collaborative project with international activity. Each
student will spend six months in the counterpart institution, with these
exchanges timed to allow the research students to work together and thus gain
expertise in both theoretical and experimental methods. The detailed
experimental characterization and predictive modeling of domain structure
evolution from this research will support and stimulate the design of the next
generation of novel ferroelectric devices.