* 0909539
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: When edges meet: Interacting edge effects in an African savanna
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Ecological edges are transition zones between adjacent environments (e.g.,
forest and field). Plants, animals and other entities respond strongly to edges,
and these responses are not static. In fact, responses to a given edge can
change dramatically depending on what environments are nearby, and how these
environments are configured in space. In particular, responses can be altered by
the presence and configuration of other, nearby edges. Worldwide increases in
anthropogenic habitat fragmentation motivate an improved understanding of edge
interactions. As landscapes become more fragmented or patchy, edges become more
tightly packed, and edge interactions become more important. This research will
therefore focus on understanding edge interactions and their implications for
the management of fragmented landscapes.

This research is located in a Kenyan savanna ecosystem, where livestock coexist
with diverse and abundant wildlife. New livestock management practices are
increasing the patchiness of this working savanna. Using large-scale
manipulative experiments, this study will investigate the prevalence, causes,
and consequences (for plants, wildlife and livestock) of edge interactions in
the increasingly patchy landscape. Results will provide an integrated
understanding of edge interactions in a model system, and will improve
conservation, restoration and management efforts in fragmented landscapes
worldwide. Locally, findings will be discussed with managers and community
members via newsletter publications, presentations, workshops, and an online
forum. This study will also involve the education of three Kenyan field
assistants, a Kenyan Masters student, and local elementary school students.