* 0909165
* Modeling, Analysis and Applications of Coupled Elasticity and Liquid Crystal Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 437,547.00

Calderer&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0909165&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project deals with
modeling and analysis of&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric liquid crystals and hydrogels,
with the goal of&lt;br/&gt;studying switching and hysteresis of devices made of
such&lt;br/&gt;materials. The project on liquid crystals focuses on
newly&lt;br/&gt;discovered bent core ferroelectric phases that are capable
of&lt;br/&gt;sustaining polarization fields of just one order of
magnitude&lt;br/&gt;below that of traditional solid ferroelectric compounds.
The&lt;br/&gt;goal of the work on hydrogels is to model a cyclic
membrane&lt;br/&gt;appropriate for application to the design of pulsating
drug&lt;br/&gt;delivery devices. Such types of elastic membranes are also
very&lt;br/&gt;relevant to the study of fuel cells and filtrating devices.
Both&lt;br/&gt;problems share distinctive phenomenology and mathematical
issues,&lt;br/&gt;such as presenting a first order phase transition
behavior&lt;br/&gt;between two distinguished states. In ferroelectric
liquid&lt;br/&gt;crystals, they correspond to the oppositely polarized states
with&lt;br/&gt;distinct optical properties; a main goal is to optimize
the&lt;br/&gt;switching speed between them. Understanding and
controlling&lt;br/&gt;hysteresis may help achieve optimal switching. This
also&lt;br/&gt;requires a good understanding of the rheology of bent core
liquid&lt;br/&gt;crystal flow. Mathematical issues involve non-
convexity,&lt;br/&gt;metastability, and coupling of Maxwell's equations with
fluid&lt;br/&gt;flow and elasticity. Overall, ferroelectricity is an area
of&lt;br/&gt;liquid crystals rich in phenomenology, modeling, and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;challenges that remain largely unexplored.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; It is often the case that seemingly disparate problems
of&lt;br/&gt;science and technology have common mathematical underpinnings.
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator addresses two of
these&lt;br/&gt;problems, with applications in pharmacology and fuel cells
as&lt;br/&gt;well as in optical devices, such as video and high speed
Internet&lt;br/&gt;switching. The underlying idea is the modeling and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;study of "switching," with the goal of designing faster
and more&lt;br/&gt;efficient devices. In pharmaceutical applications, a
switch&lt;br/&gt;connects the two relevant states: release and non-release of
the&lt;br/&gt;drug to be administered. A goal of the investigator is to
model&lt;br/&gt;a cyclic drug delivery membrane. Such periodically
releasing&lt;br/&gt;devices are believed to be especially relevant in
hormone&lt;br/&gt;therapies, where matching the natural body hormone cycle
is&lt;br/&gt;perhaps as important as the replacement hormone itself.
In&lt;br/&gt;proton exchange membrane fuel cells, positive hydrogen
ions&lt;br/&gt;produced at the anode travel through the membrane,
separating&lt;br/&gt;from the fuel and yielding electrons. A ferroelectric
switch&lt;br/&gt;connects optically distinct states. In these examples,
energy&lt;br/&gt;loss is a common feature of switching dynamics, together
with&lt;br/&gt;cycle lengthening in periodic devices. This phenomenon, known
as&lt;br/&gt;hysteresis, occurs in many mechanical and magnetic systems.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator harnesses the mathematical knowledge of
hysteresis&lt;br/&gt;in other fields as an approach to understanding
pharmacological&lt;br/&gt;and liquid crystal devices. Mentoring of graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students as well as other educational activities
is&lt;br/&gt;intertwined and integrated with the research aspects of the work.