* 0909091
* Materials World Network-- Ultrafast Switching of Phase Change Materials: Combined Nanosecond and Nanometer Exploration
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bryan Huey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 312,000.00

This Materials World Network focuses on Non-volatile Phase Change Memory (PCM)
is a promising alternative for future data storage systems, as it is more scale-
able and requires less power than present technologies. Understanding and
controlling the materials science of the phase change process while writing data
is of particular importance, as it defines the ultimate operational speed and is
fundamental to surmounting challenges with stored data accuracy and longevity.
To investigate these issues, this joint effort between the University of
Connecticut and Lancaster University in the UK leverages complementary expertise
at both sites in nanometer- and nanosecond- scale property measurements. In
addition to a semester abroad for the supported students, teaching modules on
the topic will be developed for local high school teachers, and two
international scientific symposia as well as a special journal issue will be
organized on the topic of this sponsored research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present
data storage systems are based on technologies that are difficult to scale,
relatively slow, and/or energy inefficient given future storage requirements.
Non-volatile Phase Change Memory (PCM), based on resistance changes for locally
switchable crystalline vs. amorphous states, is a promising alternative. The
materials science of this switching process is therefore of tremendous
importance, especially the dynamics of nucleation and growth which defines
ultimate switching speeds and is implicated in challenges with bit retention,
fidelity, and fatigue. To investigate these issues, this joint US/UK effort
leverages complementary expertise in quantitative electronic, mechanical, and
thermal property measurements at the necessary nanometer and nanosecond scales.
Accordingly, switching will be initiated electrically, thermally, and optically,
and the switching pattern, speed, and mechanisms will be quantified by several
variations of scanning probe microscopy as a function of composition,
processing, and switching cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program features a
semester abroad for the supported students, faculty exchanges, round-robin
measurements, and extensive industrial collaboration. During the award, the PI?s
will develop hands-on teaching modules for local high school teachers, jointly
organize two international symposia, and co-edit a special journal issue on the
topics of nanocharacterization and next-generation memory devices.&lt;br/&gt;