* 0909002
* Materials World Network: Dynamic Materials with Triggerable Adhesion Motifs
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2009,10/31/2013
* Andres Garcia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2013
* USD 306,000.00

This Materials World Network award by the Biomaterials program and the Office of
Special Program in the Division of Materials Research to Georgia Institute of
Technology supports an international collaboration for research and education
between Georgia Tech (USA) and the Max-Planck Institut fur Polymerforschung
(Germany). The objective of this project is to engineer phototriggerable
materials to dynamically present and/or release bioadhesive motifs via the use
of UV-labile caged bioadhesive ligands, which are expected to provide precise
control over cell-material interactions both in vitro and in vivo. The project
is to develop two biomaterial platforms (surfaces, hydrogels) with triggerable
adhesive arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) tripeptide ligands in order to
investigate the effects of spatiotemporal adhesion in cell processes. A major
and unique strength of the proposed work is the ongoing international
collaboration integrating photocaged chemistry and biomaterials engineering. The
overall objective will be accomplished by completing the following specific
aims: a) synthesize surfaces presenting caged RGD peptides that are activated or
inactivated via exposure to UV light to spatiotemporally modulate cell adhesion;
b) analyze the role of temporal ligand presentation on cell proliferation and
differentiation on bioadhesive surfaces; c) engineer hydrogels presenting caged
RGD peptides that exhibit spatiotemporal control of in vivo cell adhesion. These
phototriggerable materials are expected to have wide-spread applications in
basic-science studies of cell function as well as dynamic, tunable implants for
tissue repair and regeneration.

The proposed research will generate a general biomaterial strategy for precise
spatiotemporal control of biological functionalities. These innovative
biomaterials will then be used to provide new insights on cell-biomaterial
interactions in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the focus on engineering
triggerable hydrogels provides a pathway for translation into many
biotechnological and biomedical applications. Because of these strengths, the
proposed research will be highly transformative. Finally, this project will also
strengthen the ongoing collaboration by enabling significant interactions and
expanding research activities. The research will result in the advanced training
of undergraduate and graduate researchers, including an underrepresented
minority student from Georgia Tech, with unique analytical skills based on a
multi-disciplinary, integrative perspective.