* 0909678
* Unsteady Flow Phenomena in Models of Curved Arteries with Stents
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2008,08/31/2011
* Michael Plesniak, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2011
* USD 240,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CBET - 0729995&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: Plesniak,
Michael W.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Polytechnic University of New
York&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unsteady Flow Phenomena in Models of Curved Arteries
with Stents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimental study will examine the effects
of perturbations to the Stokes layer on secondary flow structures in a curved
pipe subjected to pulsatile flow. This work is motivated by issues associated
with the insertion of stents to structurally reinforce arteries treated by
angioplasty in patients with stenoses (blockages) resulting from the
progressive, degenerative cardiovascular disease atherosclerosis. Heart disease
is the number one killer of men and women in the US and developed countries
world-wide. Medical procedures performed in the US to treat atherosclerosis cost
tens of billions of dollars annually. A simplified model with the relevant
features of a stent in a curved vessel will be constructed and probed with non-
invasive optical velocimetry techniques including LDV and PIV. It is
hypothesized that the orientation and position of the stent relative to the
walls will affect the secondary flows in the curved vessels, which will impact
cellular biochemical signaling that is responsible for vascular
remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed study is to develop
an understanding of the sensitivity/receptivity of viscous layers leading to
pulsatile secondary flows in curved pipes (representative of curved arteries
which are ubiquitous in the body). The forcing functions to be employed are
based on physiologically relevant waveforms that are considerably more complex
than simple sinusoidal forcing previously used in the relatively few studies of
pulsatile flow in curved pipes. The rapid accelerations and decelerations of the
flow, which are characteristics of blood pumped by the heart during systole and
diastole, produce a richness of flow physics. In terms of broader applicability
to fluid dynamics, such perturbations may be considered as passive flow control
in curved pipes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed study
include societal, educational, and technological components. The underlying
societal motivation is combating heart disease. Not only is the price high in
terms of mobidity and mortality, but the economic impact of necessary medical
procedures is tremendous. Another societal broader impact of this program will
be to promote participation of students from underrepresented groups. Because of
its urban setting in Brooklyn, Polytechnic University has many programs in place
to attract underrepresented groups. For example, Polytechnic''s PROMISE FUND has
given disadvantaged high school students the opportunity to attend work with
faculty on research projects during the summer. The PI is actively involved to
engage Polytechnic University as a partner in the NSF-funded Central New York-
Puerto Rico Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) project
intended to significantly increase the number of domestic students receiving
doctoral degrees in the sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM), with special emphasis on underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the Biomedical Engineering, Particulate and
Multiphase processes, and Thermal Transport Processes Programs.&lt;br/&gt;