* 0909515
* CNH: Hyper-Extractive Economies and Sustainability: Policy Scenarios for Sustainable Water Use in the High Plains Aquifer
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Stephen Welch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,499,999.00

Southwest Kansas sits on the Ogallala Aquifer, one of world's largest
underground sources of freshwater, which is also quickly becoming a depleted
natural resource. The hyper-extractive economic system of Southwest Kansas
survives and thrives by externalizing the costs of production, at every step
along the production chain, onto society, the economy, and natural systems of
the region. Hyper-extractive practices produce economic and resource path
dependencies, which when placed in relation with global processes such as
international migration and the emergence of global commodity chains, shape
future patterns of population growth and economic development.

Our research asks which changes in the parameters of irrigated agriculture will
produce sustainable uses of the aquifer without jeopardizing the region's
economy. To model this system, we use an integrated, cross-disciplinary, system-
level, theoretical approach developed by the Consortium for Global Research on
Water-Based Economies at KSU By linking land and water use patterns, economic
trends and population dynamics to issues of sustainability, we focus on 1)
accurately modeling the current hyper-extractive system, 2) forecasting the
outcome of possible policy approaches to transition the current system toward
possible paths that are more sustainable for the social, economic and natural
systems of the groundwater-based economies of the High Plains Aquifer, and 3)
communicating the model's outcomes to stakeholders and policy-makers for the
purpose of developing legislation to implement policy changes designed to
enhance sustainability.

This holistic, interdisciplinary approach has broad application to other hyper-
extractive economic systems in the High Plains, Africa, Asia, and South America.
It will help researchers, students and stakeholders representing different
fields and interest areas to work together on commonly-discussed but differently
interpreted concepts such as sustainability and path dependence. Collaboration
with the Steward County Community College will bring in underrepresented groups
and help disseminating knowledge and interdisciplinary perspective on
environmental stewardship at the local level. The involvement of researchers,
educators, students, elected leaders and stakeholders ensures the development of
a healthy dialogue about sustainability issues and the possibility of changing
policy to implement some combination of reforms to enhance regional
sustainability. This project will create synergies for research, education and
infrastructure development with the Kansas NSF EPSCoR Ecoforecasting project.