* 0909475
* CNH:   Fires in Western Amazonia: Understanding and Modeling the Roles of Climatic, Social, Demographic, and Land-Use Change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Christine Padoch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,292,040.00

Large fires escaped from fields and pastures have become common dry season
events ravaging forests, farms, and settlements in much of Amazonia. Such
destructive fires have recently become a major problem along the upper Ucayali
River in the lowland Peruvian Amazon where burning has been used for centuries
to manage agricultural fields, and more recently, to clear and clean pastures.
While still largely mosaics of small agricultural fields, diverse gardens and
extensive mature forests, these landscapes are being rapidly transformed by
clearing for large-scale plantation agriculture (especially biofuel production),
by extensive ranching, and by new smaller-scale land uses. This project will
investigate processes of change in land use, migration, urbanization, and
climate and their links to the probability of changes in the incidence, size and
severity of escaped fires using the tools of the natural, social, and
atmospheric sciences. The project goal is to identify whether and how changes in
(1) the pattern and scale of land uses, (2) accelerating immigration from other
regions, (3) rural-urban migration patterns, and (4) regional climatic patterns,
particularly shifts in seasonality, interact to alter fire use, fire spread,
fire control, and losses due to uncontrolled burns. Models will link these
multiple, complex, and non-linear processes to change in the probability of
uncontrolled fires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in better
understanding of how biological, social, and atmospheric processes are coupled
to alter the danger of fire damage in complex and rapidly evolving tropical
landscapes. The work will have implications not only for much of Amazonia, but
also for other tropical developing regions. Results will help policy makers,
communities, and farmers avert even more fire catastrophes expected with global
climate change, and they will help guide appropriate resource use and
management. The models will also be used to evaluate the implications of
different policies and to suggest specific policy interventions. Activities will
be specifically designed to disseminate results and recommendations to
policymakers, local scientists and technicians, students, and members of local
communities. These will include informal meetings, production of informative and
didactic materials, training courses, and other outreach media. Three
postdoctoral scientists will be trained in these interdisciplinary research
methods, and numerous undergraduate and graduate students are expected to be
involved in the project.