* 0909338
* CNH: Collaborative Research: Climate Change and Responses in a Coupled Marine System
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Sylvia Brandt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 04/30/2015
* USD 174,997.00

a) Technical description:

The project focuses on the surf clam (Spisula solidissima) populations of the
Mid-Atlantic and southern New England waters of the Atlantic coast and the
fishery and governance system surrounding this shellfish resource, within the
framework of adaptive and cooperative management of complex and dynamic coupled
systems. The two overarching questions are (1) how climate forcing affects surf
clam populations; and (2) how the current socio-economic and regulatory aspects
of the coupled system adjust to the perceived and documented effects of climate
change. Heretofore climate forcing has not been considered as a variable in the
scientific models used in surf clam management. The project will introduce the
environmental aspects of climate forcing through a set of interconnected
mathematical and schematic models that allow evaluation of potential outcomes
that result from climate forcing. The work builds upon two models developed by
this team, a genetics-based population dynamics model and a coupled circulation-
larval model, which will be modified for the specifics of surf clams. Outcomes
of the modeling will be available to the formal stock assessment process, which
in turn informs management and industry decisions. The fishery component of the
coupled system and its responses to direct effects of climate forcing as well as
management rules will be studied from social science perspectives, but
integrated with the biophysical analyses. Of particular interest are ways that
the changing environmental conditions change individual and collective behavior
in the fishery and that behavior of industry and managerial actors feeds back
into the biological system. A spatial choice analysis will model industry
responses to changes in clam distribution and abundance. Experimental economics
will be used to assess what factors are important to achieving collective action
in response to changes in the fishery. Ethnographic techniques will be used to
explore the roles of knowledge?particularly scientific and lay models, including
the scenarios generated in this project?and social and economic relationships in
private and collective decisions about responding to the effects of climate
change in the fishery.

b) Significance and importance:

Marine fisheries are influenced by relationships among climate, oceanographic
conditions, biology, fishing industries, and social, economic, and political
institutions. This project responds to the need for greater understanding of
these complexities in order to redress the cumulative problems related to
overfishing, climate change, and environmental stressors. The issues are
interdisciplinary in nature; collaborative research on interaction among these
components is therefore critical to the larger goal of developing governance
institutions that are informed by the best available science.

Of specific interest are the effects of climate change on a marine fishery and
how those effects are perceived, interpreted, and responded to by scientists and
by actors in the public and private sectors. Those human responses then modify
the future outcomes in the fishery. The fishery of interest for this study, the
surf clam (Spisula solidissima) fishery of the Mid-Atlantic Bight, has suffered
a population decline that appears to be a result of climate warming. The study
will develop a comprehensive mechanistic description of response to climate
change by a dominant member of a biological community, the surf clam. The
dominant member of a biological community is the cornerstone of that community
as it evolves over geological time, and such cornerstone species are seminal to
community stability and long-term resource availability. The study focuses on a
particular fishery to develop a new paradigm that can be utilized in a broad
arena from terrestrial to freshwater and marine systems.

A mechanistic description of change in the species due to climate change will be
coupled with the models of the human system. The human system will incorporate
the social, economic, and political factors that drive the decisions in the
fishing industry and regulatory agency. Using this approach we will characterize
how the coupled system evolves and explore management options. For example how
does increased uncertainty from climate change modify the incentives of market-
based regulations? How are the outcomes changed when there is spatial
differentiation of the population that is exaggerated by climate change? Is the
sustainability of the species different when the fishing industry has a strong
presence in decision-making? The project will enhance the ability of private and
public sector groups to effectively respond to the increasing effects of
climate-induced changes.

The use of state-of-the-art oceanographic and ecological modeling approaches
that are linked to economic and social approaches provides opportunities to
train students in a variety of disciplines. The proposed work presents a unique
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
investigators to be trained in the variety of approaches that are needed to
solve many of the important problems affecting marine systems. The educational
component is integrated with the research and builds on an existing K-12
educational program and outreach with specialized communities such as the
commercial fishery.