* 0909733
* The Development of Computational Thinking among Middle School Students Creating Computer Games
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,092,908.00

This is a research project that would contribute to further understanding of
STEM teaching and learning in informal settings by conceptualizing and measuring
computational thinking for middle school students. Three research questions will
be addressed: 1) What is an appropriate definition of computational thinking in
middle school? 2) Does creating a computer game promote computational thinking?
3) Under what conditions does pair programming produce greater gains in
computational thinking than solo programming? The study will be conducted over
three years. Approximately 240 students will use Storytelling Alice to create
3-D animation games over 16 weeks. Participants will be drawn from extended
learning programs in two school districts that include primarily Latino and
white students. Classes will be randomly assigned to either pair or solo
programming conditions. Paired students will choose their partners and
statistical analyses designed for longitudinal dyadic interdependent data will
be conducted. Data will include pre and post-test surveys, interviews, computer
logging data, observations, students games, videotape, and performance
assessments. They will also employ a group-randomized controlled trial;
randomization will be by class to either a pair programming or solo programming
condition. The qualitative and quantitative data will measure computational
thinking, students experience programming, closeness with partner, affect, and
behavior on the computer. The project will produce evidence about the strength
of working in pairs compared with working on technology games alone and it is
intended to inform discussions of the meaning of computational thinking.