* 0909289
* The Study of Social Impacts of Tourism in Finnmark, Norway
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Joseph Chen, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2012
* USD 275,139.00

This research examines social change related to tourism development in the
Finnmark region of Norway. The proposed study site is one of the most visited
Arctic destinations in Europe, as well as one of the most popular and
established. Data will be gathered on the perspectives of local residents,
business managers, and tourists. The inclusion of these three key stakeholders
in the project will provide the researcher with a more representative sample
from which to examine the impacts of tourism than is typical of studies of this
kind, which focus primarily on the tourism experience. It is the PI's contention
that new theories about tourism and new analytical frameworks may emerge from
this more holistic approach to sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
methodology is both qualitative and quantitative data gathering among residents,
business managers, and tourists in Alta, Kirkenes, Karasjok, North Cape (the
most visited destination in Finnmark), Hammerfest, Honningsvag, and BÃ¥tsfjord.
In the first stage of the research in-depth interviews and focus groups will be
conducted in different locations to derive impact-related attributes. Those
attributes will be integrated into a close-ended questionnaire for survey
research. In addition, mail and on-site surveys will be deployed to measure
opinions of tourism development from a large sample of tourism stakeholders in
Finnmark. From the collected data, the PI will develop a tourism impact scale
that moves beyond the traditional studies of tourism that focus on tourists'
experiences and local concerns and will tease out the impacts among local
residents, businesses, and policy makers, as well as tourists. One of the
results of the research will be a tool for assessing social impacts and to
measure social change due to tourism on a regional
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a growing industry in the Arctic, tourism is a
fertile subject for social scientific inquiry. This project brings a well
established field of tourism research into the Arctic and works to solidify a
growing international research network in this field. Through the practical
collaboration with tourism scholars and practitioners from the study region, the
project will facilitate the growth of an education and research collaboration
between US and Norwegian tourism scholars. Also, the host communities where the
research will commence will have a more holistic understanding of the impacts of
tourism development through the planned outreach and public informational
activities planned by the PI and associates. The PI envisions that this project
will provide northern stakeholders with the necessary tools to assess the
impacts, both positive and negative, of tourism on their communities and that
these tools will be shared among Arctic communities who seek information about
tourism business development as a viable alternative for both sustaining the
natural environment and escalating living standards.