* 0909265
* Understanding the physical properties of Northern Greenland near-surface snow: A spatial variability study
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 485,959.00

This award will support an investigation of the physical properties and state of
snow and firn along a traverse from Thule to Summit Greenland. The 'Intellectual
Merit' of the study relates to the fact that the Greenland Ice Sheet is an
important indicator of the response of the cryosphere to climate and, since the
ice sheet contains enough water to raise sea level by 7 meters if it were all to
melt, understanding the state of the ice sheet is critically important to
scientists, policy-makers and society at large. The scientists will accompany
the resupply traverse from Thule to Summit, and make detailed observations of
grain size, density and stratigraphy in 1 m deep snow pits and 10 m deep
boreholes in firn along a route that crosses all the facies (ablation facies,
soaked facies, percolation facies, dry snow facies) of the ice sheet. Techniques
to be applied in the field include near infra-red photography, borehole optical
stratigraphy and a neutron-scattering probe. A ground-penetrating radar operated
along the traverse will provide stratigraphic data that links the stratigraphic
information obtained in the snow pits and boreholes. Two shallow ice cores
obtained at the beginning and end of the traverse, and snow samples, will be
returned to the laboratory for examination of microstructure using micro-
computed tomography and brightness temperature using optical and near-infra-red
photography. The microstructure results will be used as input to a radiative
transfer model and the brightness temperature will be used for validation of the
simulations. The study has a variety of 'Broader Impacts'. The traverse lies
very close to traverses made in 1952-55 when studies of snow and firn properties
established the concept of glaciers facies; a comparison of those results with
those of this study will provide valuable insights into changes that have
occurred in this region since the mid-1950s. The characterization of the spatial
variability of the physical properties of surface and near-surface snow also has
application to the interpretation of remote sensing data, which are essential to
mapping surface melting across the entire ice sheet. The study will involve a
graduate student participant in the Dartmouth College Integrated Graduate
Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program - 'Polar Environmental
Change' - and develop a series of snow-science-themed activities designed for a
four week after-school program for grades 3 and 4 at the Montshire Museum of
Science. The activities will be run by Dartmouth students trained by museum
staff in inquiry-based, hands-on activities. The principal investigators are
both early-career scientists.