* 0909021
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Knotting Phenomena in Contact and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Lisa Traynor, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 226,221.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0909273,
DMS-0909021&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Joshua M. Sabloff, Lisa
Traynor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators propose to investigate flexibility&lt;br/&gt;and
rigidity questions that are central to the character of&lt;br/&gt;symplectic and
contact topology by exploring knotting phenomena&lt;br/&gt;of Lagrangian and
Legendrian submanifolds. Approaching&lt;br/&gt;symplectic and contact geometry
through a topological lens has&lt;br/&gt;given rise to a young and thriving
discipline with interesting&lt;br/&gt;questions that explore the boundary
between flexibility (when the&lt;br/&gt;symplectic world behaves topologically)
and rigidity (when the&lt;br/&gt;symplectic world behaves geometrically). In
particular, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;plan to study the Arnold Conjecture for Legendrian
submanifolds,&lt;br/&gt;squeezing phenomena for Lagrangian disks, and the
cobordism&lt;br/&gt;theory of Lagrangian submanifolds. Special attention will
be&lt;br/&gt;paid to Legendrian knots in contact 3-manifolds and
Lagrangian&lt;br/&gt;surfaces in symplectic 4-manifolds. The methods used
in&lt;br/&gt;addressing the aforementioned problems are of interest in
their&lt;br/&gt;own right. On one hand, the PIs plan to develop and
use&lt;br/&gt;pseudo-holomorphic techniques initiated by Gromov and Floer,
and&lt;br/&gt;expanded to the Symplectic Field Theory (SFT) framework
by&lt;br/&gt;Eliashberg, Givental, and Hofer. On the other, the PIs plan
to&lt;br/&gt;develop and use generating family techniques.
Investigations&lt;br/&gt;into the structure of the holomorphic and the
generating family&lt;br/&gt;based invariants will yield insight into geometric
flexibility&lt;br/&gt;and rigidity; making connections between these different
types of&lt;br/&gt;invariants will increase understanding of
each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic and contact topology have their roots in
physics as&lt;br/&gt;the language of classical mechanics and geometric optics.
While&lt;br/&gt;remaining in touch with those roots, symplectic and
contact&lt;br/&gt;topology have blossomed into a central mathematical field
that&lt;br/&gt;combines features of geometry (the science of measurement)
and&lt;br/&gt;topology (the study of the shape of space). This field has
a&lt;br/&gt;variety of applications including fluid mechanics,
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations, and the study of the possible shape of
the&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space and the 4-dimensional space-time in which
we&lt;br/&gt;live. The goal of the PIs' project is to achieve a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how symplectic and contact topology sit
between&lt;br/&gt;geometry and topology, and thereby strengthening the
foundation&lt;br/&gt;for the aforementioned applications. The PIs'research
activities&lt;br/&gt;will bring a diverse set of students at both the
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and graduate levels into the process of discovering
new&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, with the PIs' research with undergraduates
serving&lt;br/&gt;as a pedagogical laboratory for integrating mathematical
research&lt;br/&gt;into the PIs' curricula.