* 0909797
* Evolution of the Genes Involved In Formation of the Echinoderm Embryonic Skeleton
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2008,02/29/2012
* Brian Livingston, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/29/2012
* USD 241,430.00

Abstract PI Brian T. Livingston. Proposal number NSF 0641535. Evolution of the
genes involved in formation of the echinoderm embryonic skeleton.

Echinoderms consist of five related but distinct classes. All of the adult forms
have skeletons. However, only two, the sea urchins and brittle stars, have a
well developed skeleton in their embryos and larvae. Dr. Livingston proposes to
address how it is that these two groups activated a set of genes that leads to
mineralized embryonic structures, while the other groups did not. Are the same
genes involved in these two species? Are they regulated in a similar manner? If
not, what has changed? Many of the genes involved in the formation of the
embryonic skeleton of the sea urchin are known. Dr. Livingston therefore
proposes to use molecular tools to isolate similar genes in brittle stars. By
comparing the genes that are involved in making the skeleton in these two
groups, he can determine what are the conserved, and therefore important,
proteins involved in biomineralization. He also proposes to examine how these
genes are regulated during development. Comparison of the mechanisms of gene
regulation in these two groups will provide a better understanding of how
complex relationships between genes arise and evolve. Dr. Livingston has a
longstanding commitment to combining research and training. He will continue
outreach efforts and recruitment from local high schools as well training
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds in his research.

