* 0909745
* Empirical Research, STEM Teaching and Learning in Formal and Informal Settings:  Strengthening Measurement Curriculum, Teaching, & Research
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* John Smith III, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 954,300.00

The project builds on the resources and results of a prior REESE project,
Strengthening Tomorrow's Education in Measurement (STEM), that has produced a
fine-grained analysis of the character and limitations of the spatial
measurement content (length, area, and volume) in three elementary mathematics
curricula. It will expand, deepen, and report STEM results for length, area, and
volume but will also centrally address the task of putting that knowledge to
work by improving educational practice. The project will complete the primary
grades analysis of length, area, and volume and explore with the authors of the
three elementary curricula ways to strengthen their existing materials. It will
analyze the highly-regarded Singapore mathematics curriculum and compare and
contrast findings with the U.S. results. It will also address issues relevant to
the topic of measurement in the elementary science curriculum. It will develop
and test effective ways of enriching preservice elementary teachers' knowledge
of core measurement principles and work with practicing teachers to improve
their measurement lessons using both innovative activities and existing
curricular content. Finally, it will implement a three-year measurement mini-
Center that will bring together major U.S. research and development scholars and
projects for sustained interaction, innovation, and collaboration.

The three-year project is concerned with finding ways to strengthen instruction
and learning of measurement in the elementary school mathematics curriculum.
State and international assessments show U.S. children to be consistently
underperforming in this content area. Difficulties are traced to significant
weaknesses in conceptual and procedural understanding, including word problem
solving. The project will compare the measurement approach used in the Singapore
elementary curriculum with current U.S. elementary textbooks. Also, researchers
and practitioners who work in the area of measurement in both science and
mathematics contexts will participate in a yearly mini-Center with the goal of
sharing findings and best practices relevant to the teaching and learning of
measurement. Another interesting aspect of the study is the incorporation of
findings in measurement courses for preservice elementary teachers, including
relevant measurement experiences for practicing teachers. In the long term, the
project is expected to provide a curriculum model that can potentially be
replicated across the country.