* 0909839
* Collaborative Research:  Does competition for nitrogen between autotrophs and heterotrophs control carbon fluxes in the western coastal Arctic?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Rachel Sipler, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2012
* USD 390,827.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bronk 0909839&lt;br/&gt;Virginia
Institute of Marine Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unds are provided to
investigate the microbial controls on the productivity of a coastal Arctic
ecosystem by focusing on the competition between autotrophs and heterotrophs for
nitrogen (N). In the winter and summer waters near Barrow, Alaska, supplemented
with complementary international research opportunities, the PIs propose to
measure in situ concentrations of key microbial and biogeochemical constituents,
relevant uptake activities, and expression of key N cycling genes to address two
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;H1: The balance of autotrophy and heterotrophy in the
Arctic is regulated both temporally and spatially by nitrate (NO3&amp;#713;) and
light.&lt;br/&gt;? Phytoplankton out-compete heterotrophic bacteria for
NO3&amp;#713; during the well-lit spring and summer conditions.&lt;br/&gt;?
Heterotrophic bacterial uptake of NO3&amp;#713; will be greater during the dark
winter and under sea ice than in open water or well-lit summer conditions when
bacteria are replete with phytoplankton-derived DON.&lt;br/&gt;? NO3 -, combined
with terrestrial DOC derived from riverine and groundwater flow, may provide the
means for bacterial growth and respiration during the dark winter.&lt;br/&gt;H2:
Microbial community structure will vary according to the seasonal light cycle
and the sources of available N. The observed lag in bacterial response to
phytoplankton growth is due to a community shift.&lt;br/&gt;? Bacterial
community composition will vary significantly between winter and
summer.&lt;br/&gt;? The composition and dynamics of bacterial communities will
correspond to concentrations and sources of N.&lt;br/&gt;? The expression of key
N-cycling genes, N-uptake and regeneration, and DON uptake kinetics will vary
with season and community composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;