* 0909630
* REESE Empirical Research on Emerging Topics in STEM Education: Statistical Methods for Assessing Teaching and Program Effectiveness
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yan Yang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2012
* USD 308,916.00

This basic research project will develop new statistical techniques that will
provide more robust estimates of the Value-Added Models (VAM). Multivariate
response value-added models will be developed to include continuous and
categorical responses and nested data structures, and address missing data
problems. These models will employ latent-class mixture models, and will use
classification trees and random forest methods for data analyses. The new
techniques will allow the models to be used not only with continuous response
data, such as test scores, but also categorical response data such as completion
of a STEM degree. The techniques will also allow researchers to investigate the
effects of missing data on value added models, as can occur when students drop
out of STEM degree programs during college. The models will improve upon the
current VAM models in three aspects: 1) incorporating the various missing data
structures, 2) considering both continuous and categorical outcomes, and 3)
taking into account complex relationships among subgroups of students and
program characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential benefits of
developing such value added statistical models will be for informing educational
policy and practice. These benefits will include better decisions based on more
precise estimates of teacher effects and the effects of other inputs on student
outcomes in STEM. The researchers propose to address limitations of current
value-added models to provide stronger models for assessing STEM program
effectiveness and measure teacher or school effects on student achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;