* 0909065
* Materials World Network: Structure-Response Relations of Advanced Diagnostic Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2012
* USD 456,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Materials World Network for
Structure-response Relations of Advanced Diagnostic Tools comprises a research
and education partnership among the Macromolecules and Interfaces Institute at
Virginia Tech, the School of Physics at the University of Western Australia, the
Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis at the University of Western Australia,
NIST, and a global expanded network of scientists and engineers focused on
diagnostics utilizing magnetic fields. The International team will develop new
magnetite-polymer contrast agents for quantitative MRi of tissue that have the
combined properties of very fast transverse NMR relaxivities in physiological
conditions AND that will interact with biological components in prescribed ways.
The research is driven by the hypothesis that the properties of amphiphilic
polymer coatings on magnetite can be finely-tuned to enhance the relaxivities of
water protons in the local vicinity of the nanoparticle, yet contain hydrophobic
components that enable efficient interactions with cellular components. Our
collective MWN expertise lies in synthesis of well-defined magnetic cores and
copolymers, colloid measurements and modeling, and a deep understanding of
magnetic nanoparticle physics. The findings will be culminated in a model for
predicting material-relaxivity relationships. Although MRi is already one of the
most utilized bioimaging methods, new materials based on rational designs
derived from this MWN could lead to methods for tracking stem cells in vivo,
better cancer diagnosis through MRi methods that expedite tracking the spread of
cancer cells, and improved signal intensities. Our philosophy is to provide
students with integrated research/education opportunities and tools to address
the science and engineering of polymer nanostructures for diagnostics. The
program will expose students to interdisciplinary research in a global context
that crosses the traditional boundaries of chemistry, physics, engineering and
advanced diagnostics. Our vision is that these students will carry the
interdisciplinary teamed approach to creativity and problem-solving into their
careers, and that they will exploit this approach to effect change, discover new
phenomena, and implement complex and hybrid materials into biotechnology. The
MWN is jointly funded by NSF, the Australian Research Council and the Australian
International Science Linkage program.