* 0909909
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Ecology and the Use of a Metal-Hyperaccumulating Plant in Phytoremediation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* David Inouye, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 7,057.00

&lt;br/&gt;Certain plant species can absorb heavy metals from soil and store
them in their stems and leaves in quantities that would be toxic to normal
plants. Because of this extraordinary property, these metal hyper-accumulating
plants are being studied as a means to restore lands contaminated by mining
activities. However, these restoration efforts would typically involve the
introduction of plants species that are not native to the remediation site,
which poses the potential for these species to become invasive or otherwise
interrupt ecological relationships among native species. This project asks the
innovative question: how would metal accumulating plants affect ecological
interactions with other species when introduced as a non-native species. The
study focuses on Thlaspi caerulescens, a metal hyper-accumulating plant species
being sown on mine tailings in southwestern Colorado; it is a non-native
introduced from southern France. The project will evaluate the likelihood that
this plant would establish a dense population at the introduced site, examine
whether it would reduce the fitness of native plant species through competition,
and test whether native herbivores would feed on this non-native plant,
potentially causing a bioaccumulation of the metals in the food web.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are significant to
restoration of metal contaminated lands. Results from this project will inform
land managers of the potential risks of introducing metal-hyper-accumulating
plants as a means of remediation of mining sites, and may identify preventive
measures that can be used to minimize these risks. This project will support the
thesis research of a doctorate student, and provide undergraduates with field
research experiences.