* 0909756
* Dissertation Research:  Phylogenetics and phylogeography of moray eels (Muraenidae):   The first coral reef fishes with panmictic populations throughout the entire Indo-Pacific
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2011
* USD 9,020.00

This project investigates the evolutionary history of a diverse group of
ecologically important and evolutionarily diverse coral reef fishes known as
moray eels (Family Muraenidae). Approximately 150 species of moray eels inhabit
the Indian and Pacific Oceans, all exhibiting similar widespread geographic
distributions, diet, and ecologies. Typically, species that are closely related
and similar to one another do not live in the same place at the same time, nor
fill the same ecological niche. Understanding the evolutionary history of moray
eels will potentially explain this enigmatic pattern. 150 species of moray eels
living in the Indian and Pacific Oceans will be sampled for genetic and
morphological characteristics that can be used in a phylogenetic analysis of the
group. Additionally, four species of moray eels will be intensively sampled
throughout their range to estimate levels of migration and gene flow between
populations of the same species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
increase our understanding of the evolutionary history of moray eels and of the
causes of their unusual ecological distribution. Understanding the levels of
migration and gene flow between populations of moray eels will determine whether
population genetic structure exists over the broad geographic regions inhabited
by these species, and will also inform broader conservation efforts that seek to
maintain connectivity between marine protected areas.