* 0909122
* Collaborative Research: Greenland Ice Sheet Basal Hydrology and Sliding Dynamics.  The Proof of the Drill
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Neil Humphrey, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2013
* USD 458,171.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Recent changes in the flow dynamics and overall geometry of the Greenland Ice
Sheet have been concurrent with increased surface melting: the velocity of some
outlet glaciers has increased, the ice sheet margins have thinned, and the
overall mass of the ice sheet has declined by more than melt alone can account
for. A direct linkage between surface melt and ice sheet change is commonly
argued but has not been proven. In the proposed work, direct connections between
surface melt, the basal hydrological system, and ice motion will be quantified
along a flow-line transect of the Greenland Ice Sheet. The region to be studied
receives high surface melt, but is located far from the influence of ocean
tidewater dynamics. Basal conditions will be directly measured in six boreholes
drilled to the bed, with two holes at each of three sites. Surface melt and
spatial gradients in ice velocity will be quantified to enable detailed
comparison between melt water forcing, basal hydrologic conditions, and ice flow
dynamics. Instrumentation at the surface, within the ice, and at the bed will
collect data at high time resolution for up to 2 years. Two models will be used
to interpret the mechanical and thermal context of the measurements. In turn,
the intensive measurement campaign will uniquely constrain the modeling and
enable model assessment. This integrated measurement and modeling campaign will
be a comprehensive investigation of the role of water in ice sheet motion. This
work will support two Ph.D. dissertations and provide field research experiences
to at least five students. Several informal education and outreach activities
will be supported, including a high proportion of Native American participants.