* 0909840
* Phreatoplinian Signatures of the 1991 Explosive Eruptions of Hudson Volcano, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2010
* USD 109,849.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many large volcanoes are ice-covered
and, consequently, when they erupt there is the potential for the interaction of
high temperature magma and melt-water, such as in the Pacific Northwest region
of the United States. This may result in the generation of catastrophic floods
or explosive activity that poses significant hazards to communities in the
surrounding area. The 1991 eruption of the ice-covered Hudson volcano in Chile
was one of the largest explosive eruptions of the twentieth century. It caused
over $8.5 million dollars worth of damage in Argentina and Chile as a result of
extensive fallout of volcanic ash and flooding. This proposed research seeks to
examine the potential role of glacial melt-water in affecting the nature of
explosive volcanic eruptions using the 1991 Hudson event as a case study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of magma with glacial melt-water produces
distinctive characteristics in the products of the eruption that can be studied
by analytical geochemistry and scanning electron microscopy. Characteristics of
the widespread dispersal of the Hudson volcanic products suggest that
significant interactions of magma and water took place in addition to primary
degassing of the magma. A principal objective of the research will thus be to
try to identify the signal of magma/water interactions in the 1991 Hudson
deposits and assess its importance to the overall eruption. The findings of the
study should have broader significance for the recognition of magma/water
interactions in the ancient deposits of large stratovolcanoes and will thus
contribute to more precise assessments of future eruption styles and their
potential volcanic hazards. The research plan includes the analysis of the
volatile content of juvenile particles from the 1991 eruptions using FTIR to
assess the potential for arrested degassing during the eruption, SEM imaging of
particle surfaces to search for features of 'wet' versus 'dry' phreatomagmatic
activity, and crystal size distribution analysis to evaluate the thermal and
staging histories of magmatic components from the initial basaltic phase of the
eruption. In addition, grain size analysis and pumice vesicularity measurements
will be carried out to evaluate the potential role of magma/water interactions
on fragmentation efficiency. The project will fund a one-year post-doctoral
position.