* 0909449
* CNH: Fine-Scale Dynamics of Human Adaptation in Coupled Natural and Social Systems:  An Integrated Computational Approach Applied to Three Fisheries
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* James Acheson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2014
* USD 1,021,292.00

The purpose of this project is to gain a better understanding of the way
competition between individual fishermen lead to the emergence of private
incentives and informal social arrangements that are (or are not) consistent
with conservation of the resource. These informal arrangements and incentives
are important because they help us understand the extent to which private
interests might strengthen or weaken on-going resource management and,
consequently, the sustainability of coupled human and natural systems. The broad
hypothesis driving the study is that the informal social structure that emerges
from competitive interactions among fishermen reflects the particular
circumstances of the natural system. In some cases, successful competition
requires secretive non-cooperative behavior; in others, cooperation tends to
yield better competitive results. These different outcomes have different, and
not always obvious, impacts on the feasibility and effectiveness of resource
management.

We think of the relevant human social process as one in which individuals
compete with one another through time-consuming and costly acquisition of
valuable knowledge about a complex resource. To compete successfully,
individuals must balance the immediate benefits that come from exploiting
knowledge they currently hold with the costly need to explore for new knowledge;
additionally, when seeking new knowledge, individuals must balance the costs and
benefits of acquiring knowledge through cooperation or through autonomous
search. In order to model this kind of competitive process, we employ a
significantly modified version of a technique borrowed from computer science
called a learning classifier system (LCS). LCS uses a genetic algorithm to mimic
the way an agent (here a fisherman) uses his experience to continuously refine
his knowledge and decisions about his natural and social environment. The
importance of LCS is that it permits simulation of the co-evolving strategic
interactions of self-interested fishermen who are only partially informed about
the state of the resource they are exploiting and the fishermen with whom they
compete.

The problem of understanding these kinds of competitive dynamics is evident in
almost all coupled natural and human systems. We apply the approach to a
comparative study of three Gulf of Maine fisheries which are characterized by
significantly different temporal and spatial dynamics - sea urchins, lobster and
cod. Each fishery will be modeled using a biophysical simulator of the natural
system and a tightly integrated multi-agent learning classifier system that
simulates the learning and interactions of fishermen. The design of each model
will be based in part on extensive interviews with fishermen about their
knowledge of the dynamics of the fisheries in which they work. We will use these
models to explore past and prospective policy problems in each fishery.

Beyond the immediate applicability of these explorations, we expect this project
will provide a foundation for the wider use of multi-agent learning models in
other coupled systems. Project outcomes will be transmitted regularly to
industry and managers.

Principal investigators include economists, biologists, anthropologists and
computer scientists. All the PIs have years of experience in the fisheries of
the Gulf of Maine and have well developed relationships with individual
fishermen and managers. A masters level student in marine policy, a Ph.D.
student in computer or marine science and a post-doctoral researcher in computer
science will be employed on the project. In addition, the project will develop
an undergraduate course in complex adaptive social-ecological systems and a
graduate student/faculty workshop in the same area.