* 0909764
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tracking Ecosystem Nitrogen Cycling in Black Spruce Forests with Novel15N Measurements
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Edward Schuur, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,836.00

The dynamics of many terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are controlled by the
availability of nitrogen (N), which is often in short supply in the environment.
Human activities are increasing N availability in ecosystems both by increasing
N inputs through fertilizer addition or atmospheric deposition, and by speeding
up internal recycling of N as a result climate warming or landscape
modification. While more N can increase biological productivity, this has a
significant impact on the structure and function of natural ecosystems that have
been shaped by low nutrient conditions for thousands of years. Recently,
researchers have sought to use stable isotopes of N --a measurement method that
can distinguish between different forms of N-- in plant leaves to understand
ecosystem N dynamics. Relatively straightforward measurements of leaf N isotopes
at a single point in time record the net effect of multiple complex biological
and physical transformations that occur over time as N moves throughout whole
ecosystems. This doctoral dissertation research project will make mechanistic
measurements of N cycling across a range of Alaskan black spruce forests to
provide an underpinning to the interpretation of leaf N isotope made at the same
sites. Here, natural gradients of soil fertility in combination with
experimental fertilizer additions and analytical modeling will be used to
explore and interpret the patterns of leaf N isotopes. These results will help
inform the response of natural ecosystems to a changing N cycle. The graduate
student, in addition to performing research, will be mentoring and undergraduate
research assistant. This study will help better understand the impact of climate
change on natural ecosystems.