* 0909833
* Collaborative Research: IDENTIFYING FAULT LINES, CIRCUMVENTING FAULT LINE ERUPTIONS, AND MITIGATING THE EFFECTS OF FAULT LINES
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2014
* Laurie Kirsch, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 03/31/2014
* USD 299,719.00

Studies of large-scale information technology (IT) development projects that
include multiple groups of stakeholders have found that such projects are prone
to conflict escalation and eventual project failure if care is not taken to
repair intergroup conflict as it erupts or even to avoid it entirely. This
project aims to understand what triggers intergroup conflict, or, more
precisely, what the researchers call ?faultlines,? among stakeholders engaged in
cyberinfrastructure development projects and, more specifically, in GENI, a
virtual laboratory currently being prototyped to explore future internets at
scale. Early identification of potential faultlines and their mitigation or
repair are central to achieving positive stakeholder interactions and project
success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will consist of an in-depth
longitudinal study of the social networks emerging in the GENI development and
prototyping community over the next three years, using a mix of quantitative and
qualitative methods. Social Network Analysis (SNA) will be used to understand
the communication patterns among stakeholders, primarily based on electronic
communications, e.g., email and wiki postings. Qualitative Comparative Analysis
(QCA) will be used to discern patterns in qualitative data, for example, from
interviews, meeting minutes or project documents. The GENI social network will
be studied at two levels, within development teams and across them ? at the
larger GENI community level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The management of large-scale
IT development projects is challenging, in large part due to their sheer scale,
scope and complexity. As a result, this research could have broad applicability.
Understanding how conflict can be anticipated, avoided or mitigated has the
potential to positively impact project stakeholders as well as the broader
society, which is the ultimate beneficiary of the innovations that GENI may
stimulate.