* 0909243
* Societally Relevant Engineering Technologies-Research Experiences for Teachers (SRET-RET)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2014
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award to support a
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the
University of Southern California (USC), entitled, "Societally Relevant
Engineering Technologies-Research Experiences for Teachers (SRET-RET)", under
the direction of Dr. Maja J. Mataric. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this
RET in Engineering Program is to leverage the considerable resources of the USC
to create long-term partnerships among world-renowned engineering researchers
and K-12 teachers in Los Angeles inner-city schools. The six week SRET-RET
summer program will bring knowledge of science, technology and engineering
directly to middle and high school educators (10 teachers/year for 3 years) by
involving them in mentored, discovery-based authentic learning and research
experiences in state of the art engineering research facilities including the
NSF Engineering Research Center for Biomimetic MicroElectronic Systems (BMES).
In addition to immersion in the research environment SRET-RET teachers will
participate in engineering, technology, ethics, and pedagogy professional
development workshops which will facilitate the synthesis and translation of
their newly gained knowledge and skills into meaningful and rigorous K-12
classroom activities that sprark enthusiasm for science, technology, engineering
and math, using Stigler's lesson study approach to processional development. The
academic year follow-up component of the SRET-RET program is structured to
sustain and elaborate on the accomplishments the teachers make during the summer
and facilitate communication between the teachers and their K-12 colleagues as
well as their university partners. The SRET-RET teachers will be role models and
conduits of science, technology, and engineering, bridging the traditional gaps
between university centers of research and 6-12th grade classrooms.