* 0909276
* WORKSHOP: Support for the 15th International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA-15), 2009, Feb. 14-18, 2009
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2009,06/30/2009
* Sangyeun Cho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

The 15th annual IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA-15) is co-located with the 14th ACMSIGPLAN Symposium on
Principles and Practiceof Parallel Programming (PPoPP 09), which is being held
February 14-18, 2009. &lt;br/&gt;HPCA is one of the top conferences in the field
of Computer Architecture. The conference addresses a broad spectrum of concerns
for computer architecture and computer design including microarchitecture, cache
and memory system design, parallel computer architectures, power-efficient
architectures, embedded and reconfigurable architectures, I/O systems, and
performance evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference organizers are
requesting $10,000 to fund 20-30 student travel grants for graduate students
attending the conference. Student authors who are presenting papers will receive
highest funding priority, followed by non- presenting authors, followed by other
students. Students must apply for a travel grant in advance of the conference
and are required to write a brief summary of their experience. Grants may cover
expenses related to travel to Raleigh for the dates of the conference, and hotel
expenses while in Raleigh. The nominal size of the award will be in the range of
$250-$500.