* 0909264
* Arctic Ocean redox history and Hg cycling using redox-sensitive trace metals and Hg isotopes: the influence of sea ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Gleason, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 191,972.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
measure mercury (Hg) concentrations, mercury isotopes, and a suite of trace
metals in previously-collected Arctic sediment cores in order to increase
understanding of paleoceanographic conditions in the Arctic Ocean as well as
overall understanding of mercury cycling, particularly prior to the interference
of humans with the mercury cycle. The abundance and isotopic composition of
mercury in Arctic sediments may be sensitive to (and thus record changes in)
such processes as sea ice cover, biological productivity, and changing sources
of mercury. Questions that can be addressed over the course of this research
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)What is the Hg isotopic composition of the
Pleistocene-Holocene Arctic Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;2)Can Hg isotopes be used to infer
different Hg sources to the Arctic Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;3)Can Hg isotopes be used to
quantify extent of sea ice growth and retreat in the Pleistocene-Holocene
Arctic? That is, can Hg isotopes by used as a proxy for sea ice?&lt;br/&gt;4)Is
the Hg isotopic system sensitive to changes in organic productivity during
shifts in Arctic climate and ice volume?&lt;br/&gt;5)Can Hg isotopic
investigations of the ancient record help predict changes in the Hg cycle during
an ice-free (summer) Arctic environment of the future?&lt;br/&gt;6)Can knowledge
gained by studying Hg isotopes in the unique environment of the Arctic be
applied globally to ocean productivity and circulation
studies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has potential impacts in understanding
the geochemical cycling of mercury, an important neurotoxin. It also promises to
improve our ability to decipher Arctic paleoclimate. One graduate student and
three undergraduate research interns would be supported by the proposed
research.