* 0909734
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Leaf litter leachate and the fate of phosphorus in seasonal lowland tropical forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Michelle Mack, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2012
* USD 13,413.00

Phosphorus is a key element for plant growth, so phosphorus availability in the
soil is critical for world food production and carbon cycling by terrestrial
ecosystems. Yet the controls on phosphorus cycling are not well understood, and
these controls are expected to change with global climate change and continued
land-use conversion. Understanding phosphorus cycling in the lowland tropics is
especially critical because many soils of this region have mineral constituents
that greatly hinder the mobility of this nutrient. The goal of this study is to
improve our understanding of how leaf litter leachate (water extracts of
senesced leaves) affects phosphorus cycling in seasonal lowland tropical
forests. This study will evaluate whether leaf litter leachate is important for
the return of nutrients to the soil, and if leaching potential can be predicted
from structural and chemical characteristics of litter. The researchers will
also investigate the extent to which litter leachate controls phosphorus cycling
within the plant-soil-microbe environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include its contribution to our understanding of the
relationships between litter leaching and rainfall patterns, and the
applications of these results for predicting and mitigating the effects of
climate change. An improved understanding of how natural systems cycle
phosphorus could also have applications for improving production in managed
systems, without high inputs of fertilizer. During the course of this research,
the student will mentor undergraduate students through coursework hosted by the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama, and by engaging University of
Florida undergraduates in this research.