* 0909170
* Materials World Network: U.S.-Japan Research Collaboration in Meta-Magnetic Shape Memory Alloys with Enhanced Ductility and Controlled Porosity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 11/30/2012
* USD 286,000.00

This Materials World Network award by the Metallic Materials and Nanostructures
program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials Research
to Texas Engineering and Experimental Station is to fabricate inexpensive meta-
magnetic shape memory alloys (MMSMAs) in polycrystalline bulk form having large
magnetic field-induced actuation work output and enhanced ductility using a
powder metallurgy approach. This award is also cofunded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering. Magnetic shape memory alloys (MSMAs) are
promising candidates for actuation, sensing, energy harvesting and magnetic
refrigeration. The development of these materials have been limited by small
actuation work outputs, poor ductility, and a lack of systematic studies to
connect the issues in solid-state physics, conventional metallurgy, and
applications. The problem of low work output was recently resolved by the
present U.S.-Japan team from Texas A&amp;M and Tohoku Universities by the
discovery and preliminary understanding of MMSMAs. Yet the ductility problem
remains and the works on MMSMAs are limited only to single crystals, which are
difficult to fabricate. In addition, porous MMSMAs will be fabricated for the
evaluation of their potential in biomedical applications, focusing on the
characterization of biological viability and their use as active tissue
scaffolds. These goals will be achieved through the synergistic combination of
materials design, fabrication, and multi-scale characterization in order to
develop an understanding of the magneto-thermo-mechanical response and magneto-
microstructural coupling, and evaluation of their corrosion resistance,
cytotoxicity, and potential for stimulating tissue growth remotely with the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this transformative
research will provide an opportunity for (a) revolutionizing the field of shape
memory alloys by fertilizing completely new applications and property
landscapes, (b) transformation of current understanding of field-induced shape
change in MSMAs through a multi-scale, multidisciplinary characterization on the
new MMSMAs; and (c) the creation of an entirely new family of tissue scaffolds
that would allow remotely controlled mechanical stimulus for tissue growth.
Ultimately, the methodologies in this work will contribute to the overall effort
to maintain US-leading role in active and biomaterials research. Graduate and
undergraduate students including several minority students will benefit through
establishment of joint-degree and exchange programs with the Japanese partner
institution, new course developments, classroom instruction and direct
involvement in the research. K-12 students and high school teachers will be
engaged in developing science projects with SMAs to increase the awareness of
science and engineering among them and provide them firsthand research
experience.