* 0909619
* Single Conformation Spectroscopy and Isomerization Dynamics of Synthetic Foldamers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 07/31/2013
* USD 535,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Timothy Zwier of Purdue University and his
graduate and undergraduate students will investigate the spectroscopy and
isomerization dynamics of a series of beta-peptide, gamma-peptide, and hybrid
(e.g., alpha/beta) synthetic foldamers containing 2-10 residues. These molecules
will be studied either as isolated neutral molecules cooled in a supersonic
expansion or as ions cooled to 10 K in a cryo-cooled ion trap. The focus will be
on molecules that differ from naturally-occurring alpha-peptides in having one
(beta) or two (gamma) extra carbon atoms separating the amide groups, giving
them additional flexibility and opening up a wider range of secondary structures
that either mimic or improve on those found in nature. Professor Zwier and his
team will use laser-based methods that enable them to record infrared and
ultraviolet spectra of single conformations free from interference from one
another, and to determine their relative populations. The results will also
provide benchmark tests of the accuracy of computer models of the behavior of
proteins and synthetic foldamers. Finally, lasers will be used to initiate
conformational isomerization in order to determine the energies, time-scales,
and energy flow associated with the isomerization process. This research project
will impact society at large by providing fundamental insight to the inherent
structural preferences of these synthetic foldamers, which are being applied by
synthetic chemists to a wide range of biomedical and drug-discovery
applications. Sam Gellman and his group at University of Wisconsin-Madison are
collaborating in this study, synthesizing foldamers that test particular aspects
of their behavior. The design of unique helical scaffolds tailor-made to
interact with specific biological receptors requires a knowledge of, and control
over, the structural preferences of the individual sub-units of which they are
made. The strong collaboration with a leading synthetic group in the foldamer
field ensures close-coupled feedback that will maximize the benefit of this
project's results towards biomedical applications.