* 0909100
* RET: Shaping Inquiry from Feedstock to Tailpipe (SHIFT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Susan Stagg-Williams, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,477.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This award provides funding for a 3 year standard award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering Site program at the University of
Kansas (KU) entitled, "RET: Shaping Inquiry from Feedstock to Tailpipe (SHIFT)",
under the direction of Dr. Susan M. Stagg-Williams.

This program hosted by the University of Kansas and the Southeast Kansas
Education Service Center-Greenbush will provide a 6 week summer experience for a
total of 24 high school science teachers and community college teachers (8 per
year for 3 years). The participants will be recruited from both rural and urban
school districts and two community colleges throughout the state of Kansas.

The primary objectives of the program are to: 1) Provide professional
development training and research opportunities to increase participants
knowledge base and awareness of research methods; 2) Nurture long-term linkages
between KU faculty and the surrounding educational community; 3) Guide the
creation of original, standards-based, biofuel-related lessons for
dissemination; 4) Engage students in real-world applications to demonstrate that
solutions to complex problems often require integration of knowledge from
multiple subject areas; and 5) Stimulate students' interest in STEM careers.

The teachers will participate in full-time discovery-based research at KU during
the summer in four areas of biofuels research that complement the courses they
teach. These research areas include: (1) ecosystem processes; (2) feedstock
production; (3) biofuel production; and (4) biofuel assessment. This opportunity
will help teachers learn about the integrated nature of biofuels research.

With guidance from Greenbush educators, participants will translate their
research experiences into curricular materials that can be used in their classes
the following year. These lessons will be designed to meet state science
standards and it is anticipated that at least four lesson modules will be
developed each year of the project.