* 0909861
* Dissertation Research: Using hummingbirds to test the link between bird and plant distributions in tropical montane rainforest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Douglas Levey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,287.00

In the tropics there are over 320 species of hummingbirds, with bills of
different shapes and sizes. Some hummingbird species visit many species of
flowers and others visit just a few. Along tropical mountainsides, most
hummingbird species occur within a narrow range of elevations. The goal of this
project is to understand environmental factors that prevent birds with such
restricted ranges from living elsewhere. The hypothesis is that hummingbird
ranges are restricted to the ranges of the species of flowering plants that they
pollinate. Testing this hypothesis requires data on which plants are pollinated
by which hummingbirds. By identifying pollen on bills of hummingbirds one can
determine which flowering plants they rely on. Pollen will be identified from
different hummingbird species found along a mountainside in southeastern Peru.
To test the hypothesis, pollen data will be combined with data of the
distributions of flowering plant species along the same mountainside.

The broader impacts of this study include: 1) its importance in assessing
whether species such as hummingbirds, which are potentially constrained by their
flowering plant resources, will be able to persist in the fact of future climate
change; 2) the production of educational outreach materials, including a
hummingbird-flowering plant photo guide and three compact discs of recorded bird
songs from the mountains of Peru; and 3) extensive training of thirteen future
scientific researchers of diverse ethnic backgrounds in Neotropical ornithology
and ecology.