* 0909119
* Measuring Mass Distributions in Moderate-Redshift Galaxies Through Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Christopher Fassnacht, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2013
* USD 305,256.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Dr Fassnacht will use strong gravitational lensing, the bending of light as it
passes close to a massive object, to study the mass distributions of massive
elliptical galaxies, probing back to times when the cosmos was roughly half as
old as it is now. The velocity dispersion of the stars in the foreground
'lensing' galaxy will be measured using multislit spectrographs on the Keck
telescopes in the optical and in the near-infrared. Uncommitted slits will be
used to measure redshifts of galaxies lying nearby on the sky, to study any
group or cluster surrounding the lens. Hubble Space Telescope images will be
used to measure the weak lensing distortions for galaxies whose light passes
100kpc or more from the central lens, probing the massive dark halo of the
lensing galaxy. Finally, adaptive optics imaging on the Keck telescopes will be
used to search for faint companions to the lens galaxy. Brightness ratios for
the images are often discrepant from what would be expected for a smooth
elliptical lens, suggesting that companions may be present. Dr Fassnacht has
already used this technique to find a faint companion to one lens galaxy.

A graduate student and undergraduate researchers will participate in the
research. Dr Fassnacht will continue his program of public-outreach talks, and
he will introduce astronomy to an existing program at UC Davis for high school
students.