* 0909747
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Dynamics of labile organic matter fractions in arctic soils
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 13,150.00

The proposed doctoral dissertation research will determine the extent to which
soil aggregates, a foundation of soils, provide stabilization for soil organic
matter (SOM) in the Arctic. Warming has been linked to changes in carbon cycling
in the Arctic. Cold temperatures and anoxic conditions inhibit microbial
activity and reduce decomposition, resulting in an accumulation of carbon-rich
organic matter, straining an already nitrogen-limited system. Nutrient additions
have changed the plant community and depleted soil carbon; however, mechanisms
behind carbon loss are not understood. It is not known which OM fractions are
most susceptible to degradation in Arctic soils, and 2) where are they located
within the soil matrix. These factors are important to understanding mechanisms
behind carbon loss in Arctic soils, which may be due, in part, to shifts in the
physical stability of soil aggregates. In other words, soils with greater
proportions of macroaggregates contain more carbon.

Soils have been collected from long-term nutrient addition experiments at the
Arctic LTER site on the Alaskan North Slope, and were separated into four size
classes of aggregates. These aggregates will be separated into sub-structural
elements as well as free OM, which will reveal if SOM is protected within
aggregates and which fractions are susceptible to degradation. The project will
also link current conceptual models of soil carbon stabilization to the Arctic.
The graduate student will interact with the K-12 community by providing research
opportunities for teachers through existing workshops, internships, and a
Teacher-in-Residence program.