* 0909779
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Genetic Basis of Recombination Rate Variation in House Mice
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Bethany Dumont, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Meiosis is a specialized cell division that gives rise to sperm and egg cells
that bear half the amount of DNA as other cells in the body. Recombination
occurs at the onset of meiosis and is particularly important to the partitioning
of DNA into sperm and egg cells. During recombination, chromosomes with high
sequence similarity become physically joined and swap pieces of their genetic
material. The frequency of recombination and the placement of recombination
events along paired chromosomes are highly variable among individuals. Using the
house mouse as a model system, this research will combine molecular genetic
methods with new techniques for imaging cells undergoing meiosis and the
cellular proteins that mediate recombination to identify the genetic factors
that control the amounts and chromosomal locations of recombination during
meiosis.

This project will provide research opportunities for undergraduate students and
will support the continued training of a female graduate student in quantitative
and statistical methods, an area of genetics in which women are under-
represented. Additionally, this project will promote multidisciplinary
collaboration among statisticians, evolutionary biologists, and molecular
biologists. Finally, understanding the genetic basis of variation in
recombination has important applications for health. Aberrant recombination is
linked to infertility and sterility, and identifying the genes that contribute
to variation in recombination has potential application to these challenges.