* 0909603
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolutionary History of Symbiotic Bacteria in Bird Lice
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Dale Clayton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Mathews
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,646.00

Within the feather louse genus Columbicola there are at least two groups of
endosymbiotic bacteria. Although these bacteria are transmitted maternally and
must be inside of a louse to remain alive, their evolutionary tree does not
mirror that of the lice they live in. This incongruity might be explained by the
replacement of one group of symbionts with another group in some of the species
of Columbicola. Genome sequences will be produced for the symbionts of two lice
species, C. columbae and C. baculoides. These data will be used to compare the
gene inventory, genome organization and genome size of the two symbionts. If the
ancestral symbiont has been replaced in some species of Columbicola, then we
expect that these genomic characteristics will be very different for each of the
symbiont groups. The genome sequences produced from this study will be the first
for symbionts of insects that feed on keratin (feathers or hair).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve our knowledge of symbiotic
relationships, in particular the possible replacement and subsequent evolution
of bacterial symbionts. In addition, this work will provide training in the
fields of bioinformatics and genomics for a female PhD student and several
undergraduates. Using the cosmopolitan Rock Pigeon as a model for the
Columbicola-symbiont system, K-12 students will be educated about symbiosis and
the importance of genetics and evolution. All sequence data produced from this
work will be submitted to the NCBI Genbank public database.&lt;br/&gt;