* 0909333
* Collaborative Research:   Quantifying Glacier-Fjord-Ocean Interactions and their Impact on Changing Ice Discharge: Kangia Nunata Sermia and Other Outlets, West Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Fahnestock, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 206,457.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
proposal aims to improve understanding of ocean/glacier-ice interactions by
linking oceanographic, glacier, and atmospheric measurements in a fjord/glacier
system showing recent change to quantify processes occurring at this interface.
The proposed work leverages and extends a substantive oceanographic
investigation established as part of a Greenlandic-Danish IPY initiative,
FRESHLINK, which attempts to assess the freshwater balance of the
Godthåbsfjorden drainage in southwestern Greenland. This proposal adds tightly
integrated glacier and inner-fjord components to this multidisciplinary effort.
The specific goals are to 1) establish observations of glacier flow variability
and patterns of change of the main glacier entering the fjord and quantify ice
discharge on seasonal and annual time scales and relate these to fjord and off-
shore oceanographic measurements; 2) quantify submarine melting at the calving
terminus as a function of water temperature and glacial freshwater discharge;
and 3) compare these results to other outlets and assess the implications for
glacier-ice/ocean interaction on the scale of Greenland. The underlying
assumption, that oceanographic forcing controls aspects of outlet glacier flow,
is suggested in many areas of Greenland. Understanding recent outlet glacier
retreat requires a study of the entire glacier-fjord-open ocean system. Such an
integrated approach is the goal of this proposal. The combination of detailed
seasonally-distributed oceanographic transects with measurements from moorings
will allow quantification of marine melting of glacier ice as well as subglacial
discharge. The suite of glaciological measurements will quantify the response of
the glacier system as well as constrain surface melting. The satellite time
series of the system, analyzed with the goal of finding remotely measurable
characteristics that scale with the processes measured in situ, may allow
extension to other fjords around Greenland.