* 0909393
* Using pollen to assess local environmental variation during the Viking Age in Skagafjordur, Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2011
* John Steinberg, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 05/31/2011
* USD 94,902.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. John Steinberg, Heather
Trigg, Douglas Bolender and their colleagues will use pollen samples to assess
the parameters of environmental change around Viking Age farmsteads in
Skagafjörður, Iceland. This work, if successful, will be a prelude to a larger
project where the sampling strategy and analysis methods developed during the
2009 season would be applied across a whole range of socio-economic contexts and
through the profound changes of Viking Age Iceland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's seek to develop pollen sampling protocols and analysis strategies for
investigating local environmental variation during the Viking Age in Iceland.
The pollen record can provide a wealth of information about past regional and
local environments and how they have changed. Properly assessing these changes
around archaeological sites requires a high sampling density (temporal and
spatial) as well as suitable counts of tree and non-arboreal pollen. Variation
in these parameters can substantially change quality of data recovered beyond
issues of time, cost, and area represented. Data collected in this experimental
season will assess these parameters in preparation for a much larger future
micro-environmental reconstruction project that would incorporate these methods
into a regional study of settlement sequence and variation in farmstead
production strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish sampling protocols and
analytic strategies the team will investigate two farmsteads in the same region:
Reynistaður and Medalheimur. Reynistadur, was one of the first farms settled in
the region and was politically and economically prominent during the Viking Age
and medieval periods. In contrast, Medalheimur was, in all likelihood, a poor
sharecropper farm. The Skagafjörður Archaeological Settlement Survey (SASS) has
extensively investigated both farmsteads as part of three previous grants from
NSF. Pollen samples will be obtained from already identified archaeological and
natural deposits at these two sites. Pollen results will be compared with
macrobotanical and faunal evidence. The group will take pollen samples from
occupational contexts (middens &amp; dwelling floors), agricultural fields and
pastures, and at nearby bogs. At both targeted farms there is macrobotantical
evidence of barley consumption, and at Reynistaður, a suggestion of local barley
production. Barley does not release a great deal of pollen and it does not
travel far. A goal of this proposal is to determine if the team can identify
cereal pollen and if so, the location of its production. If not, the potential
of using a spectrum of pollen that is associated with grain agriculture as a
proxy for local production, will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
explicit comparison of the environmental history of successful large farmsteads
against small, poor and sometimes unsuccessful farmsteads will allow the
research team to answer basic questions about the intersecting roles of
landscape change, farm production, and political economy in the early history of
Iceland. From that data, The PI's and their colleagues hope to begin to
understand the role of the fragile arctic environment in the social evolution of
Viking Age chiefdoms to medieval manorial states.