* 0909314
* Finite group schemes and semi-topological theories
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Eric Friedlander, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 179,404.00

One aspect of Friedlander's proposed research is to advance the understanding of
how finite groups and their generalizations act on vector spaces. The elementary
example of Z/p x Z/p is one of the first examples encountered by beginning
students of abstract algebra, yet its representation theory is ``wild" so that
no listing of all finite dimensional representations is possible. Friedlander
has introduced constructive techniques which apply to this and other specific
examples yet extend to very general situations. Friedlander proposes to continue
his study of representations of arbitrary finite group schemes using insights
and techniques from algebraic geometry as well as more traditional techniques of
algebra. One goal is to contribute to the understanding of specific examples; a
second goal is to sketch a general theory which incorporates these examples; and
a third goal is to utilize certain special actions to study the algebraic
K-theory of certain singular projective varieties associated to finite group
schemes. A second aspect of Friedlander's proposed research is the investigtion
of algebraic cycles on algebraic varieties. This is one of the most fundamental
and challenging topics of algebraic geometry, much studied in the past hundred
years. Friedlander's focus will be on algebraic equivalence classes of cycles,
influenced by insights from the better understood analogue in algebraic
topology. Applications are envisioned to algebraic K-theory as well as algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can finite groups of symmetries
act on vector spaces over finite fields or over even more general fields? How
does the consideration of more general algebraic objects (finite group schemes)
reflect on the original problem, especially in basic, familiar examples? How
does the geometry, at first unrecognized, constrain the possibilities and lead
to concrete examples? Can the explicit nature of these examples give structures
in abstract contexts? These are some of the questions Friedlander proposes to
investigate with several collaborators. In addition, he proposes to study
solution sets of polynomial equations (algebraic geometry) using techniques
developed in algebraic topology &lt;br/&gt;(theory of shapes). Friedlander plans
to encourage younger &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians (including his past, present, and
future students) in his quest. He also plans to continue his active roles in
publishing mathematics, organizing mathematical events, and serving the national
mathematical community.&lt;br/&gt;