* 0909166
* Exploring the Collisional and Dynamical Evolution of Asteroids
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* William Bottke, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 280,781.00

AST-0909166&lt;br/&gt;Bottke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using state-of-the-art numerical simulations and
present-day asteroid properties, the team led by Dr. Bottke will investigate how
collisional and dynamical evolution has shaped small body populations since the
end of accretion. The work follows three main themes. 1) Vesta, a 530 km
diameter intact differentiated asteroid, is currently unique in the main belt,
and yet evidence indicates that the primordial main belt once held as many as
one thousand Vesta-like objects. Critical clues to their mysterious
disappearance can be found among the basaltic, olivine-rich, and metallic
fragments in the main belt today, and the team will use these surviving remnants
to glean insights into the nature and evolution of the missing Vesta population.
2) The outer main belt, Hilda, and Trojan populations contain 15%, 90%, and 90%
of the type of asteroid classified from spectral data as class D or P, primitive
objects that closely resemble dormant comets and whose origin is controversial.
Numerical simulations of the evolution of these populations to derive the nature
of D/P asteroids will be used to test various origin scenarios. 3) The histories
of asteroid populations are critically constrained by the existence and
evolution of different asteroid families. The research tools used here include
the Yarkovsky and YORP (an acronym of scientists' names) effects, which are
thermal radiation forces and torques that cause asteroids to undergo orbital
semi-major axis drift and spin vector modifications, respectively. This study
will track the coupled dynamical effects of Yarkovsky/YORP forces along with
collisional effects, to model the evolution of specific asteroid families. For
individual families, the team will be able to estimate their initial velocity
distributions, their ages, and whether or not they produced "asteroid showers"
in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will affect the interpretation of
critical spacecraft data and will help to characterize the processes that shaped
and scattered known asteroids, comets, and meteorites. The research will be
included in continuing educational and public outreach work in Colorado and
Wyoming elementary and high schools, and through the public and amateur
astronomy media.