* 0909098
* Theoretical and Numerical Investigation of a Unified Astrophysical Rotating Black Hole Model for Active Galactic Nuclei, Microquasars, and Gamma-Ray Bursters
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Reva Williams, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2011
* USD 118,725.00

AST-0909098 Williams

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research will investigate the jet structure and energy generation of
quasars and other active galactic nuclei (AGNs), microquasars, and gamma-ray
bursters, all of which are believed to be powered by rotating (Kerr) black
holes. However, there is as yet no self-consistent black hole model that
adequately explains the energy source. This project will use the physics of
general relativistic super-massive Kerr black holes in Monte Carlo computer
simulations of Penrose processes to extract energy and momentum from the
ergosphere of the rotating black hole. The energies extracted are in fact
comparable to the observed X-rays and gamma-rays, and the inferred electron-
positron pairs, in the spectra of quasars and other AGNs.

The first part of the project will investigate in detail (1) the large vortical
geodesic orbits of escaping elementary particles in the form of polar jets, due
to intrinsic collimation by a rotating black hole; and (2) the expected self-
induced magnetic field associated with the jets of escaping particle plasma. The
objective is to show that super-massive Kerr black holes can indeed explain the
energy source of AGNs. Then, scaled-down black holes will be used to model
galactic microquasars. Next, similar scaled-down black holes going through
periods of being active and then inactive, will be used to model gamma-ray
bursters. The overall objective is to devise a unified model showing AGNs,
microquasars, and gamma-ray bursters powered by black holes of different masses
and/or accretion disk properties. This will have an impact across extragalactic
astronomy, high energy and relativistic astrophysics, and the study of stellar
evolution.