* 0909851
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive Processes - Classroom Practices that Lead to Student Proficiency with Word Problems in Algebra
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Floden, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2013
* USD 506,588.00

This three-year study provides a detailed description and analysis of
mathematics classroom practices that result in Algebra 1 students' development
of proficiency in word problem solving in algebra. The research study is
expected to: (a) provide an enhanced understanding of the mechanisms of teaching
for mathematical proficiency in a centrally important area of the mathematics
curriculum, (b) develop research tools that support deeper investigation into
the mechanisms of teaching for robust mathematics learning, and (c) develop
practical tools that can be used on a large scale for benchmarking and improving
teaching practice. The following two research questions are addressed: (1) What
instructional practices are frequently used by teachers judged to be doing an
exceptional job of helping students to develop proficiency in solving word
problems? (2) What analytic procedures can be developed and used to characterize
these promising teaching practices, with low enough cost so that connections
between teaching and learning can be examined for a large number of classrooms?
The instructional practices of carefully selected master teachers will be
examined in an attempt to identify practices that result in powerful student
learning. In year 1 videotapes of a range of teachers selected for demonstrated
success in helping a wide range of students perform well in mathematics will be
solicited and examined. Multiple analyses at varied levels of grain size from
the establishment of classroom sociomathematical norms and student interviews to
identify mathematically productive classroom practices and related student
understandings will be performed. In year 1, the research will develop and
refine coding and analytic schemes relevant to sociomathematical norms and
effective classroom instruction in word problem solving. These will be further
refined in year 2 on the basis of a small scale project that targets the
analyses of teaching and student learning in a range of classrooms, seeking to
link instructional practices with student outcomes. Year 3 will extend the study
to a larger sample, codifying the results and producing analytic tools that can
be used by the research community and by practitioners.

The study focuses on developing and testing ways to teach typical and nonroutine
word problem solving to Algebra 1 students in an effective manner. Classroom
videotapes of effective mathematics instruction in this content area will be
analyzed and coded in year 1. The codes will provide characteristics of
productive student behavior as a result of effective internalization of
classroom sociomathematical norms. These norms focus on issues such as what
constitutes different, effective, and sophisticated mathematical explanations,
justifications, and more generally, reasoning. In year 2, the codes will be
tested and refined with a small sample of classrooms. In year 3, results from
the prior two years will be tested over a larger sample of Algebra 1 classrooms.
The study has practical significance for teachers who want to learn to teach
word problem solving in a more effective manner. At the research level, the
study seeks to expand the use of sociomathematical norms to Algebra 1 word
problem solving. Researchers (and teachers) will also be provided with tools for
analyzing effective classroom practices in this content area. The research is
especially needed at this time because Algebra 1 classrooms around the country
consist of students who bring with them a diversity of perspectives and
background knowledge.