* 0909403
* Creative Arctic:  Creative Capital for Regional Development in the Arctic (A Spatial Analysis)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2013
* USD 66,441.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a novel approach
to the role of creative capital and human agency and its affect on social and
economic development in Northern communities. PI Petrov will examine data from
Alaska, Canada, Russia, the Faroe Islands, Norway, Sweden, and Finland to
examine the role of creative capital, defined as a stock of creative abilities
and knowledge(s) embodied in a group of individuals who either possess high
levels of education and/or are engaged in creative (scientific, artistic,
entrepreneurial or technological) types of activities, in economic development
in these communities. The investigator points out that most creative class
research has been done in metropolitan areas and thus has marginalized
peripheries, such as Arctic, frequently indigenous, rural communities. This
research would apply the concept to more rural, northern areas in hopes of
developing new ways of understanding the successes and failures of northern
economic development programs. The PI will also develop a web site,
CreativeArctic, for researchers, classroom use, and informing local
entrepreneurs, policy makers, and indigenous communities and interest groups
interested in economic development in their regions.