* 0909400
* Collaborative Research: Invariant manifolds for multiscale stochastic dynamical systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Kening Lu, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2015
* USD 321,720.00

The investigator and his collaborators are developing the fundamental theory for
the existence and qualitative properties of coherent structures in the phase
space of finite and infinite-dimensional stochastic dynamical systems that
encode multiple spatio-temporal scales. Random dynamical systems arise in the
modeling of many phenomena in physics, biology, climatology, economics, etc.
when uncertainties or random influences are taken into account. The applications
for this project will center on the dynamics of spike states, viewed as defects,
for the Allen-Cahn or Cahn-Hilliard equation of materials science, oscillations
in membrane potential and ionic concentrations within cells, and the motion of
the molecular motor kinesin and its interactions with microtubules, all of which
are subject to stochastic fluctuations. From the theoretical standpoint,
Infinite-dimensional random dynamical systems may be generated, for example, by
stochastic partial differential equations and random partial differential
equations. The study of random dynamical systems involves both stochastic
analysis and geometrical theory of dynamical systems. The investigator and his
collaborators are establishing much of the basic geometric framework for
multiscale, stochastic dynamical systems. In particular they are developing (i)
The theory of normally hyperbolic invariant manifolds for stochastic dynamical
systems including the persistence and the existence of random stable and
unstable manifolds and foliations; (ii) The stochastic Exchange Lemma for fast-
slow systems; (iii) The theory of approximate normally hyperbolic manifolds in a
noisy environment. These are linked with concrete analysis of nonlinear partial
differential and integral equations of evolutionary type, with particular
attention paid to the persistence and dynamics of coherent structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many physical, biological, and financial processes
appear to be subject to random or stochastic forces, there are also coherent
structures underlying these processes which give some measure of predictability.
This project is laying the groundwork for the determination of these hidden
structures and for analyzing specific situations arising in several
applications. Among these is a fundamental transport process within each cell of
the body. Here, molecular motors attached to rod-like fibers carry essential
chemicals and waste products to and from active sites within the cell, allowing
for growth, rejuvenation, mobility, and communication. Understanding this
process brings understanding of and perhaps therapies for debilitating and
chronic diseases. Likewise, understanding the mechanisms that produce coherent
structures in complex materials can lead to the design of advanced materials
with particularly useful magnetic, semiconducting, superconducting, or
biomechanical properties.