* 0909862
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Examination of range-wide variation in American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) demography and population viability in the context of climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* James McGraw, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Accurate projections of species response to climate change are necessary to
develop successful conservation strategies for the next century. This research
will examine variation in population growth of American ginseng (Panax
quinquefolius) in response among-year climate variation, and use this
information to predict the viability of ginseng populations under future
climatic conditions. In particular, the principal investigators will examine
whether adaptation to local climate limits the ability of ginseng to respond to
climate change. A long-term (7 - 10 year), demographic dataset from across
ginseng's natural range will be used to detect patterns of population response
to climate variation, and form the basis for models that predict future
population viability. Field and laboratory experiments will be used to test for
local adaptation to climate. If populations of ginseng are adapted to local
climate, then the directional temperature increases projected for the next
century may negatively affect all populations throughout the range of this
economically important plant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American ginseng is the
United States' premier wild-harvested medicinal plant species, generating
important supplemental income for Appalachian families. Climate change threatens
to negatively impact this valuable natural resource as well as other similar
species. Developing models of population viability in response to climate change
will ultimately serve as the foundation for effective conservation and
management strategies in the context of global warming.