* 0909456
* Collaborative research: Understanding the role of environmental change on the long-term population dynamics of one surviving and two extinct arctic mammals
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Eric Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2012
* USD 267,758.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Of the planet?s ecosystems the Arctic is the most sensitive to climate change.
Recent increases in the rate of environmental change in the Arctic pose
considerable challenges to the survival of culturally and economically
important, arctic-adapted species such as caribou. An ability to disentangle the
roles of extrinsic processes, such as climatic or anthropogenic changes to the
arctic habitat, and intrinsic processes, such as density-dependent resource
limitation, in the dynamics of populations would provide key insights for
conservation and management of the arctic biota. However, such efforts have thus
far been hindered by the scarcity of long-term data for natural populations.
Here, contemporary evolutionary and ecological approaches are integrated for the
first time to produce long-term reconstructions of the population dynamics of
one surviving and two extinct and arctic mammals: steppe bison, horses, and
caribou. To achieve this, the largest, most densely sampled ancient DNA data
sets to date will be produced, focusing on two environmentally distinct arctic
localities with exceptional chronological control and detailed
paleoenvironmental records going back at least 250,000 years. These data will
provide the first opportunity to directly evaluate the role of environmental
change on the long-term dynamics and extinction risk of arctic fauna.

A near-continuous time series detailing changes in the size and structure of
bison, horse and caribou populations will be generated, spanning one complete
glacial/interglacial cycle and several periods of major environmental change.
Novel analytical techniques will be developed to (a) significantly extend the
temporal range of paleogenetic reconstructions; (b) incorporate geographic and
ecological data explicitly into demographic analyses; and (c) detect and
quantify the role of intrinsic and extrinsic processes in the fate of natural
populations of large herbivores. In addition, a detailed analysis of
evolutionary information in mitochondrial DNA sequences will be performed, using
high-throughput sequencing technology and novel experimental methodology to
develop the first comparative temporal data set of complete mitochondrial
genomes for sympatric (spatially and temporally) species. In addition,
understanding how species respond to previous periods of climate change may
improve our ability to forecast and mitigate adverse consequences of
contemporary climate change for extant arctic species.