* 0909203
* Materials World Network: Growth and Characterization of Bulk Crystals and Epitaxial Films of Beta-Ga203, SnO2, In203 and ZnO
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Speck, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Materials World Network project is supported by DMR-CER
and DMR-OSP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network research program
between Prof. Roberto Fornari from the Leibniz Institute for Crystal Growth
(IKZ), Berlin, Germany; Prof. Recardo Manzke from the Humboldt University (HU),
Berlin, Germany; and Prof. James S. Speck from the University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB) focuses on the growth of the highest quality single crystal
oxides that enable high performance oxide thin films. The oxides are typically
used for display and solar cell applications. The insight gained in this program
is creating new pathways to higher performance light emitting diodes, displays
and solar cells. Additionally, the students in this program are engaged in
experimental and theoretical activities in the U.S. and Germany and thus will be
exposed to a broad of scientific issues in an international
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploration of oxides from the perspective of
semiconductor science and technology offers exciting opportunities for
uncovering new physics as well as developing novel devices with unprecedented
performance and functionality. There is currently great interest in the
exploration and development of semiconducting binary oxides (beta-Ga2O3, In2O3,
SnO2, ZnO) as new wide-band-gap electronic materials. When grown as high purity
epitaxial films with controlled doping, as carried out for non-oxide
semiconductors (e.g., Si, GaAs), they have great potential as a new class of
semiconductors (NSF-partner UCSB). In this context, this project addresses a
major bottleneck, namely the availability of bulk substrates for homoepitaxy
(partners IKZ and HU Berlin). High quality homoepitaxial growth on single
crystal substrates provided by our partners IKZ and HU facilitate solutions to
outstanding scientific questions for semiconducting oxides including: the origin
of unintentional n-type doping; the presence of surface electron accumulation
layers; and the development of p-type doping and p-n homojunctions. A strong
impact on technology is anticipated: the wide-band-gap oxides that are the focus
of the investigation are prime candidates for transparent electronics, high-
frequency devices, multifunctional devices, and potentially for light emitters.