* 0909642
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanomaterials Reinforced Light-Weight Structural Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Nan-Rong Chiou, Nanomaterial Innovation Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to design,
synthesize, manufacture, and test high-performance polymeric composite
structures based on commercially proven resins, long fibers and nano-sized
functional particles. Long fibers can provide good mechanical properties for the
composites, while affordable nanoparticles such as nanoclays, graphene, carbon
nanofibers and carbon nanotubes may improve barrier properties and strengthen
the matrix between long fibers. To succeed in producing these new composites,
two issues need to be addressed: how to disperse nanoparticles in the presence
of long fibers and whether or not resin processability can be maintained and
enhanced in the presence of nanoparticles. Our approach is to develop novel
surface coatings of those nanoparticles, which can assist the dispersion and
enhance the surface oleophilicity of the particles; consequently minimizing the
flow resistance resulting from the nanoparticles. Furthermore, novel surface
coatings can also increase the reaction rate and final conversion for both epoxy
and vinylester resins cured at low temperature. This is highly valuable for
manufacturing large composite structures using vacuum assisted resin transfer
molding process. It is anticipated that successfully incorporating these
modified nanoparticles in structural composites will address multiple demanding
applications in energy, transportation, construction and security industries.

The expected outcome expect is to significantly grow the overall share of
composites in the materials industry and position Nanomaterial Innovation Ltd.
(NIL) to be the industry innovation leader. While steel, wood and aluminum are
prevalent today, the new composite materials will enable the replacement of
traditional materials with lighter, stronger, more durable, and cost effective
nano-tailored composites. Successful commercialization of these higher value-
added nano-tailored composite products will have a significant impact on energy
generation, material use, energy consumption and environmental stewardship. This
award will enhance the United States global leadership position in
multifunctional nano-tailored composite materials and products. Societal
benefits include reduced petroleum dependency, improved energy efficiency, and
reduced use of conventional fossil fuels that contribute to global warming.
Educational and scientific benefits relate to the pioneering nature of
nanocomposite technology and the opportunity this project will provide to
advance frontiers of knowledge and the training of future scientists.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).