* 0909819
* Dissertation Research:   Habitat Fragmentation, Habitat Corridors and Plant Fitness--An Experimental Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Habitat fragmentation is one of the most common causes of species decline and
extinction, and the negative effects of fragmentation are predicted to increase
as organisms attempt to track changing climates. The preservation and
maintenance of landscape connectivity is thus a central priority for
conservation. Habitat corridors - narrow strips of habitat connecting otherwise
isolated patches of similar habitat - are a widely used to promote connectivity,
but evidence supporting the efficacy of corridors has lagged behind their
popularity in conservation management plans. Unfortunately, the science and the
management of connectivity are still largely separate fields.

The proposed research is designed to bridge this gap. The project is a large-
scale experimental study of the impact of habitat corridors on two plant-animal
interactions - insect herbivory and seed dispersal by birds - and the resulting
impacts on plant fitness. Insect herbivory can be a primary determinant of plant
reproductive success, and long distance seed dispersal by birds is crucial for
the population growth of many plant species. The research uses an experimentally
fragmented longleaf pine forest to expand and test a behavioral model that links
seed dispersal to landscape connectivity, focusing on the influence of fruiting
season (summer vs. winter) on disperser behavior, and the importance of these
behavioral differences for long-distance seed dispersal down corridors. This
research extends an ongoing collaboration with the US Forest Service to promote
restoration of longleaf pine forests, which are among the most endangered
ecological communities in the US. It also addresses salient unanswered questions
in conservation biology: how habitat corridors influence plant-animal
interactions and ultimately plant fitness. The PhD student and lead scientist
conducting this work have an exemplary track record communicating their research
to a wide audience through public school teaching, media outreach, and mentoring
talented new students.