* 0909171
* Collaborative Research: Planetary Magnetism and Thermochemical Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Carol Raymond, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
* Interagency Agreement
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2011
* USD 0.00

AST-090206/0909171 Schubert/Raymond

This research will study the coupled thermochemical-magnetic evolution of
Mercury, Mars, the Moon, and Ganymede. In one project, a numerical dynamo code,
specifically written to operate efficiently on massively parallel computers,
will simulate the magnetic fields of these bodies at many times during their
evolution. The calculations will be used along with observations of intrinsic
magnetic fields and crustal magnetization to understand better the
thermochemical evolution of solid planets. Joint inversions of crustal gravity
and magnetic anomalies will also be undertaken for the Moon and Mars using
multiple data sets (magnetic field, gravity, topography and geology). The
density and magnetization distributions and their correlation, together with
geologic and topographic data, will be used to infer the processes that modified
the crust, e.g., magnetization or demagnetization by magmatic intrusions.

These studies will contribute in a fundamental way to our understanding of how
terrestrial planets and moons evolve through geologic time and how they produce
magnetic fields through dynamo action in their cores. The investigations will
also help determine how the crusts on the Moon and Mars were magnetized. By
studying how dynamos can operate under the different physical conditions
encountered in the cases of Mercury and Ganymede and in early Mars and the Moon
we will better understand how the Earth generates its magnetic field.

These activities will have application to many scientific disciplines, including
planetary science, geophysics, geophysical fluid dynamics, and geomagnetism. The
project will support participation by two research scientists and the training
of a Ph.D. student in the planetary sciences, all of whom are members of an
underrepresented group. The astronomical community will also benefit from the
planned release of the modeling code developed here.