* 0909459
* Troposphere-stratosphere coupling and linkages to high latitude climate variability
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Judah Cohen, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,940.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
leading statistical mode of winter climate variability for the extratropical
Northern Hemisphere, a same-signed height anomaly stretched across the polar cap
and an opposite-signed anomaly centered over the respective ocean basins of the
mid-latitudes, has received much attention from the science community. Research
continues to demonstrate its importance to interannual signals and trends in
climate variability and that it does not appear to be related to ENSO. A
relationship has been demonstrated between this dominant mode in winter and
seasonal snow cover at high latitudes in the fall. Analysis of height anomalies
around the polar cap demonstrate that the genesis of the dominant winter climate
mode involves coupling between the stratosphere and the troposphere. Moreover,
stratosphere troposphere coupling is initiated by variability in the Eliassen-
Palm (EP) flux at mid- to high-latitudes. This project will develop and expand
our concept that the pattern associated with the dominant winter mode of
variability for the Northern Hemisphere results from interactions among the
different components of the land atmosphere climate system at high-latitudes.
The team will investigate how the pattern can be forced, both locally and
remotely, by boundary perturbations, through observational analysis and
numerical modeling experiments of varying complexity. Though a statistically
significant relationship can be shown between seasonal snow cover, the EP flux
and polar cap heights, what remains unclear is the atmospheric bridge that
connects the snow cover forcing and the EP flux and polar cap response, which
are separated in time by a month or more. The emphasis of the research will be
on the time interval that spans the snow cover advance in October and the major
EP flux pulse during the early winter. Hypotheses are presented for the long
lead-lag and a series of GCM experiments will test each hypothesis. Furthermore
GCM experiments are proposed to test whether snow cover is an active driver of
stratosphere-troposphere coupling or rather a passive leading indicator, itself
a common response to forcing from the atmosphere or some other boundary
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;