* 0909525
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and attribution of changes in Siberian hydroclimate and implications for the future
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vladimir Alexeev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 283,374.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will document observed
changes in the hydroclimatology of the Siberian region, attribute these changes
to specific physical mechanisms in the context of climate change, and study the
impact of those changes from the regional to the hemispheric weather and
climate. The project will use observational analysis and modeling experiments to
investigate the links between arctic sea ice trends and changes to seasonal snow
cover. The autumn snow cover is of particular interest due to its persistent
increases over the last two decades despite the robust warming trend and its
connection to stratosphere-troposphere coupling and hemispheric variability in
the subsequent winter season and that while fall snow cover has been increasing,
spring snow cover has been decreasing. This work will explore the links to sea
ice in terms of changes to moisture transport, synoptic activity, and soil
moisture and the links to the large scale atmospheric dynamics in terms of
changes to the timing and occurrence of stratosphere-troposphere coupling
events. This will make it possible to evaluate better the feedback mechanisms
associated with snow cover and the atmosphere, and should lead to a quantitative
assessment of future trends in the Arctic. The likely influence of snow and ice
cover on future global temperature trends highlights the importance of
developing a fundamental understanding of regional surface-atmosphere water and
energy exchange dynamics of the arctic regions. Observed data will include both
remote sensing and station observations (snow cover extent of CPC/Rutgers
University, snow depth, humidity and temperature data from the Russian
Hydrometeorological network, and corrected precipitation) and data from
NCEP/NCAR and ECMWF reanalyses. This work should result in an improved
understanding of arctic climate feedback mechanisms, their association with
observed past and modeled future trends, and their influence on weather and
climate on a hemispheric scale.