* 0909271
* SGER: Development of a landscape approach for understanding the contribution of landsliding to carbon budgets: Using the Rio Jones of the Sierra de Las Minas, Guatemala as a test w
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Carla Restrepo, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2011
* USD 40,560.00

Landsliding is a spatially and temporarily variable process with potentially
large effects on regional C budgets. This variability may have important
consequences for estimating C pools and fluxes given the contribution of
landsliding to the removal of organic C contained in vegetation and soil from
the hillslopes, its deposition along the hillslope-fluvial interface, and its
subsequent regeneration on landslides undergoing succession. This project will
develop a landscape approach for quantifying C budgets associated with
landsliding based on the integration of spatial (maps) and non-spatial (field
measurements of C in vegetation, soil, and water) data into a GIS modeling
framework for a model watershed in the Sierra de Las Minas, Guatemala. Whereas
the model will generate subwatershed- and watershed-scale estimates of carbon
pools and fluxes, the field data will permit a comparison between the C isotopic
composition of soils, landslide deposits, and water and therefore provide a
better understanding of C transfer to the fluvial system.

The development of a landscape approach to examine watershed and subwatershed-
scale C pools and fluxes associated with landsliding is a first step towards
understanding the regional impact of landslide populations on C budgets, and
ultimately its influence on global climate. Furthermore, this proposal will shed
light into the factors that underlie slope instability in a tropical mountain
range, including recovery processes. Finally, this project will generate basic
data that will help guide conservation and management strategies for the Sierra
de Las Minas Biosphere Reserve of Guatemela, a hotspot of diversity that is
highly vulnerable to landsliding.