* 0909824
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Male-mediated effects on female germline recombination rates
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Laurie Stevison, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

A unique aspect of organisms that reproduce sexually is the ability to recombine
genes and traits from two parents in the next generation, potentially selecting
those trait combinations that are most favorable and getting rid of those that
are not. The amount of trait recombination varies a great deal with factors such
as species, sex, position in the genome of the underlying genes, and
environmental conditions such as nutrition, age, temperature, and number of
matings. Variation due to the number of matings is an interesting result that
leads to the scientific question of whether this could be due to changes that
are elicited by males. This project tests for a male-mediated effect on the
recombination of traits in their offspring, using the classic model species
Drosophila melanogaster to assess whether genetic background, environmental
condition, or some combination of the two cause variation in the ability of
males to alter their children's level of variation through changing
recombination rate. Drosophila males are unique in that they do not carry out
recombination; thus the trait proposed could be an indirect mechanism for males
to influence the diversity of their progeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
factors that contribute to variation in recombination rate is of broad
importance to human well being, as recombination plays an important role in
certain types of cancers, such as human breast cancer. Further, because
environmental conditions are known to alter recombination rates, these
environmental triggers are important in our understanding of how such
environmental factors as temperature and nutrition may influence genetic
diversity in future generations. This project will provide research-based
training to and undergraduate and a graduate student and will support classroom
lectures and other public and public school education and outreach by the CoPI.