* 0909199
* Collaborative Research: Growth of the Tibetan Plateau and Eastern Asia Climate: Clues to Understanding the Hydrological Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 397,169.00

For fifty years, the Tibetan Plateau has been recognized as the largest
topographic feature that perturbs atmospheric circulation. It serves as an ideal
field laboratory for understanding the geodynamic processes that build high
terrain. Accordingly, the growth of the plateau should have altered atmospheric
circulation and therefore written an evolving paleoclimatic signature not only
on eastern Asian regional climates, but on global climate as well. Despite many
recent studies, we still do not know precisely when the Tibetan Plateau reached
its current dimensions and how it perturbs atmospheric circulation. This project
brings together geodynamicists, atmospheric scientists, and paleoclimatologists
in a multidisciplinary study of the when and the how.

One of the major goals of the project is to quantify the extent to which Tibet
has grown by crustal thickening, by thrust faulting and folding, by flow within
the crust that redistributes material there, or by replacement of cold mantle
lithosphere with hotter material (all in a state of isostatic equilibrium). Such
quantification will take big steps toward the understanding of how high plateaus
are built and how continental lithosphere deforms, topics at the forefront of
geodynamics.

Determining how Tibet has grown will require determining when crustal shortening
and thickening occurred, using basic field methods and modern laboratory
techniques, and quantifying paleoaltitudes with new isotopic tools. Applying
such paleoaltimetric techniques, however, requires an understanding not only of
how the atmosphere transports isotopes, but how the evolving high terrain
affected surface temperatures at times in the past. Even if the project?s focus
were solely on how Tibet has grown, a meteorological component of the study,
focused particularly on eastern Asia?s hydrological cycle, would be necessary.

Most continental paleoclimatic indicators are thought to be more sensitive to
precipitation than to temperature, and among the unknowns of future climate, the
hydrological cycle stands out. Accordingly, a major focus will be on
understanding how high terrain like Tibet affects the hydrological cycle of
eastern Asia, and China in particular. These studies will focus on: (1) how the
plateau, as both a topographic obstacle and a sink for solar radiation, affects
atmospheric circulation; (2) how the atmosphere transports stable isotopes (ä18O
and äD); (3) how it affects mid-latitude climate variability, including how, via
lee cyclogenesis, it lofts and transports dust, and (4) how vegetation feeds
back on atmospheric circulation and the hydrological cycle. As links from
geologic processes occurring at multi-Myr time scales to those on human time
scales, the Principal Investigators plan studies that specifically examine
paleoprecipitation over the past few hundred thousand years, using both loess
deposition and speleothems that quantify paleoclimate.

