* 0909497
* Collaborative Research: To Investigate and Document Social Impacts of High-Stakes Litigation Resolution in a Renewable Resource Community
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Liesel Ritchie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

On March 24, 1989, the tanker vessel Exxon Valdez ran aground on Bligh Reef, a
well-marked navigational hazard in the Valdez Arm of Prince William Sound (PWS),
Alaska spilling 11 million gallons of crude oil into the surrounding ecosytem.
In various ways, the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill (EVOS) continues to affect the PWS's
ecosystem and renewable natural resources, as well as individuals, groups, and
communities that have built their lives and culture on ecosystem resources.

The primary goal of this project is to document how the Supreme Court decision
and subsequent disbursement of punitive damage awards in the EVOS case affect
communities, groups, and individuals in a renewable resource community. This
study builds directly upon research conducted in Cordova from starting in 2000,
and continuing through 2009, to create a longitudinal data set designed to
document the community change and transformation associated with the EVOS, high-
stakes litigation, resolution of litigation, and punitive damage payments.

This research project is designed to expand and continue a line of inquiry on
human impacts of the EVOS that began in 1989; to examine how prolonged EVOS
litigation has been associated with chronic stress, social disruption, and
diminished social capital; and to explore how and to what extent resolution of
the long-term litigation influence renewable resource communities and groups.
The achievement of these objectives will provide empirical data on community
change, disaster recovery, and personal adjustments that occur when fragile
renewable resource communities are stressed by technological failure and long-
term litigation. These results will also provide directives for understanding
issues of vulnerability and enhancing the resiliency of renewable resource
communities in the twenty-first century.