* 0909463
* Wide Low-Mass Binaries: Coeval Laboratories for Testing the Formation and Evolution of Stars, and the Structure and Evolution of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrew West, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2013
* USD 342,075.00

AST-0909463&lt;br/&gt;Stassun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M-dwarfs (dMs) make up about seventy percent of the
stars in our Galaxy and have main sequence lifetimes longer than the age of the
Galaxy. They are therefore useful probes of the structure and evolution of the
Milky Way. Low-mass binaries are important coeval laboratories for testing
empirical relations, as the two stars likely formed from the same material at
the same time. This project will construct the largest sample of wide low-mass
binaries ever assembled, and then use this sample to: (a) study the role of
multiplicity in the formation of low-mass stars; (b) test and calibrate the
mass-age-activity-rotation relationships that are central to stellar age
determinations and that are used to determine the basic properties of exoplanet
host stars; and (c) trace the history of dynamical interactions in the Milky
Way. Building on the identification of all wide low-mass binaries in the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, spectroscopic observations, time-series photometry, and
adaptive optics imaging of these binaries will address the following questions.
1) What is the intrinsic scatter of activity in low-mass dwarfs? 2) What is the
activity of low-mass stars as a function of mass and time? 3) What is the
absolute age-activity relationship in dMs? 4) What is the survival rate of wide
binaries over time? 5) Do the components of wide binaries have the same close
multiplicity statistics as low-mass stars not in wide
systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team has a joint program between
Vanderbilt and Fisk Universities of education and research mentoring at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels, which significantly enhances
and broadens the participation of underrepresented minorities in astronomy. The
present research includes a plan to continue and expand upon the undergraduate
and graduate programs. It also includes an excellent professional development
opportunity for a postdoctoral researcher seeking experience integrating
research and student mentoring.