* 0909770
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Assessing the prevalence of pseudocongruent events in the formation of biotas: a study of fish taxa of the North American Central Highlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Andrew Simons, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 13,934.00

This project investigates the biogeographical history of fishes of the Central
Highlands of the eastern United States. The Central Highlands are known for
their high level of biological diversity, including the highest concentration of
freshwater fish species in the country. The goal of this project is to explain
the complex distributional patterns of fish species in these regions to
determine whether they can be explained by common evolutionary mechanisms. The
evolutionary history of species will be analyzed using DNA sequences, and
resulting phylogenetic trees will allow tests of the causes of current
distribution patterns. The use of several genes in the phylogenetic analysis
will allow precise dating of evolutionary events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is significant because it will provide information on the evolutionary
history of community structure and changes in species distributions in response
to past climate change. An understanding of the history of species distributions
will also help inform research on future changes in distribution. This research
will also provide information valuable for conservation geneticists and will
help set conservation priorities for Central Highlands fishes. Undergraduate
students will be included in this research and will learn methods and techniques
of molecular biology and genetic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;