* 0909410
* CNH:   Coupled Natural-Human Systems and Emerging Infectious Diseases
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jefferson Fox, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,398,380.00

Previous research suggests that infectious disease outbreaks are associated with
environmental changes such as urbanization, agricultural change, and natural
habitat alterations that occur as societies evolve. Studying the role of
societal development in disease transmission is urgent and critical for
improving the prediction and control of disease. This project will examine how
the outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in Vietnam varies
across traditional settings (customary agricultural practices and housing),
modern settings (agricultural modernization and industrial cities), and
transitional settings (chaos of in-between). The objectives of this research are
to: (1) test a model of relationships between human-caused environmental
transformations and the emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases in
Vietnam; (2) examine the influence of socio-ecological and socio-psychological
variables on individuals' perceptions of and responses to the risk of HPAI in
traditional, transitional, and modern communes; (3) integrate the research with
education and training programs at the University of Hawaii, the East-West
Center, and the Hanoi University of Agriculture in Vietnam; (4) establish new
collaborations among scientists from multiple disciplines and among U.S.
academic institutions, industry, government, and international partners from
countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Because complexity is scale sensitive the
project will collect and analyze data at national, commune, and household
scales. The methods to be used include field observations, face-to-face
interviews, geographical information systems, remote sensing, global positioning
systems, and statistical tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
significant theoretical, methodological, and practical implications. Developing
basic principles and methods for understanding the complex interactions within
and among natural and human systems at multiple spatial scales will help to
elucidate the mechanisms underlying the emergence of new and reemerging
infectious diseases. The outputs will enhance the capabilities of researchers,
practitioners, and policy makers at local, national, and regional levels. The
work will provide useful insights for designing policies for preventing and
managing infectious disease outbreaks in Vietnam and other developing nations.
Several graduate students will be mentored and trained in this interdisciplinary
research project.