* 0909620
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Reproductive Senescence in the Florida Scrub-Jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 9,190.00

A decrease in reproductive performance in older birds, despite the likely
benefits of increased experience, is often attributed to senescence. Senescence
is the progressive deterioration of structure and function over time, and in
vertebrates is manifested as an age-related increase in mortality, decrease in
fecundity, or both. The physiology of senescence is complex, and involves age-
related changes in function of somatic and reproductive cells and tissues, and
subsequent changes in interactions among these systems. Analyses of seventeen
years of data from our study population of Florida Scrub-Jays (Aphelocoma
coerulescens) reveals a quadratic relationship between breeder age and number of
fledglings produced, with the youngest and oldest birds having the lowest
reproductive success. The Florida Scrub-Jay is a cooperatively breeding
passerine that is restricted to remnant scrub oak habitat of peninsular Florida.
In this project, the investigators will assess reproductive aspects of
senescence in this species; taking into consideration reproductive
endocrinology, stress physiology, egg hatchability, sperm morphology, life
history trade-offs, and age-related variance in parental behavior. Specifically,
the investigators will conduct experiments to determine which component of the
reproductive (hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal: HPG) axis exhibits senescence by
recording physiological changes (primarily endocrine measures) as individuals
age. The results from this project which will combine observational and
manipulative experiments will ultimately contribute valuable insight into the
mechanisms that underlie (or are a result of) avian reproductive senescence. The
broader impacts of the project will primarily be realized through the continuing
education of a graduate student. The investigators will present and publish
findings in appropriate national and international venues (e. g., at meetings
and in respected journals). Similarly, both investigators regularly present
research findings to lay organizations, such as ornithological and nature clubs.