* 0909120
* Collaborative Research: Ordering Processes in Water, Aqueous Solutions, and Water-Biomolecule Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* C. Austen Angell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports the
collaborative efforts of Pablo G. Debenedetti (Princeton University),C. Austen
Angell (Arizona State University), Peter Rossky (University of Texas at Austin),
and H. Eugene Stanley (Boston University) in understanding cooperative phenomena
in water and aqueous solutions. This project will investigate how solvent
organization and structure affects cooperative processes occurring over
microscopic (e.g., protein folding), mesoscopic (e.g., fibrilization), or
macroscopic (e.g., phase transitions) length scales, and explore whether there
exist common features or principles across a broad range of these cooperative
transitions. This interdisciplinary collaboration will include a novel
experimental approach to study the energetics and kinetics of protein folding
(and other ordering phenomena) using non-crystallizing but non-perturbing
solvents; computer simulations of phase transitions in two-scale spherically-
symmetric model systems that exhibit water-like dynamics and solvation
thermodynamics; theoretical and computational investigations of protein phase
diagrams and directed evolution using water-explicit lattice models; and
computational studies of the emergence of molecular mobility upon hydration of
protein powders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the role of
water and co-solutes on cooperative processes and molecular order has far-
reaching consequences for directed self-assembly of advanced materials and the
molecular basis of life processes, including metabolic control of gene
expression, protein folding (and misfolding in disease states) and the long-term
preservation and storage of natural tissues and materials. The proposed work
will also provide outstanding opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers to integrate experiment and theory and
work in a team at the interface of chemistry and biology.