* 0909275
* Collaborative Research: The Proper Scale for Environmental Markets with Application to Nitrogen Trading in the Neuse River Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Andrew Yates, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 101,874.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most striking developments
in public policy over the last several decades is the widespread acceptance of
the use of markets to achieve environmental regulation goals. Environmental
markets now span air and water pollution, fishing quotas, endangered species
habitat, wetlands, and streams. In a market for water pollution, for example, a
regulator specifies the total amount of emissions, but the individual emissions
by various sources are determined by trading in the market. Each environmental
market is defined by a particular spatial scale, that is, the size of the
geographic region over which trades are allowed to take place. In practice,
there is substantial variation in spatial scale. The sulfur dioxide market
encompasses the continental U.S., yet markets for water pollution are often
constrained to relatively local watersheds. Despite this observed variation,
little research has examined whether the scale of a given market is
environmentally and economically optimal. Determining the optimal scale of a
pollution emissions market necessitates the simultaneous analysis of economic
costs of firms complying with pollution reduction; spatial pattern of pollution
and corresponding damages to ecosystems and human populations; and the behavior
of humans in the marketplace, particularly the ability to manipulate prices.
This collaborative research project will integrate all three of these factors
and determine the optimal spatial scale for nitrogen pollution trading in North
Carolina's Neuse River basin. A theoretical economic model that combines
compliance costs and human behavior will determine the spatial pattern of
emissions of nitrogen from wastewater treatment plants. This model will be
coupled with a hydrological and biogeochemical model that maps emissions into a
spatial distribution of water quality. A series of economic laboratory
experiments will be conducted to test the predictions of the economics model.
The experiments also will analyze the degree to which feedback about compliance
costs and the spatial distribution of water quality mitigates price
manipulation. Using these elements, the investigators will analyze various
spatial scales and select the one that yields the greatest net benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most immediate impact of this study is the
market design for the Neuse river basin. This will inform the future debate over
North Carolina water quality regulation. The general principles will be directly
applicable to similar local water quality regulations, such as the market for
nitrogen trading in the Long Island Sound. The study project will impact water
quality regulation more broadly. It will provide a framework to compare the
current water quality regulation as specified by the Clean Water Act to an
alternative framework based on the optimal spatial scale. The project also will
influence the design of more general environmental regulation as its methodology
provides a template for analyzing the optimal spatial scale of many other
environmental markets. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.