* 0909184
* High-Precision Optical Interferometry with Coherent Integration: Stellar Pulsations, Limb-darkening and Faint Binary Companions
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Anders Jorgensen, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2013
* USD 329,158.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Anders Jorgensen of the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology will undertake a detailed study of the
diameters and other fundamental parameters of nearby stars. The research will
employ a new technique, called Coherent Integration, developed by the author.
This technique has been tested on the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer but
can be used on other instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate measurements of
stellar diameters and other parameters provide fundamental tests of the theory
of stellar evolution. Until recently, the only good calibrating star was the
Sun, but now the Dr. Jorgensen and other groups are assembling data on stars of
different masses, ages, and compositions. These data will allow improved
understanding of the interiors and evolution of stars of many types, and will
uncover differences between the evolution of single and binary stars. Early
tests show that the method yields diameter measurements to an accuracy of 0.2%,
a significant improvement over previous work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will make unique measurements of several aspects of stellar properties, and is
naturally divided into self-contained projects for student and classroom
involvement. Students involved with learn valuable lessons in experimental
planning, data analysis, programming, critical thinking, mathematical modeling,
and high-performance parallel computing. The PI will also continue his previous
outreach efforts in public education.&lt;br/&gt;