* 0909487
* Collaborative Research to Investigate and Document Social Impacts of High-Stakes Litigation Resolution in a Renewable Resource Community
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2009
* J. Steven Picou, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 10/31/2009
* USD 306,768.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On March 24, 1989, the tanker vessel
Exxon Valdez ran aground on Bligh Reef, a well-marked navigational hazard in the
Valdez Arm of Prince William Sound (PWS), Alaska spilling 11 million gallons of
crude oil into the surrounding ecosytem. In various ways, the Exxon Valdez Oil
Spill (EVOS) continues to affect the PWS's ecosystem and renewable natural
resources, as well as individuals, groups, and communities that have built their
lives and culture on ecosystem resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this project is to document how the Supreme Court decision and subsequent
disbursement of punitive damage awards in the EVOS case affect communities,
groups, and individuals in a renewable resource community. This study builds
directly upon research conducted in Cordova from starting in 2000, and
continuing through 2009, to create a longitudinal data set designed to document
the community change and transformation associated with the EVOS, high-stakes
litigation, resolution of litigation, and punitive damage payments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is designed to expand and continue a
line of inquiry on human impacts of the EVOS that began in 1989; to examine how
prolonged EVOS litigation has been associated with chronic stress, social
disruption, and diminished social capital; and to explore how and to what extent
resolution of the long-term litigation influence renewable resource communities
and groups. The achievement of these objectives will provide empirical data on
community change, disaster recovery, and personal adjustments that occur when
fragile renewable resource communities are stressed by technological failure and
long-term litigation. These results will also provide directives for
understanding issues of vulnerability and enhancing the resiliency of renewable
resource communities in the twenty-first century.