* 0909288
* Geomagnetic field characteristics in the Paleozoic, based on three very extensive extrusive sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Rob Van der Voo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2013
* USD 215,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth's magnetic field is known to
change annually in strength, orientation and in its location of the magnetic
poles, which move on average some 3000 feet per month. These changes are readily
observed by comparing the directions in which a compass needle points from year
to year. Geographic north and the Earth's rotation axis will stay more or less
in place, as magnetic north moves considerably. Thus, the compass-needle
direction is typically different from the true ("geographical") north-pointing
direction, and is called the geomagnetic declination. Records of the magnetic
field from 19th-century logs of navigational parameters and from magnetic
observatories have revealed, for instance, a shift of some 1500 km in the
location of the magnetic northpole in the last 150 years. This shift may be seen
in declination changes in the continental United States up to a degree every
five or six years. Such changes are called secular variation, derived from one
of the meanings of the latin word seculum as "century". For older times, it
turns out that ancient lava flows have recorded the direction of the magnetic
field that existed when they solidified and cooled. Thus, rocks formed in the
last five million years have recorded the geomagnetic field and reveal secular
variation. However, this variation is only sparsely documented for the preceding
250 million years of Earth history, whereas before that time, in the Paleozoic
and the Precambrian, secular variation characteristics have not been determined
in any reliable and robust ways. The is remedying that situation by
characterizing the secular variation in three unusually thick lava sequences in
central Asia, with ages of about 500, 370 and 270 million years. The project is
also assessing whether an evolutionary trend may exist in the magnitude of the
geomagnetic field's secular variation as the Earth's solid inner core has grown
steadily at the expense of the liquid outer core where most of the Earth's
magnetic field is generated. Because the geomagnetic field generation in the
outer core is influenced by the thickness of the outer core layer, secular
variation studies may, in turn, reveal geodynamo characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A more technical evaluation of the total geomagnetic field observable
at the surface of the Earth describes its structure as constituting a main
("dipole") field plus higher-order fields (e.g., quadrupole, octupole etc.).
During the last 550 million years the field consisted predominantly of a dipole
field, but secular variation implies that on short time-scales higher-order
fields exist and may wax or wane at any moment in time. A well-known application
of records of the magnetic field has been to determine the ancient latitudes of
continents; the method is called paleomagnetism. In order for a given magnetic
direction to be interpreted as originating at a given ancient latitude, one must
assume that the averaged magnetic field was purely that of a dipole. This
assumption is testable for limited geological times, and here too this project
will significantly extend the knowledge about the characteristics of the
magnetic field. Lastly, the magnetic field is known to reverse its polarity at
irregular intervals, in a process whereby the (magnetic) northpole becomes
southpole and vice versa, in an otherwise unchanging, steadily rotating Earth.
In a few geological periods, very long intervals of constant polarity are known,
and it has been speculated that in these intervals secular variation may be
significantly reduced. The proposed research is testing this idea for one of
these long polarity intervals ending at about 265 million years ago. In addition
to the research goals of this project, the award is providing support for the
education and training of a graduate and undergraduate student at the University
of Michigan.