* 0909968
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Mercury Bioavailability and its Environmental Controls in a River Network
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Jacques Finlay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2010
* USD 13,530.00

Mercury is a global contaminant that affects humans through fish consumption and
indirectly through adverse effects on wildlife species. The organic form of
mercury, methylmercury, is the most readily available form to the organisms
making the production of methylmercury the most critical factor determining
mercury bioaccumulation in aquatic ecosystems. The ecosystem controls of
methylmercury production in streams and rivers are poorly understood, however.
The proposed research will investigate the rates and potential mechanisms
mediating methylmercury production via filamentous algae, which may be
functioning as ?hotspots? of rapid mercury transformations in rivers.
Specifically, this research will examine whether the production of methylmercury
is related to the growth stages of filamentous algae in a river ecosystem where
hydrology, food web relationships and ecosystem processes are well characterized
from previous studies. By measuring in-situ mercury methylation rates and
manipulating both microbial and photosynthetic activities, this research will
elucidate key ecological factors that mediate the role of filamentous algae in
mercury transformations in natural rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates different scientific disciplines toward understanding a highly
complex environmental issue - ecosystem mediation of mercury contamination. The
proposed work will provide fundamental knowledge regarding the cycling of
mercury in stream and river ecosystems. The new knowledge may allow the
prediction of changes in availability of mercury to aquatic food webs in
response to effects of altered land use such as forest clearing and nutrient
enrichment. In addition, the proposed work will provide educational and research
opportunities for a graduate student and undergraduate researchers through field
sample collection and analyses. Lastly, the results from this proposed study
will be widely disseminated through presentations in scientific meetings and
publication in peer-reviewed journals.