* 0909460
* SGER: Enhanced Magnetoelectric Behavior in Piezoelectric/Magnetostrictive Composites via Magnetic Field-Assisted Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 99,183.00

The research objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award
is to understand the effect of applied magnetic field during the thermal
processing of thin films. Specifically, the impact of magnetic field-assisted
processing on piezoelectric/magnetostrictive (PZT/Terfenol-D) thin film
composites will be explored. PZT and Terfenol-D are highly anisotropic materials
and therefore significant property enhancement in each material is expected from
enhanced texturing. The observed magnetoelectric effect in the composite system
is due to strain coupling at the interface. Thus, the thin film texturing
independent of the substrate obtained here will allow an arbitrarily large
number of layers to be deposited. More layers will result in more interfaces,
leading to an even greater enhancement of the composite properties. Furthermore,
the selected processing routes are scalable to industrial manufacturing.
Deliverables include a deeper understanding of the role of magnetism in
materials processing and new processing paths for functional single phase and
composite multiferroics. This research will also offer a multidisciplinary
research experience for two graduate research assistants in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will demonstrate heteroepitaxy-like properties via a low-cost, high speed
manufacturing process. This will result in compact, cost-effective devices that
are capable of accomplishing sophisticated magnetoelectric tasks. Example
applications include high sensitivity, portable, magnetic field sensors (for
example in healthcare applications such as brain activity monitoring),
terrestrial magnetic field energy harvesters, etc. Devices made possible by the
research will offer the advantages of planar fabrication, a flat initial state,
and monolithic composition. The results will be disseminated to allow the
creation of such commercial devices. Graduate engineering students will benefit
through involvement in multidisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;