* 0909372
* Impacts of Climate Change and Ice Conditions on Microbial Food Web Dynamics in the Barents Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Lavrentyev, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2013
* USD 664,657.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to
examine the relationships between the planktonic food web of the Barents Sea and
changing sea-ice conditions. It would focus on the role of microzooplankton
(MZP; 20 - 200 um in size), which have been suggested to be more important
herbivores than the larger copepods in the tightly coupled food web of the
Barents Sea, and would address the following questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
What is the spatial distribution of phytoplankton and MZP standing stocks in
response to the change in ice cover and sea temperature? &lt;br/&gt;2. Do
distinct water masses and ice cover determine the taxonomic composition of MZP
in the Barents Sea? &lt;br/&gt;3. What is the capacity of MZP to use primary
production under different sea temperature/ice conditions? &lt;br/&gt;4. What is
the relative importance of heterotrophic protists in pelagic copepod diet under
different ice/sea temperature/bloom combinations? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
propose to address these questions by conducting five research cruises in the
Barents Sea over three years to capture seasonal and interannual variability in
microbial distribution and dynamics. Detailed data will be obtained on
horizontal and vertical distributions of phytoplankton and MZP using a towed,
high-resolution plankton survey system. These data will be related to
hydrographic (ice cover, sea temperature, stratification), hydrochemical, and
other biological variables. The program will directly involve a postdoctoral
researcher, two graduate students, and several undergraduates at an urban,
minority-serving institution. In addition, the project team includes a
professional science educator who will coordinate the production and
dissemination of curriculum materials for grades 7-12 and the conduct of teacher
workshops.