* 0909983
* US-Cote d'Ivoire Planning Visit: Computational Coastal Management and Global Computing Education Partnerships, August 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Dale Oliver, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 03/31/2010
* USD 19,988.00

Professor Guy-Alain Amoussou and Humboldt State University (HSU) propose to
organize, in collaboration with several francophone West African institutions of
higher education, a ?Computational Coastal Management and Global Computing
Education Partnerships? planning visit in August 2009 in Abidjan, Cote d?Ivoire.
The objectives of the proposed program are to: 1) initiate an International
Computational Coastal Management program. The first step will be to build a web
based library of a collection of the best available scientific information on
the marine environment of the North Coast region of California and the West
African regions 2) identify effective learning models that incorporate a global
dimension in computing education; and 3) establish university collaborations to
support student and faculty exchanges. For each of these discussion areas, we
have indentified funding opportunities which we anticipate will stimulate
participants? creativity to generate projects that will support their
collaboration. Ultimately, our intention is to initiate innovative project ideas
that will contribute to build Computational Coastal Management and Global
Computing Education Partnerships. This planning visit will bring together three
faculty and one evaluator from HSU, five faculty from the African partner
institutions and three students (one undergraduate student from HSU and two from
Cote d?Ivoire).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Faculty and Students
participating in the planning visit will be part of an interdisciplinary
research environment that breaks the traditional academic silos they are used
to. Additionally, given the increasingly technology-driven features of our
modern society of the 21th century, there is a critical need to be involved in
education and research endeavors that widen our perspectives to allow: - the
development of sound and valid computational models that can be used in
California and West Africa, - the identification of the necessary features
computing education needs to be global and - a better preparation of the next
generation of students and faculty. Finally, this planning visit will enable
specific funded projects to be initiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The proposed project will contribute to create a synergy with other existing NSF
funded projects at HSU that are focused on interdisciplinary research and
education projects. These include, for example, the Science of Design and the
Research Experience for Undergraduates Projects. The outcomes of this planning
visit will be shared at diverse venues including the California State University
System Institute for Teaching and Learning e-magazine, the Special Interest
Group on Computer Science Education 2010 annual workshop and the Consortium for
Computing Sciences in Colleges North West regional conference. Our goal will be
to attract additional partner institutions on the American side.