* 0909399
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Archaeology of Labrador Inuit Choices in an 18th-and 19th-Century Mission Context
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Stephen Plog, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2011
* USD 18,351.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This archaeological and ethnohistorical project explores the long-term economic
and social impact of German Moravian missionaries on Canadian Inuit culture, by
examining changes in 18th-and 19th-century Inuit material culture and foodways
near the mission town of Hopedale, Labrador. It examines why Inuit chose to move
out of their settlements to missions, convert to Christianity and adopt European
practices, and whether this cultural transformation was part of a longer
historical trajectory that was influenced by an earlier hierarchical social
system.

More specifically, the project will use archaeological evidence and historical
documents to determine whether there was an Inuit social hierarchy where
prominent Inuit men rose to positions of leadership due to their ability to
organize hunting groups and trade with Europeans. Hunting and trading captains
would experience greater accessibility to desired trade goods, and, as a result,
accumulate more of those items. The timely arrival of the Moravians disrupted
this hierarchical system by offering lower status Inuit access to those same
desired goods. Examining data from the early historic period provides
information on social structures already in place and serves as a foundation for
models explaining Inuit religious choices. Thus, testing models of Inuit social
organization may reveal reasons why Inuit converted to Christianity.

Beyond the academic importance, this proposed project incorporates a community
archaeology component offering alternative education and work opportunities
while contributing to local cultural heritage efforts. This program will include
local archaeologists, museum directors, teachers and Inuit elders along the
coast to promote and preserve a cultural landscape reflecting individual and
collective memories. A collaborative effort to develop a permanent exhibit on
local archaeology in the Hopedale museum and a special archaeology resource book
for Labrador schools provides a cultural experience for Inuit youth as well as
significantly expands awareness and appreciation of the 19th century Inuit and
Moravian tenure in Northern Labrador.

