* 0909335
* Development of a Viscoelastic Ice-flow Model for Process-based Prediction of Ice-Sheet Evolution
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 295,099.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alley 0909335&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The glaciology community lacks a
quantitatively predictive understanding of sliding and bed deformation. The PIs
propose a modeling effort to develop viscoelastic ice-flow models overlying a
viscous-plastic bed and associated techniques for data assimilation to help
constrain basal flow laws describing this bed. For ice, the Maxwell model
(consisting of a spring and dashpot in series) is anticipated to prove
sufficient when the standard Newtonian (linear) dashpot is replaced by one
obeying Glen's (nonlinear) flow law. The Maxwell model allows instantaneous
elastic response, as well as stress relaxation, in which the stress required to
sustain a given strain rate in the material diminishes over time. Thus, the
Maxwell model is well-suited to materials for which viscous and elastic behavior
are relatively independent, so that changing a model from viscous to Maxwell
viscoelastic may be viewed as adding an elastic "overlay" to the existing model.
Prior success in modeling tidal forcing of a purely elastic ice stream lends
support to this approach. However, should the Maxwell model prove inadequate,
the PIs are prepared to investigate a Burgers model, which consists of a Maxwell
unit in series with a Kelvin unit (itself consisting of a spring and dashpot in
parallel). In addition to the viscous and instantaneous elastic behavior of the
Maxwell model, the Burgers model also displays delayed elastic response to
forcing at certain frequencies. At the longer timescales of interest for glacial
flow, though, the PIs expect that any lag between forcing and (nonlocal)
response will result from the finite propagation speed of elastic waves. They
plan to begin by adding Maxwell viscoelastic behavior to a depth-integrated,
width-averaged ice stream-ice shelf model. This type of one-dimensional model
allows for relatively straightforward incorporation of new physics, yet is
sophisticated enough to assess the effects of ice shelf buttressing and basal
melting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;