* 0909694
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Pitcher Plants:   A Window into Metacommunity Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Primrose Boynton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Ecologists understand many of the processes that control plant and animal
diversity. However, they are only beginning to understand microbial diversity.
This study will explore processes common to microbes and larger organisms. The
group Fungi is well suited to this role because it includes yeasts (as small as
many bacteria), large forest mushrooms (estimated to rival blue whales in size),
and all sizes in between. This project focuses on yeasts living in the leaves of
carnivorous plants. It will quantify yeast biodiversity at several spatial
scales, and will investigate both competition between yeasts and dispersal of
individual yeasts as mechanisms that control diversity. Because yeasts are
microscopic, they are expected to have a wide range of dispersal abilities;
different dispersal abilities may result in a range of competitive abilities. In
addition to using new technologies to explore biodiversity in nature, yeasts
will be manipulated experimentally in microcosms. This research promises both to
connect microbial ecology to plant and animal ecology and to reveal many
processes contributing to microbial biodiversity. This project will have broader
impacts on the community through connections with students, educators, and the
public at large. It supports the work of one graduate student researcher, and
will also include undergraduates and local public school teachers. In addition,
results will be presented to both the local scientific public, the local lay
public, and local youth through the course of the project.