* 0909971
* Becoming a 21st Century Scientist:  Cognitive Practices, Identity Formation, and Learning in Integrative Systems Biology
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nancy Nersessian, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,019,240.00

The project examines the requirements for becoming a researcher in 21st century
bioscience research--what the PIs call a "transdisciplinary" researcher.
Transdisciplinary is defined as a situation "where researchers have deep
disciplinary knowledge and methods from one discipline but inhabit a research
space in which there is interpenetration of one or more other disciplines."

The investigation specifically looks at the cognitive and learning practices for
both undergraduates and graduate students, in the emerging transdisciplinary
field of Integrative Systems Biology (ISB) where the research lies at the
intersection of the computational, biological, and engineering sciences. The PIs
will conduct historical and ethnographic research on learners in two
laboratories--one inhabited by computational scientists and in another that
conducts biological experiments, computational modeling, and engineering. Using
observations and interviews, the ethnographies will investigate how learning
unfolds in the labs, how newcomers are apprenticed, how they make choices
regarding the cognitive tools and practices they appropriate, which ones they
discard, and the research paths they take based on these experiences. The
historical dimension examines historical records through the lens of cognitive
science research. Data collection includes publications, grant proposals,
dissertation proposals, presentations, laboratory notebooks, emails,
technological artifacts and interviews on lab history.

The project explores how interdisiciplinary research in general moves forward, a
topic that is critical to the conduct of 21st century science and to the
education of 21st century scientists. The PIs define interdisciplinary research
as research that integrates information, data, techniques, tools, perspective
and concepts/theories from two or more disciplines. Thus, the PIs consider
interdisciplinary to be a broad, overarching description, while
transdisicplinary research concerns a kind of interdisciplinary work that leads
to "interpenetation" of one more other disciplines. The field of ISB is such a
transdisciplinary field and can make significant contributions to several
pressing problems related to health and the environment.