* 0909273
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Knotting Phenomena in Contact and Symplectic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joshua Sabloff, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 146,772.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0909273, DMS-0909021 Principal Investigator: Joshua M. Sabloff, Lisa
Traynor

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The principal investigators propose to investigate flexibility and rigidity
questions that are central to the character of symplectic and contact topology
by exploring knotting phenomena of Lagrangian and Legendrian submanifolds.
Approaching symplectic and contact geometry through a topological lens has given
rise to a young and thriving discipline with interesting questions that explore
the boundary between flexibility (when the symplectic world behaves
topologically) and rigidity (when the symplectic world behaves geometrically).
In particular, the PIs plan to study the Arnold Conjecture for Legendrian
submanifolds, squeezing phenomena for Lagrangian disks, and the cobordism theory
of Lagrangian submanifolds. Special attention will be paid to Legendrian knots
in contact 3-manifolds and Lagrangian surfaces in symplectic 4-manifolds. The
methods used in addressing the aforementioned problems are of interest in their
own right. On one hand, the PIs plan to develop and use pseudo-holomorphic
techniques initiated by Gromov and Floer, and expanded to the Symplectic Field
Theory (SFT) framework by Eliashberg, Givental, and Hofer. On the other, the PIs
plan to develop and use generating family techniques. Investigations into the
structure of the holomorphic and the generating family based invariants will
yield insight into geometric flexibility and rigidity; making connections
between these different types of invariants will increase understanding of each.

Symplectic and contact topology have their roots in physics as the language of
classical mechanics and geometric optics. While remaining in touch with those
roots, symplectic and contact topology have blossomed into a central
mathematical field that combines features of geometry (the science of
measurement) and topology (the study of the shape of space). This field has a
variety of applications including fluid mechanics, differential equations, and
the study of the possible shape of the 3-dimensional space and the 4-dimensional
space-time in which we live. The goal of the PIs' project is to achieve a better
understanding of how symplectic and contact topology sit between geometry and
topology, and thereby strengthening the foundation for the aforementioned
applications. The PIs'research activities will bring a diverse set of students
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels into the process of discovering
new mathematics, with the PIs' research with undergraduates serving as a
pedagogical laboratory for integrating mathematical research into the PIs'
curricula.