* 0909319
* Geodynamics of the base of the lithosphere and ultraslow ridge axes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Norman Sleep, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 06/30/2012
* USD 106,270.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical explanation: The uppermost
200 kilometers of geologically stable regions behaves nearly rigidly over
geological times. The temperature in this region, called the lithosphere,
gradually increases with depth. The rock near the base of the lithosphere
deforms slowly as a very viscous fluid. Cold material sinks into the underlying
mantle and hot material rises from below. Thermal conduction through the rigid
lithosphere carries heat to the surface. Scientists constrain the temperature
change by studying rocks that were carried quickly from great depths to the
surface in diamond pipes. The proposed work involves the physics of heat and
mass transfer at the base of the lithosphere. This process occurs everywhere on
the Earth. Over geological time, it determines whether continents are above or
below sea level and strongly influences the depositional history of hydrocarbon-
bearing sediments in basins where subsidence occurs. The investigation will
include related topics on the long-term habitability of planets, including the
axes of mid-oceanic ridges that spread at rates below 2 kilometers per million
years. The heat and mass transfer computer code developed for the project has
proved useful for understanding the thermodynamic basis of widely used empirical
relationships that represent time-dependent friction in geological situations
including earthquakes as well as industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The project involves
dynamic effects that occur at the base of the lithosphere or equivalently at the
base of tectonic plates. The lack of tectonics in cratonal continental crust
(older than ~2.5 billion years) is a salient feature of the Earth. Data from
xenoliths erupted from diamond pipes provide hard constraints on physical
models. Cratonal lithosphere approached its present thickness, about 200
kilometers, soon after it formed before 2.5 billion years ago and has persisted
since then. The second key observation from xenoliths is that the rheologically
active boundary layer (the zone of active flow) at the base of the lithosphere
has a temperature range of less than 200 K. The investigation will focus on
observable processes. Thermal convection occurs within the basal transition
region (the rheological boundary layer) between the lithosphere and the
underlying nearly adiabatic mantle. The overlying nearly rigid cold lithosphere
provides a stagnant lid. The lithosphere cools and subsides when the basal
convective heat flow (plus lithosphere radioactive heat generation) is less than
the heat flow through the surface. This situation prevails in young ocean
lithosphere, which subsides as it ages. Convective heat flow comes into quasi-
equilibrium with surface heat flow below stable continental regions. Cratons
with crust typically over 2.5 billion years old have chemically buoyant highly
viscous lithosphere that provides a chemical lid to convection. Lithosphere that
differs only thermally from deeper mantle provides a stagnant lid beneath
younger platform crust. At present, the Earth is in a state where the
lithosphere beneath platforms is almost as thick as that beneath cratons. That
is, the chemical-lid convection beneath cratons is transitional to stagnant-lid
convection. (1) The proposal concentrates on the scaling and 3-D numerical
physics of the transition including 3-D effects from the disruption of
convection by changes in plate motion. (2) Mantle plumes of hot buoyant material
ascend from great depths and impinge on the base of the lithosphere. The buoyant
material ponds beneath the lithosphere and flows laterally toward thin
lithosphere like oil beneath pack ice. The plume material convectively exchanges
heat with the lithosphere, thinning it. Scaling relationships and 3-D numerical
models indicate that situations that favor vigorous thinning also favor vigorous
lateral flow. The duration at a given place of thinning and lateral flow is thus
brief, except above a slowly moving plume-tail orifice. The proposal
concentrates on 3-D modeling of real features. (3) The proposal begins physical
investigation of ultraslow ridge axes with kinematic thermal models.