* 0909805
* Collaborative Research Study: Understanding Indian Enterprise Systems: Graduate Research Capability and Future Potential: A US-India Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2008,08/31/2009
* Sridhar Seshadri, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 40,987.00

This research focuses on an assessment of the potential for scientific
collaboration between Indian and the US academic institutions in the fields of
enterprise engineering, specifically Operations Research, Operations management
and related manufacturing design research. The study will evaluate the potential
of Indian institutions to produce effective faculty and graduate research talent
for modeling and analysis of enterprise systems and effective collaboration
mechanisms with US institutions in order to achieve that goal. It will also
assess whether there is an impending shortage of talent at the graduate
education and research levels in India and how these trends will affect US
educational institutions and businesses. The study will focus on three areas:
(a) Design Capability, models and associated services, collaborations and
related research, (b) Supply Chain Management approaches in manufacturing
companies and associated research and (c) Service networks and models used to
understand risk in enterprise networks. These three areas of focus complement
research agendas of the study team and taken together will provide a complete
understanding of these aspects of enterprise systems. The grant will enable
collection and analysis of data on output trends, in funded and unfunded
research activity, collaborative activity, etc., from a representative set of
top-class research-and-degree granting Indian institutions. A projection of
problems and potential will be made based on direct onsite interviews by a
research team. This will be followed by a brainstorming of specific possible
collaboration initiatives between US and Indian
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This understanding will enable assessment of
the potential for scientific collaboration between Indian and the US academic
institutions in the fields of enterprise engineering, specifically Operations
Research, Operations Management and related manufacturing design research. As a
broader outcome, the findings from this project will help in identifying
possible mechanisms for enhancing collaborative opportunities between US and
Indian university partners with a view to enhance overall research
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;