* 0909102
* Investigation of the Coupled Dynamics and Chemistry of the Venus Lower Atmosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Eliot Young, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 298,543.00

AST-0909102 Bullock

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will acquire infrared images of Venus' night side in October and
November of 2010 using NASA's Infrared Telescope Facility (IRTF). Together with
simultaneous infrared spectral image cubes, these data will be used to calculate
the wind field at two altitudes, and to retrieve maps of below-cloud CO
abundance. The cloud-level wind fields and below-cloud CO abundance will also be
calculated from similar data acquired since 2001. This award will support
simultaneous observations from the Visible and Infrared Thermal Imaging
Spectrometer (VIRTIS) on the Venus Express spacecraft, and from the ground-based
IRTF, during the next two inferior conjunctions. Wind fields and CO abundances
can be determined from the south pole to 60 degrees north, while VIRTIS is
observing the clouds. The combined IRTF and VIRTIS datasets will provide
information on Venus' atmospheric motion at levels that have not previously been
explored. Any evidence for return flow, eddies, or Hadley circulation, will give
a much better picture of Venus' overall atmospheric circulation, and the
variations in CO abundance beneath the clouds may also be correlated with lower
cloud convective activity.

Advances in planetary exploration suggest that studying other planets can help
to understand the limits of Earth's systems. The atmospheric forecasting of
weather and climate on other planets has great public appeal, and this study
will inform popular publications, museum presentations, and radio shows, in an
effort to expand the public's awareness of other planets. Teacher training,
school presentations, and work with dedicated volunteers at the Denver Museum of
Nature & Science, all add valuable informal educational efforts to this research
project.