* 0909013
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Immunogenetics of Chytridiomycosis Resistance and Susceptibility in Rana yavapaiensis, a Declining North American Anuran
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,980.00

The emerging infectious disease chytridiomycosis has caused the decline or
extinction of many amphibian species worldwide. The genetics of frog immunity
will be critical to understanding the dynamics and potential outcome of this
disease for amphibian biodiversity. This study investigates the genetic
consequences of infection by the chytridiomycosis-causing pathogen
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) in the lowland leopard frog, Rana
yavapaiensis. The researchers propose to characterize disease prevalence across
frog populations with different histories to determine the relationship between
infection and disease, and to test for associations between chytridiomycosis
susceptibility and frog genetic background in natural populations and in lab-
reared individuals. Frog and Bd samples will be collected from genetically-
distinct Arizona frog populations for five years, and tadpoles will be reared
from five focal localities for experimental infections in the laboratory. Using
each frog's infection and disease status along with genotypes at neutral
(microsatellite) genetic markers and immunogenetic (major histocompatibility
complex) genes, this study will test hypotheses about immunogenetics, disease
susceptibility, and disease dynamics.

Understanding the relationship between Bd infection and frog mortality, the
importance of standing immunogenetic variation for population disease dynamics,
and the effect of host genotype on disease outcome, will provide critical
genetic indices for future studies of amphibian chytridiomycosis and other
emerging wildlife diseases. One graduate student and several undergraduate
students will receive broad training through participation in this project.