* 0909270
* Collaborative Research: Sensitivity of local glaciers in central East Greenland to Holocene climate change
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2013
* USD 261,589.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This award will support an investigation of Holocene glacier fluctuations in the
Scoresby Sund region of central East Greenland (~70-72°N, 22-28°W) along a
transect from a coastal maritime setting to the continental conditions adjacent
to the Greenland Ice Sheet. The 'Intellectual Merit' of the proposed study lies
in the potential to affirm, or otherwise, the widely-held view that the scale of
glacier and ice sheet change being observed today in Greenland is not unique in
the Holocene. The current recession of glaciers in the Scoresby Sund region is
exposing sub-fossil vegetation that grew at times when glaciers were smaller
than at present. These emerging records yield a rare opportunity to examine both
the biota of these warm times and, more critically, the response of the glaciers
to temperatures as high as, or higher than, at present. Development of a
chronology for a network of sites in the Scoresby Sund region, including a site
adjacent to the Renland ice core, across an environmental gradient can provide
insights into recent patterns of ice sheet distribution. However, to place these
in context requires a longer temporal framework. Thus, two additional objectives
emerge. First, compare late-Holocene glacier fluctuations in Greenland with
glacier fluctuations in other mid-to-high Northern Hemisphere locations. This
will assess whether glaciers in Greenland are more or less sensitive than their
counterparts in other high-latitude locations. Second, document a continuous
pattern of glacier fluctuations in Greenland during Holocene time. When
contrasted with paleoclimate indicators, such as the GRIP borehole
paleotemperature record, how Scoresby Sund glaciers responded to warmer-than-
present times, such as the so-called Holocene Climatic Optimum (~5000-9000 years
ago), can be assessed. The proposed study has numerous 'Broader Impacts'. It
will contribute to the educational development of graduate and undergraduate
students at Dartmouth College, the University of Maine, and the University of
Cincinnati, and tie in with the IGERT program at Dartmouth College. The PIs will
also visit elementary schools and present public lectures on climate change. The
results of the study will be added to an interactive, Web-based learning system
and stand-alone kiosk deployed at Acadia National Park.