* 0909749
* Gold Nanoparticle Ensembles on Optical Plasmon Capillaries for Virus/DNA Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/27/2008,08/31/2012
* Greg Thoma, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2012
* USD 261,194.00

This study is aimed at detecting and distinguishing virus serotypes inside
silicon capillaries using light interacting with free electrons on structured
arrays of nanoparticles. Arrays are formed by a ¡¥bottom-up¡¦ method to provide
unique spectral sensitivity and heat dissemination. Arrays will be tuned to
control light-electron interactions using new solution to Maxwell¡¦s Equations
and a novel calorimeter to detect viral DNA at ?T10 femtomolar (fM) in ?T10
minutes using ?T10 mW. The proposed research is expected to develop rapid,
inexpensive, virus/DNA sensors to replace existing immunoassays or genotyping
methods that are slow, insensitive and capital-intensive. Its technical impact
arises from applications of light-electron interactions to develop photonic
circuits, high-density magneto-optic data storage, near-field optical
microscopy, and terahertz imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will
educate two underrepresented graduate students in active nanostructures and
biophotonics in a campus-wide initiative to fabricate and analyze nano-scale
devices and materials. Its social impact includes having undergraduates
demonstrate sensors in hands-on instructional modules prepared for classroom and
hands-on lab experiences for community-college and high-school students as part
of a 5-year NSF-sponsored collaboration co-initiated by the PI to double
enrollment and retention of students underrepresented in STEM courses.
&lt;br/&gt;