* 0909511
* Dissertation Research:   Testing for Generalities in Mutualistic Networks:  The Role of Specialization in Plant-Pollinator Community Structure and Stability
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Beryl Simpson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2010
* USD 9,998.00

Knowledge of species interactions is crucial to understanding the origins and
persistence of biodiversity as organisms are not isolated in nature but are
rather part of complex communities. Recent studies suggest that plant-pollinator
communities have a universal type of structural organization that is determined
by the degree of mutual dependency and specialization of interactions among
their members. However, since community composition is contingent upon overall
species diversity, among other factors that vary across latitudes, plant-
pollinator communities likely yield different structures in distinct geographic
regions. This study focuses on a tropical plant-pollinator community in the
Brazilian Cerrado, one of the most diverse and endangered tropical ecosystems in
the world. High plant diversity and frequent occurrence of specialized
pollination systems create an important opportunity for a community-wide
analysis of structural organization using a particular approach that treats this
community as a network. This structure will then be compared to the universal
structure proposed for other plant-pollinator communities, providing an
important contrast with previously well studied systems outside the tropics. In
addition, field sampling will be conducted both in the wet and dry season, to
determine how environmental conditions may affect community structure. The
project involves collaboration between South American and North American
institutions, training of undergraduate and graduate students in Brazil and the
U.S., as well as the identification of keystone species that may have an
especially important role in the conservation of plant-pollinator communities in
the Cerrado.