* 0909137
* A Long Baseline Investigation of Clouds, Haze and Methane Distributions on Titan
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Eliot Young, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 429,881.00

AST-0909137&lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saturn's largest moon, Titan, is perhaps the only
other body in the solar system currently experiencing the familiar atmospheric
processes of precipitation, liquid and aeolian erosion, and the formation and
dissipation of smog-like haze. This project will resolve several outstanding
questions about Titan, such as the source of the atmospheric methane (which
should survive for tens of millions of years without being replenished), why
clouds appear over specific latitude ranges at certain times, and how the haze
migrates between north and south hemispheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has five goals: 1) investigate whether localized sources of methane can be
detected from maps of Titan; 2) characterize the conditions for methane
condensation as a function of time, latitude and altitude; 3) compare the
predictions of the Titan Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (TRAMS) with high-
resolution image sequences of convective clouds; 4) investigate if there is such
a phenomenon as "morning brightening", a diurnal asymmetry in the east/west limb
brightnesses; 5) map the latitudinal and height distributions of haze from 1996
through 2007. The study applies constraints on the properties of Titan's
atmosphere and its methane clouds which come from Cassini Spacecraft data,
Hubble Space Telescope observations, and ground-based Keck images, interpreted
in part with TRAMS. The analysis will include the construction of three-
dimensional hemispherical maps of methane and haze profiles, the determination
of temperature profiles from spectra obtained with the Cassini Composite
Infrared Spectrometer, and a study of clouds in Cassini Imaging Science
Subsystem image sequences to determine the scale and lifetime of convective
cloud components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because similar processes are operating
on Earth, Titan is an important laboratory for investigating familiar processes
like precipitation, erosion, and the properties of smog-like hazes. The project
will also support summer undergraduate students at the University of Idaho who
will assist and be trained in astronomical data processing. The work supports an
additional postdoctoral scholar at the University of Maryland.