* 0909388
* Improving surface mass balance estimation of the Greenland ice sheet through assimilation of multi-sensor satellite products and ground measurements into a regional climate model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Steven Margulis, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2013
* USD 572,430.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) plays a major role in Arctic
climate and is a major consideration in projections of sea level rise.
Diagnosing the surface mass balance of the GIS is a critical objective that
continues to involve large uncertainties from errors in modeled precipitation
and errors related to sub-grid-scale process representation. To date, there has
been limited work in integrating remote sensing techniques and ground-based data
with modeling. In this project, a data assimilation approach will provide a
rigorous framework for merging these disparate sources of information in a
consistent way (based on their associated uncertainty) to obtain an optimal
surface mass balance posterior estimate comprising maps in space and time. This
project will focus on implementing a synergistic modeling/observation framework
with the final outcome being improved estimates of the mean and uncertainty of
the surface states and fluxes associated with the surface mass balance. Broader
impacts include a significant contribution to understanding of GIS influence on
sea level rise.