* 0909037
* Materials World Network: Structures and Mechanical Behavior of Nanocrystalline Phase-Containing Glass-Forming Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Peter Liaw, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 07/31/2014
* USD 426,000.00

This Materials World Network award by the Metallic Materials and Nanostructures
program in the Division of Materials Research to University of Tennessee
Knoxville is to establish a fundamental understanding of the processing and
fabrication of amorphous/nanocrystalline metallic thin-film coatings, and the
mechanisms responsible for the resulting ductility and fatigue-resistance
enhancements. This award is cofunded by the Office of Special Projects-DMR and
the Office of International Science and Engineering. This collaborative
experimental and theoretical project is carried out between the University of
Tennessee and the team in the Republic of China (Taiwan) consisting of National
Taiwan University of Science and Technology, National Taiwan Ocean University
and National Cheng Kung University. This project is motivated by two novel and
preliminary observations that the two teams recently discovered that: 1)
metallic-glass coatings with or without the presence of nanocrystalline phases
can be prepared by an annealing-induced amorphization process; and 2) these
coatings on structural materials demonstrate excellent mechanical properties and
fatigue resistance. In the experimental program, the Taiwan team will develop
and improve the thin-film preparation method that realizes the controllable
amorphization and nanocrystallization during annealing, and the USA team will
focus on the deformation and fatigue behavior of these film-on-substrate
systems. Advanced characterization tools, such as the high-resolution
transmission-electron microscopy, will be employed to study (1) the
microstructural evolution during the thin-film preparation and (2) the
interaction of the strain localization and the nanocrystalline phase in the
metallic-glass film during mechanical testing. From the modeling point of view,
the Taiwan team will emphasize a molecular-dynamics study of the kinetic
processes in the annealing-induced amorphization, while the USA team will work
on the relationship between the shear-band characteristics and the mechanical
behavior of the film, and the effect of the film on the fatigue behavior. The
connection of these models to and comparisons with the experimental observations
will lead to the basic understanding of fatigue mechanisms.

The collaborative research will advance and enhance the focused research and
teaching activities on both the USA and Taiwan sides. Research projects from
this joint program will be designed and used as a teaching unit for both middle-
and high-school students and teachers, especially women and minority students
involved in the outreach programs. These efforts are designed, not only to
increase the public awareness of advanced structural materials and their
scientific importance, but also to stimulate the interests of the broader public
in science, engineering, and technology careers. Educational materials will be
developed and disseminated through two newly-developed graduate-level classes.
The present integrated research and education activities will promote the public
awareness of the international-scientific collaboration.