* 0909695
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolution of seed-cracking beak morphology in Darwin's Finches and their relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Arkhat Abzhanov, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2011
* USD 11,464.00

A fundamental challenge in evolutionary biology is to understand the mechanisms
that generate biological diversity. Traditional studies of diversity have
focused on comparing traits between distant groups but such an approach tells
little about the mechanisms that cause the differences between closely related
species. Darwin's Finches in the Galapagos Islands comprise a group of fourteen
closely related species that has evolved extreme diversity of their beak shapes
and sizes. Similarly, the Caribbean Bullfinches, an independently-evolved group
of closely related species, display similar levels of beak variety. This second
group provides an ideal opportunity to test whether the genetic tool kit that
fueled the diversity of beak shapes in Darwin's Finches is shared with other
species. The researchers will perform analyses of gene expression in natural
populations of both groups of birds followed by experiments with beak
development in chicken embryos in the laboratory. This project will 1) establish
which genes are involved in generating the highly specific seed-eating beaks of
Darwin's Ground Finches and 2) investigate whether the same genes are used in a
different group of birds to adapt to similar environments. The results of this
research will aid the general understanding of how embryological processes
generate variation within and among species.

The interdisciplinary nature of this project, combining fieldwork and
developmental genetics in an evolutionary context, will involve collaborations
with scientists from several fields of biology. The work involves international
collaborations and training, plus the involvement and mentoring of
undergraduates in field and laboratory methods.