* 0909451
* CNH:   Collaborative Research:  Coupled Natural Human Systems in the Chicago Wilderness: Evaluating the Biodiversity and Social Outcomes of Different Models of Restoration Planning
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Liam Heneghan, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 435,325.00

The frequency of human-caused disturbance in metropolitan areas imposes
significant challenges to the management of urban habitats of high conservation
value. Typically these areas require active, sustained management intervention,
usually in the form of restoration activities (e.g., removal of invasive
species, use of prescribed fire), in order to realize the biodiversity
conservation objectives set for them. Chicago Wilderness is a consortium of over
240 organizations that has as its primary goal the conservation, restoration and
management of biodiversity on 360,000 acres of protected open space in the
greater Chicago area. This research will use ongoing efforts in the woodlands
and savannas of Chicago Wilderness as a model for investigating how the
restoration and conservation planning process affects biodiversity outcomes in
complex metropolitan landscapes. Several related research approaches will be
utilized, including development of models to explore how interactions among
different constituencies may lead to different restoration and management
practices, and in turn, how these practices affect biodiversity outcomes.
Documenting the range of biodiversity outcomes in woodland and savanna
restoration sites across the Chicago region will permit a test of hypotheses
about the relationship between distinct models of the restoration planning
process (traditional, co-management, grassroots) and biodiversity. Thus, the
project will research the impact of humans, via the planning process, on
biodiversity in an urban context, and also the reciprocal influence of these
biodiversity outcomes on different members of the human community. The project
will add to knowledge of the connections between conservation management
planning and the biodiversity results that emerge from its implementation. The
project will generate results relevant to the conservation of habitats of global
significance (e.g. oak savanna, oak woodlands, and tallgrass prairie) while
simultaneously enhancing the understanding of institutional responses to the
challenges of balancing multiple objectives and incorporating heterogeneous
sources of information into the planning process. The results will be broadly
applicable to other complex metropolitan landscapes throughout the U.S. and the
world. Postdoctoral scholars and undergraduates will be mentored and trained in
this interdisciplinary research project.