* 0909083
* Collaborative Research:    Origin of Crust and the Temporal and Spatial Scales of Mantle Melting at the Endeavour Segment, Juan de Fuca Ridge
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Frank Ramos, New Mexico State University
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2012
* USD 112,427.00

ABSTRACT 0623161/0623255/0623156 (Gill/Michael/Ramos)

Intellectual Merit: This research examines how ocean crust is formed at
intermediate rate mid-ocean ridge spreading centers, how melts and hydrothermal
systems interact in this setting, and at what scale in time and space the
volcanics and hydrothermal vents relate to mantle melts beneath them.
Geophysical, geological, and geochemical data will be integrated to obtain a
holistic picture of the system. Major and trace element chemistry of already
collected seafloor volcanic rocks from the Juan de Fuca spreading ridge, as well
as corresponding radiogenic isotopes, volatile contents, and U-series elements
form the core of the geochemical data set. Objectives under investigation are:
testing whether layer 2A of the ocean crust forms off-axis as mantle plumbing
moves during seafloor spreading and evaluating whether heterogeneities in
basalts, that are erupted on the seafloor that reflect heterogeneities in magma
composition and degassing, can be tied to variations in the composition and
intensity of the overlying hydrothermal systems.

Broader Impacts: The work fosters collaboration between academic institutions
and scientists in Washington State, California, and Oklahoma. Impacts include
support of an early career scientist and support the objectives of the NSF-
funded RIDGE2000 Program. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
state-of-the-art analytical techniques, and the work supports the set-up of a
U-series analytical laboratory at Central Washington University expanding its
infrastructure for research. Public outreach to K-12 teachers and their students
will be carried out through the RIDGE2000 Education and Outreach Office.

