* 0909723
* New Synthetic Methods for Building Chip Based Libraries
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Moeller, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 455,000.00

This work will continue the development of microelectrode arrays as tools for
probing interactions between small molecule libraries and biological receptors.
The use of the microelectrode arrays allows for interactions between small
molecules and biological receptors to be probed in "real-time" without the need
for the subsequent washing steps typical of current state-of-the-art methods. In
this way, more accurate information can be gathered about the three dimensional
binding preferences of the receptor being studied. During the upcoming budget
period, new site-selective chemistry that extends the general synthetic
capabilities of the arrays will be explored. This work is essential because it
is the synthetic methodology available for building molecules proximal to the
microelectrodes in an array that defines both types of molecules that can be
synthesized on the arrays and the nature of the biological problems that can be
studied using them. Efforts will also be made to develop new polymer coatings
for the microelectrode arrays that are compatible with the synthetic methods
being discovered, to design and synthesize new linkers for attaching molecules
to the polymer coatings so that the members of a molecular library on the arrays
can be readily characterized, and to optimize the signaling capabilities of
microelectrode arrays.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Kevin D. Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at
Washington University in St. Louis. Professor Moeller's research involves the
development of electrochemical methods for synthesizing organic molecules and
probing their biological activity. The long-range impact of the proposed work
will be to greatly enhance our ability to map the three-dimensional binding
motifs of therapeutic targets and more effectively guide the design of new
ligands and potential therapeutic agents for them. In this effort,
microelectrode arrays will be developed and employed as tools for following the
interactions between molecules and their targeted receptors as they happen.
Successful accomplishment of this project will have a positive impact on the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.