* 0909191
* Climate Change Adaptation in High Latitude Rural Development Planning
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Harley Johansen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2012
* USD 173,697.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic development in remote rural
regions is a challenge throughout the world, but in high latitude areas,
remoteness is joined by early measurable effects of climate change to make this
challenge even greater. To learn how local communities are adapting to the early
effects of climate change in their vicinity, this project will compare data on
economic and social indicators and will conduct a survey of municipal planners
in 71 municipalities above 65N in northwest Russia, Finland, Sweden, and Norway.
Data on climate change experiences and problems or opportunities resulting from
these experiences will be compared to municipal adaptation strategies and plans
as part of their economic and community development programs. The climate change
and adaptation data will be compared to economic and demographic measures and
trends across the set of municipalities to understand how they vary in their
approach to adaptation and how this compares to levels of development among the
municipalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Municipalities are expected to vary in
their approach to development and adaptation, both across countries and by level
of development. It is also expected that climate change may bring advantages as
well as problems to local areas and these will be important in the study.
Understanding how these effects of climate change are viewed by the local
leaders and how they view both opportunities and problems can help other rural
regions in lower latitudes understand and prepare for changes that may affect
their economies and their development potential in similar or different ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a comparative database for
measuring economic growth, human and natural resource endowments, location
characteristics, and local development efforts, and to model change in economic
development as a function of these factors. The research team expects climate
change adaptation and local development strategies to focus on location
advantages, traditional industries, and/or human and natural resource
advantages, and that these strategies will be associated with the most positive
economic growth measures. They also expect municipalities that have addressed
climate change issues to be more successful and to have considered both positive
and negative possibilities resulting from climate change effects.