* 0909932
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An assessment of horizontal and vertical transmission of endosymbiont infections in Drosophila and bee species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Robert Unckless, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2011
* USD 14,016.00

Parasites are common throughout the natural world and most parasites spread by
moving among individuals infectiously. Many insects, however, harbor microscopic
parasites that are thought to be transmitted solely through the egg from mother
to offspring. These microorganisms are termed reproductive parasites because
they usually cause abnormalities during reproduction, such as feminization of
males, killing of male embryos or development of embryos without fertilization.
Most studies of reproductive parasites assume that transmission is strictly from
mother to offspring. Surprisingly, recent experimental work has shown that these
microorganisms can occasionally spread infectiously among unrelated individuals.
The extent of infectious transmission in fruit flies (Drosophila) will be
investigated by using DNA markers to detect transfer between individuals and
between generations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses fundamental
process of disease and parasite transmission. Moreover, reproductive parasites
such as those examined here have been proposed as biological control agents for
some insect-vectored human diseases. If infectious transmission of the parasite
is common, current models for pest control will need to be modified to prevent
spread of the parasite to non-target insects. The investigators will continue to
engage high school students and undergraduates in laboratory research and are
developing outreach programs for high school and middle school students. This
project is ideal for younger students because it is relatively simple
conceptually, interesting (male-killing and feminization piques the interest of
young students) and includes components that are technically simple.