* 0909538
* Collaborative Research: Environmental changes alter the carbon cycle of High Arctic ecosystems: shifts in the ages and sources of CO2 and DOC
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Welker, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 502,530.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Arctic is undergoing structural and functional changes that appear to be the
result of climate change, including shifts in vegetation distribution, increases
in CO2 and CH4 efflux from ecosystems to the atmosphere, and the acceleration of
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) export from land to oceans. Research in NW
Greenland has produced four lines of evidence that climate change is affecting
the High Arctic C cycle in ways we do not fully understand. First, soil organic
C pools in polar semi-deserts, which occupy 1 x 106 km2 of the Arctic land
surface, may be at least 6× greater than previous estimates, and ancient (>30 ky
BP) and young soil C pools are present in the active layer. Second, CO2
ecosystem exchange measurements have consistently shown net C losses during the
growing season; these C losses are, however, reversed under warmer and wetter
conditions and with modest snow depth increases during the previous winter. In
situ ecosystem respiration has been found to increase by 25 and 35% with
experimental summer warming of 1.3 and 2.4°C, respectively, but by 50% when the
higher level of warming was combined with irrigation. Third, soil CO2 efflux
measurements indicate that ancient soil C is being degraded by microbes before
vegetation leaf-out. Losses are expected to continue throughout the growing
season, but masked by high rates of plant respiration (recently-fixed C) during
the mid-summer. Forth, interannual and temporal patterns of riverine DOC are not
explained by simple differences in summer weather conditions. Articulating the
magnitudes of CO2 and CH4 exchange and DOC export along with the ages of soil
respired CO2 and DOC in soil solution and rivers, and determining the
sensitivity of microbial degradation of different soil C pools to temperature
and moisture will transform our understanding of environmental change, ecosystem
function and C cycling in the Arctic. This study will address these questions:

1. How does the age (recently-fixed vs. older) of soil respired CO2 and DOC
change over the course of a year, to what extent is this influenced by inter-
annual variability in temperature and precipitation, and how does it correspond
with the patterns of CO2 and CH4 fluxes?

2. To what extent do long-term experimental increases in temperature (+2 and +
4oC), and in water inputs (summer rain and winter snow) alter the ages,
magnitudes, and patterns of C fluxes (CO2, CH4, and DOC)?

3. Are there differences in the extent of microbial degradation of young as
opposed to older soil C pools and how sensitive are the degradation rates to
changes in climate?