* 0909843
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Theoretical and Empirical Studies of State-Dependent Variation in Maternal Investment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Suzanne Alonzo, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2012
* USD 14,982.00

Predicting the future abundance of organisms requires that we understand how
individual reproductive patterns respond to environmental change. Maternal
reproductive investment (e.g. the age at first reproduction or the size and
number of offspring produced) affects population growth and can thus determine
the persistence or extinction of a population. Recent empirical studies suggest
that the size and number of offspring produced by females varies among
individuals and is shaped simultaneously by multiple factors, including
individual condition, resource availability and mate quality. The proposed
research will include both theory and empirical work to address maternal
investment. The theory will be developed to predict how the factors listed above
jointly influence the production of offspring. The predictions from the theory
will be tested in a Mexican species of swordtail fish where maternal investment
is known to vary among females. Swordtails are ideal for testing this novel
theory because they are naturally abundant and their reproductive biology is
well studied. The PIs will collaborate with researchers from the US, Mexico, and
the UK to address how population ecology and sexual selection interact to shape
female reproduction in natural populations of swordtails.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will involve local high-school students, largely
from groups traditionally underrepresented in academia, in the research. They
will also provide research opportunities for undergraduates. Finally, by linking
theory and data to improve the understanding of individual reproductive
patterns, the proposed research will improve predictive models used in the
management and conservation of wild populations.&lt;br/&gt;