* 0909394
* CNH: RCN: A Research Network for Computational Modeling in the Socioecological Sciences
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Marco Janssen, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 09/30/2016
* USD 499,735.00

This project establishes a scientific research collaboration network to support
and expand the development and use of computational modeling in the social and
life sciences. The COMSES (COmputational Modeling for SocioEcological Science)
network aims to be broadly inclusive of social and natural scientists using (and
desiring to use) advanced modeling to study coupled natural and human, or
'socioecological systems' (SES). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The often non-linear,
non-intuitive, and even surprising relationships and consequences that emerge
from complex interactions between human social practice and the biophysical
environment make it imperative that scientific models - including their
underlying assumptions, algorithmic processes, logical consistency, and
connections with empirical data - be transparent and quantitative. For this
reason, computational modeling in general and agent-based modeling (ABM) in
particular are important tools for research in socioecological sciences. Yet ABM
remains little used or understood in the broader scientific communities involved
in the science of coupled natural and human systems. Rather, it is widely
perceived as inaccessible to social and natural scientists in spite of the fact
that ABM has existed as a potential research tool for nearly two decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the COMSES network is to serve as a
coordinated community of practice and a conduit to expedite knowledge exchange
for computational modeling in SES. The network will build on the NSF-funded
OpenABM Consortium http://www.openabm.org. It will seek to grow scientific
infrastructure so as to better serve research that uses computational modeling
by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- establishing an interactive, online archive for
computational models and providing standard tools and data for model
evaluation;&lt;br/&gt;- promoting a common standard for describing
models;&lt;br/&gt;- developing educational curricula for embedding modeling and
computational thinking in the interdisciplinary study of social and natural
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;- establishing a new e-journal dedicated to publishing
research in the social and natural sciences that involves computational
modeling, and studies of modeling methods and empirical
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the development of exemplar curricula
and training opportunities, the project will endeavor to stimulate new
interdisciplinary learning opportunities for students at multiple levels who
represent the next generation of scientists. With the ever-increasing importance
of information technology and related cybertools in today's world, training in
advanced modeling techniques and their application in the social sciences will
broadly benefit students' careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
environmental challenges that we face in the 21st century may also be considered
social problems because they affect our quality of life and can only be
addressed by human actions. The COMSES network has the potential to transform
the social and natural sciences in profound ways by developing computational
tools and expertise that will help us to gain a much deeper understanding of the
relationships between humans and their environment, and allow us to better
predict the likely effects of future policies and decisions.