* 0909604
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing the effects of priors on prediction error in Bayesian demographic models
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Sydne Record, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2011
* USD 12,715.00

It is critical that forecasts of populations sizes and extinction risks applied
to rare species have high accuracy and low uncertainty. One possible solution to
reducing uncertainty in these models is to include information on closely
related species in a Bayesian population viability analysis (PVA). This study
tests the ability of Bayesian PVA to predict real future extinction risks and
population sizes. To do this, the researchers will construct Bayesian models for
two rare plant species, Calochortus tiburonensis and Pedicularis furbishiae,
Calochortus tiburonensis and Pedicularis furbishiae, using external data from
closely related congeners. These two species were originally studied in the
1980s, and the original populations will be re-censused. Estimates of the
extinction risks and 2009 population sizes derived from different models will be
compared with information on the populations obtained from contemporary
censuses.

This research provides one of the first tests to determine the appropriateness
of using external data in Bayesian PVA. The results will be applied to improving
conservation and recovery plans for the rare species studied. The researchers
will make the modeling software available online and teach others how to use it
at international and regional conservation conferences. Further this research
promotes cross-disciplinary interactions and will train both a graduate student
and an undergraduate in the use of Bayesian statistical modeling.