* 0909821
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Identifying and Measuring Components of Reproductive Isolation Between Terminal Forms of the Ensatina eschscholtzii Ring Species Complex
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Craig Moritz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,908.00

The salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii is the most famous example of a 'ring
species', a rare situation in which a ring of interbreeding populations
surrounds an area of unsuitable habitat and the end populations of the ring
exist in the same area without interbreeding. This proposal seeks to identify
and measure the barriers to reproduction that prevent gene flow between the
terminal forms of Ensatina. Mating trials will be used to test for differences
in courtship behavior that may reduce mating between the terminal forms.
Parentage will be determined for the offspring of these crosses to investigate
patterns of sperm use when females have mated multiple times. Finally, a mark-
recapture study will test whether differential habitat preference reduces the
opportunity for encountering (and mating with) individuals of the alternative
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study will provide a detailed case study in
nature where barriers that prevent gene flow between incipient species are
identified and measured. The project will directly support a graduate student
and will include participation by undergraduates from diverse backgrounds.
Results will be communicated to the public via the award-winning 'Understanding
Evolution' website (http://evolution.berkeley.edu/), a site developed and
maintained by UC Berkeley to provide resources for evolution education to
teachers and students.