* 0909854
* Dissertation Research:  Vasopressin-Glutamate Interactions in the LAH of Aggressive Male Syrian Hamsters
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Richard Melloni, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,769.00

During the past 40 years research in aggression has identified the main
neurotransmitters and brain areas involved in the modulation of aggressive
behavior. However, how key brain areas and neurotransmitters interact to
modulate aggression is unknown. In the lateral anterior hypothalamus (i.e., LAH;
the center of control of aggression that receives and integrates aggression
inputs from other brain areas involved in aggression control and sends output
projections back), vasopressin is a neuropeptide that facilitates aggression.
Moreover, in this brain area glutamate (i.e., a predominant excitatory amino
acid in the hypothalamus) has been previously hypothesized to be the aggression
output system to other aggression brain areas. The current project will focus on
understanding how interactions between vasopressin and glutamate in the LAH
modulate the aggressive behavior. Specifically, male Syrian hamsters
(Mesocricetus auratus) exposed to moderate doses of anabolic androgenic steroids
will be used to investigate whether increased hypothalamic vasopressin
stimulates the activity of glutamate cells and underlies the escalated
aggressive behavior observed in these animals. This project will primarily use
behavior pharmacology to investigate how changes in aggressive behavior map to
changes in brain activity.

The findings from this project will not only provide new knowledge that will
further our understanding on the neurobiology of aggression but it will also
make a contribution to other research areas investigating how brain mechanisms
regulate behavior. Moreover, this project will promote the development as an
early neuroscientist of a female PhD student and training in laboratory of
various undergraduate students from underrepresented groups.