* 0909798
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  MHC and Mating Systems:  Is sexual behavior related to selection on MHC genes?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,134.00

Natural selection is a potentially powerful force of evolutionary change and
yet, how an animal's traits influence its action is poorly understood. This is
surprising, as being armed with this knowledge will allow researchers to better
understand many aspects of basic population biology. This study, on the
relationship between sexual behavior and natural selection (a mechanism of
adaptive evolution) on genes of the Major Histocompatibility Complex (the genes
underlying vertebrate immune function), will relate vastly different sexual
behaviors (monogamy versus promiscuity) to striking differences in genes. This
study tests the hypothesis that the increased rate of infection by parasites and
pathogens in promiscuous species leads to adaptive evolution at genes that
control immune function. One specific class of pathogen hypothesized to be
underlying this relationship is harmful bacteria transferred during mating. This
study uses wild animals (deer mice) and genetic techniques such as PCR (targeted
amplification of DNA), cloning (a technique to separate different DNA
sequences), and DNA sequencing to identify differences. Vaginal bacteria will be
collected using a swabbing technique. Individual bacterial species will be
identified using molecular techniques. Undergraduate training opportunities will
be available for both lab and field components of the project. The fundamental
relationships between animal behavior, pathogen transfer, and adaptive evolution
of genes of the immune system is poorly understood, yet is critical to
understanding many aspects of population biology. This study will allow for a
better understanding of these relationships, and in the process, integrate
several distinct scientific disciplines and provide opportunity for
undergraduate training.