* 0909743
* Non-covalent Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 07/31/2013
* USD 730,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this award funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Bowers of University of
California, Santa Barbara, explores the question of why peptides and proteins in
living systems are soley composed of L-amino acids - one of the deepest
mysteries in biology. Professor Bowers and his students will start with several
simple model systems of peptides that are available in a wide range of chirally
mixed forms. These peptides are small enough (5 or 6 amino acids long) that good
theory can be done on them to help understand observed changes in their folding
and aggregation tendencies as a function of their chiral purity. These peptide
families will also provide an entrée into a second major thrust of the proposal
- amyloid formation mechanisms. Amyloids are ubiquitous in complex living
systems and are implicated in many serious diseases (Alzheimer's, type 2
diabetes, etc.). The goal is to understand the aggregation process and how
initially coiled or alpha-helical oligomeric systems end up as large beta-sheet
assemblies. As part of this effort Professor Bower's team will initiate a
collaboration with Gerhard Meijer and Gert Von Helden at the Fritz Haber
Institute in Berlin. This group is building a state of the art instrument to
Professor Bower's specifications for this work to couple with a new free
electron laser under construction at that facility. Finally the researchers have
initiated studies on a related biologically important amyloid system, the 37
residue IAPP or amylin peptide, involved in type 2 diabetes. The human wild type
peptide rapidly forms large oligomers but a number of very similar peptides do
not. Preliminary data implicate compact assemblies as leading to fibril
formation (and hence disease) while elongated assemblies of the same oligomer
number do not aggregate further. Modeling and further experiments are planned to
fully understand these initial results. &lt;br/&gt;Science education in the
United States is in a sustained downturn that threatens our world leadership in
both innovation and technology development. The problems start early. The 5th
grade has been targeted as the first "go" or "no go" indicator in a child's
scientific development. At UCSB there is a strong outreach program at the 5th
grade level initiated and sustained by a former group member with continuing
help from current research group members. Professor Bowers decided to tackle the
second "go" or "no go" decision time in young adults - their high school years.
His group is developing an outreach program using all group members to present
their research projects to high school classes and to relate their personal
scientific stories and how they ended up in graduate school at UCSB. A
preliminary trial with one of the group members has been run with encouraging
results. Additional UCSB faculty and research groups will be incorporated as the
program grows.