* 0909499
* Collaborative Research: Greenland Ice Sheet Snow Accumulation Variability: Filling Knowledge and Data Voids
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Forster, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 369,779.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support an investigation
of snow accumulation in the south-eastern sector of the Greenland ice sheet.
Snow accumulation rates on the Greenland ice sheet have been significantly
underestimated and the missing mass prevents accurate estimates of the overall
ice sheet mass balance. The south-eastern sector of the ice sheet contains the
largest proportion of the missing mass. Consequently, this study will measure
snow accumulation using new and existing firn cores along two transects in the
south-east Greenland data void and, by combining the firn core records with
ground-penetrating radar surveys, develop continuous accumulation transects
between 2500 m and 500 m elevation. Successful completion of the investigation
will fill a geographic gap in knowledge of accumulation on the Greenland ice
sheet, and the data will have broader scientific value for remote sensing of
accumulation and ice sheet mass balance, and ice sheet and climate modeling. In
addition to the scientific benefits, the 'Broader Impacts' of the investigation
include a comprehensive suite of informal and formal education and outreach
activities for all age groups. Notable among these is a collaboration with the
Utah Museum of Natural History that includes the development of a display about
snow accumulation in Greenland, hosting a workshop for teachers, and project
scientists' participation in "Scientist in the Spotlight" and "Science Movie
Night" series.