* 0909922
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of SINES and their Phylogenetic Utility in Carnivora
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Kathryn Walters, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2010
* USD 9,379.00

Recent genome-sequencing projects have unveiled a new variety of molecular
markers for potential use in phylogenetic studies of divergent species. Short
interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) are a type of molecular marker with the
potential to clarify relationships between populations and specie,s while
providing insight into genome composition and function. The proposed research
explores the distribution of a specific class of SINEs within the cat family
Felidae. Specifically, modern genomic techniques will be used to uncover
species-specific SINE insertion sites in non-domestic felid species. Relative
genomic positions of isolated segments will be determined via alignment to the
genome of the domestic cat. These methods will identify informative SINE
insertion sites that may be used in future phylogenetic, evolutionary, and
conservation studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize data
from recent whole genome sequencing efforts to extract genetic information
useful to a variety of research areas. Results from the study will also be
essential to the development of conservation strategies by revealing molecular
markers that can be used for rapid identification of exotic felid species. In
addition, this project will provide research opportunities to undergraduate
students under the leadership of a PhD candidate, while fostering collaborations
between academic and government laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;