* 0909801
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The (epi)genetic basis of increased MUP expression during rapid adaptation to sociality in MUS
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Wayne Potts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Social selection is a form of evolution that results from social competition,
and acts on traits necessary for courtship, competition for resources and social
dominance, and group behaviors. Artificial selection experiments that
experimentally control social selection are a recent technique used to
understand the genetic basis of behavior. While these experiments have revealed
many traits under social selection, they have been limited to invertebrate
groups. Moreover, research now indicates that organisms can respond to changes
in the social environment via non-genomic epigenetic inheritance, where
phenotypic responses to the environmental are transmitted to subsequent
generations. This project addresses these gaps in our understanding by examining
the behavioral, genetic, and epigenetic responses of laboratory-bred wild mice
reintroduced to high population density and the opportunity for social
selection. The prediction is that mice bred under laboratory conditions, where
social selection is absent, down-regulate or eliminate costly traits that are
only relevant during intense social selection. Data show that reintroduction of
mice to a social environment rapidly increases male mating success but decreases
survivorship in competitive environments, increases male signaling and
attractiveness, and increases male expression of Major Urinary Proteins (MUPs),
a primary signal in mouse communication. MUPs are known to be regulated by
epigenetic inheritance, but the function remains unknown. This project now
investigates the behavioral significance of increased MUP expression and the
causal genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. It demonstrates how mammals respond to
changes in the social environment, and will contribute to our understanding of
behavioral ecology by showing how fitness and communication vary across social
environments. It also will continue to engage undergraduate and high school
students in scientific discovery by encouraging them to take independent roles
in the research and to present their work at conferences.