* 0909830
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Incorporating Metagenomics into Experimental Community Ecology:  Tests with the Pitcher Plant Model System
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Dianna Padilla, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Microbial systems, including the community of microbes that form the aquatic
food web within the leaves of the pitcher plant, Sarracenia purpurea, have been
important models for ecological studies. This is because they are easily
replicated in the laboratory and have rapid dynamics that allow questions to be
addressed in a matter of days that would take weeks to years with other types of
organisms. To date, studies of the community ecology of microbial systems have
been limited to those bacterial species that can be grown in the lab (culturable
on agar), which is estimated to be less than 1% of the diversity within a
community. The use of molecular biology techniques has revolutionized this
field; microbial systems can now be studied by examining the genomes of all of
the bacteria within these systems (metagenomics). This project will use
metagenomics as a tool to identify bacterial species in a series of experiments
designed to test questions about the dynamics of the food web of the pitcher
plant system, and how this system responds to different types of impacts,
including invasion by novel species. This project will also test whether the
results of prior work (with only culturable bacteria) on the interactions and
diversity of this system are robust when all bacteria in the system are
considered. This project will train a female graduate student and undergraduates
in molecular biology, community ecology and experimental design. This cross-
disciplinary training will prepare them for careers multiple areas of the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;