* 0909502
* Re-visiting "The Limnology of Tundra Ponds": Re-sampling historic sites to track global change in Arctic aquatic ecosystems.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vanessa Lougheed, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 389,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a resampling of
several small ponds in the tundra near Barrow, Alaska that were studied
intensively in the early 1970s as part of the International Biological Project
(IBP) ? Tundra Biome Project. The principal objective of this proposal is to re-
sample historic sites and, together with additional sampling methodologies,
determine if the physical, chemical and biological environment of tundra ponds
on Alaska?s coastal plain have changed in response to recent warming and/or
anthropogenic alteration. Key activities will include: &lt;br/&gt;1. Re-sampling
IBP tundra ponds for physical, chemical and biological variables last surveyed
nearly 40 years ago. &lt;br/&gt;2. Comparing IBP tundra ponds, now being
affected by a warming climate and encroaching development, to similar habitats
in the region to determine whether they represent the best regional sites to
monitor in the long-term, or if they have been overly impacted by development.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigating possible drivers of change for tundra pond
ecosystems under several possible warming scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;4. Establishing
new protocols for continuous measurement of parameters of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Educating the next generation of polar scientists about Arctic
aquatic ecology, data rescue and scientific reporting.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will support a graduate student and several undergraduates, and include outreach
to the Barrow community and schools.&lt;br/&gt;