* 0909182
* The Catalina Real-Time Transient Survey (CRTS)
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Stanislav Djorgovski, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2013
* USD 889,157.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Djorgovski and his team will use
the data stream from the NASA-funded Catalina Sky Survey (CSS) to search for
transient astronomical objects including flare stars, gamma-ray bursts, and
strong microlensing events. That survey uses two wide-field telescopes in
Arizona and one in Australia to catalog objects in the Solar System,
particularly asteroids on orbits that bring them close to Earth. The team will
build an open optical-transient discovery engine to compare image from CSS with
earlier images of the same piece of sky and identify sources that have
brightened. The team will provide the resulting data stream on a public server
accessed by Virtual Observatory protocols, so that it is available to the wider
community for immediate followup observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained by participating in the research. The
team plans to work with Microsoft's World Wide Telescope project to present the
event stream in a form accessible to amateur astronomers and the general public.
This project will be the first that allows rapid followup of such a wide range
of bright transient sources, and can act as a testbed to develop scientific
strategies and procedures. The resulting science is potentially transformative,
and will inform decisions on building and operating future facilities such as
the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope.