* 0909227
* A Comprehensive Approach to Understanding Chemistry at Interfaces and Atmospheric Implications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Douglas Tobias, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 8,260,697.00

The NSF Division of Chemistry with contributions from the NSF Division of
Atmospheric Sciences (GEO/ATM) and the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) supports the collaborative research project of Prof. Barbra
Finlayson-Pitts and her collaborators at the air UCI Center at the University of
California at Irvine. The air UCI collaborative team will study complex
interfacial processes that are directly relevant to atmospheric processes. These
include studies of gas-aerosol interactions, interactions between gas molecules
and water films on surfaces, interactions of organic molecules on surfaces with
atmospherically relevant gas phase oxidants, the photochemistry of complex
organic and inorganic mixtures at interfaces, the spectroscopy of ionic species
similar to those found in the atmosphere, and acid-based equilibria at complex
interfaces. The collaborative team will utilize state of the art theoretical
methods to guide and interpret the experimental results obtained in these
complex systems. Molecular-level understanding of processes at interfaces is
critical for providing accurate inputs for models of atmospheric processes from
local to global scales including climate change, for understanding and
ultimately preventing corrosion of surfaces, for elucidating processes on
materials that include biological interfaces, and for understanding processes on
water and soils. The study will also provide cutting-edge training of the next
generation of scientists in state-of-the-art experiments and theory studies that
are designed to improve our understanding of atmospheric processes. Exchange
opportunities with international collaborators and the national labs will
provide significant and unusual breadth to their training. A high percentage of
the trainees will be from underrepresented groups. The broad scope of this
research and its application to air pollution and climate change will be used to
educate middle/high school level science teachers through a two week summer
teacher workshop that will potentially have impact on 3000 - 4000 students per
year.