* 0909615
* Accuracy in the cross-cultural understanding of others' emotions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2012
* Hillary Anger Elfenbein, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 07/31/2012
* USD 146,793.00

The ability to recognize the emotional states of other people serves as a window
into their reactions, attitudes, intentions, and likely future behaviors. The
accuracy of recognizing such emotional signals is an important adaptation for
social life. Recently, research conducted by Dr. Hillary Anger Elfenbein at UC-
Berkeley and her colleagues suggests that this accuracy is lower when reading
the emotional expressions of individuals from foreign cultural groups. The
current proposal seeks to understand better this cross-cultural challenge and to
provide guidance for overcoming it. The PI's new "dialect theory" of emotion
argues that different cultural groups express emotions with subtly different
styles -- like different dialects of a language, such as British versus American
English -- and that it is easier to understand emotions expressed in a familiar
style. Because this is an area of intense current debate, the current proposal
consists of a series of studies to test the specific mechanisms proposed by this
new dialect theory, by examining cultural differences in the expression and
judgment of spontaneous facial expressions, vocal tones, and body language. This
research is timely and relevant for providing the data to judge a controversial
new theory, as well as for its potential benefits to society. The findings aim
to offer guidance to cope with rapid changes in the modern society, such as
increasing cultural diversity. Americans work closely with people from multiple
cultural backgrounds more than was previously the case. It is important to
understand the nature of communication breakdowns in multicultural environments,
in order to facilitate communication breakthroughs. In addition, the project
broadens participation from underrepresented groups by including Native
Americans in the research process.