* 0909872
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Islands underground: species limits, phylogenetics, and conservation of Neoleptoneta spiders in Texas caves
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,194.00

Cave-adapted organisms are characterized by their specialized biology and
limited geographical distributions. Their uniqueness has made them conservation
priorities, especially in the Southwestern United States, where rapid
development threatens cave habitat. Arachnids are among the most diverse
organisms in caves and are a primary conservation concern in Texas where eleven
species are listed under the Endangered Species Act. Unfortunately, the taxonomy
for these groups is outdated and prevents an accurate assessment of conservation
priority. Recent advances in systematic biology provide new tools that can be
used by taxonomists to help resolve these difficulties and provide insight into
the evolution of cave organisms.

This project is focused on Neoleptoneta, a diverse group of spiders restricted
to caves and soil habitats in Southwestern North America where two species,
Neoleptoneta microps and N. myopica, are federally recognized as endangered.
Preliminary data show that several species, including the endangered
Neoleptoneta myopica, are more broadly distributed than believed and suggest
that caves are linked into larger subterranean networks. A combination of
morphological, molecular, and geological evidence will be used to refine the
species limits within Neoleptoneta and ascertain the degree of connectivity
between caves. The study will contribute to a better understanding of the
biogeography and conservation of cave invertebrates in Texas and test
fundamental assumptions about the evolution of cave life. In addition to the
graduate student trained as part of this work, the project will train two
undergraduate students and contribute to exhibits at the California Academy of
Sciences.