* 0909281
* CNH:   Social-Ecological Dynamics of Aquatic Species Invasions on a Lake-Rich Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Stephen Carpenter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,499,785.00

The effect of public policy on ecosystem services is complex, not only for the
obvious reason that ecosystems are complex, but also because a policy's effect
is filtered by the private decisions of individuals and households, often with
unintended ecological consequences. An important example is public policy to
control aquatic species invasions, which are often a major threat to native
species and biodiversity, and consequently to the social value of aquatic
ecosystems. This project investigates how policy interventions intended to
control or prevent harmful aquatic species invasions affect the decisions and
economic welfare of individuals using the aquatic system, and consequently the
spatial dynamics of invasions. This question will be addressed for aquatic
invasive species (AIS) now present in the lake district of northern Wisconsin,
such as Eurasian water-milfoil, rusty crayfish, and zebra mussel. The analysis
uses a variety of new data and methods, including an econometric model of boater
behavior estimated with data from a two-year, web-based survey of boaters, novel
experiments and analyses concerning propagule uptake by boats leaving infected
lakes and propagule survival during transport, and a statistical model of the
lake characteristics affecting propagule establishment and colonization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As well as advancing understanding of aquatic species
invasions, results will generally inform human-environment studies through the
development of innovative models that incorporate uncertainties in human
behaviors. On a practical level, the project will have broad impacts via its
insights into basic management questions about AIS. For example, historically,
management resources have been directed primarily towards invasive species
control, possibly because of the political economy of invasions. But in reality,
the appropriate management action is likely to be a mix of control and
prevention; and methods falling into each of these categories need further
investigation. Multiple graduate students and undergraduates will be trained and
mentored in this interdisciplinary research project. Project personnel will work
in Wisconsin with the North Temperate Lakes Long-Term Ecological Research site's
Schoolyard program to educate K-12 teachers and students about the ecology and
economics of such invasions.