* 0909811
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  A Genomic Approach to Resolving the Origin of and Evolution of Turtles
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jeffrey Boore, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 13,576.00

Turtles are some of the world's most recognizable animals however scientists
have little idea about the relationships among turtles and other animals. Past
work using morphological data indicate that turtles are the most ancient living
reptile group although some DNA data conclude that turtles are a younger group
more closely related to crocodiles and birds. While most of the current studies
using DNA sequences include only a handful of genes, this project will develop a
novel genomics approach to sequence 25 nuclear genes for fish, amphibians,
reptiles, and mammals. These DNA data, along with the use of fossils will help:
1) determine the position of turtles in the tree of life, 2) resolve
relationships within turtles themselves, and 3) provide insight into the tempo
and mode of turtle evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate
the training of undergraduates from underrepresented groups and results will be
used in public outreach to seventh graders. In addition, this work will help
resolve a fundamental portion of the tree of life and will provide a framework
of future research in comparative evolutionary biology. The DNA technique
developed in this project will provide a simple, efficient method for small
laboratories to begin collecting genomic-level data previously restricted to
large, high-budget laboratories.