* 0909541
* Biomass Burning, Dust, Sea Salt, Volcanic & Pollution Aerosols in the Arctic during the Last 2 Millennia: High Resolution Aerosol Records from NEEM & an Aray of Archived Ic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,090.00

This award will support the development and interpretation of a new generation
of records of short-lived aerosols from biomass burning, dust, sea spray,
volcanism, and industrial pollution in the Arctic during the past 2000 years and
for selected time periods during the past >130,000 years. These objectives will
be accomplished using a unique, NSF-funded analytical system developed
specifically for such measurements in ice cores and recently expanded to include
detailed measurements of black carbon (BC; soot) and a range of new aerosol
source tracers. Proposed measurements of aerosols during the past 2000 years -
building on a series of recently published findings from similar measurements in
shallower ice cores - will be made on samples from a 400 m shallow core
collected by Danish collaborators in 2008 and 2009 at the NorthEem (NEEM)
drilling site in northern Greenland. To place the NEEM measurements in larger
Arctic and global perspective, samples from a broad array of ~1000 year archived
Arctic ice cores also will be analyzed and results from the Arctic measurements
compared with similar century to millennial scale aerosol measurements already
underway in Antarctic ice cores.

Intellectual Merit: Natural changes in the Earth's climate are well documented
in paleoclimate records, but the climate history provided by deep ice cores
needs to be complemented by better understanding of how recent climate changes
have affected different regions and relationships among high-, mid-, and
lowlatitude processes. Short-lived aerosols - including those generated by
wildfires - are important environmental and global climate forcing agents and,
because of the snow-albedo feedback, particularly important to Arctic forcing
when deposited in snow and ice. Their sources are primarily in the low- and mid-
latitudes, but their impacts on the Polar Regions - poorly quantified because of
the paucity of reliable, long-term measurements - are profound. The rich
glaciochemical records developed from the NEEM and archived ice cores,
especially when compared to similar Antarctic ice core aerosol records and the
results synthesized through collaborative modeling studies, will transform
global understanding of the sources and histories of short-lived BC, dust,
volcanic, sea salt, and pollution aerosols and their impacts on climate forcing,
ecosystems, and human health. Moreover, because wildfire emissions are one
factor directly modulating GHG concentrations, the independent history of fire
emissions provided by this and related Antarctic research will contribute to a
quantitative interpretation of changing GHG concentrations measured in the deep
NEEM and WAIS Divide ice cores.

Broader Impacts: Policy decisions are guided by global climate model (GCM)
predictions of climate under different scenarios of societal behavior; climate
predictions are critically dependent on well-tuned, validated models. Despite
large uncertainties in aerosol forcing identified by the IPCC, ice core aerosol
records seldom are used in GCM calibration, parameterization, or tuning because
of the limited scope and reliability of past ice core aerosol measurements. New
generation aerosol measurements from this ice core analytical system are
suitable and have enabled recent collaborations with the GCM community. To
ensure the broadest impact of the proposed research in climate change and policy
arenas (e.g., recent testimony before the U.S. Congress on short-lived
pollutants and Arctic climate change), ongoing collaborations with modelers at
NCAR, NOAA/GFDL and NASA/GISS will be expanded to incorporate the proposed ice
core measurements into GCM studies. This proposal also directly addresses a
thrust of the NSF-sponsored International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences
(IPICS) initiative - development of an array of detailed ice core records
spanning the last 2000 years aimed at better understanding long-term climate
records thorough improved, quantitative investigation of recent climate change
and the role of human activities in climate forcing and on the environment. The
NEEM project provides many national and international opportunities for
education and outreach. The proposed effort will leverage these opportunities to
the fullest extent and continue the long-term record of high school,
undergraduate and graduate student, and post-doctoral fellow involvement in the
laboratory; K-12 educational efforts; and dissemination of results through high
visibility publications and outreach to the public, popular media, and policy
makers.