* 0909897
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Molecular Evolution of Reproductive Genes in Australian Fairy Wrens (Maluridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Scott Edwards, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2010
* USD 14,622.00

Birds living in temperate regions are valuable for studying the molecular
evolution of reproductive genes because reproduction takes place during a brief
breeding season. Genes involved with reproduction could be active primarily
during this time of year. Such genes may have evolved in response to natural
selection, and could have a role in the formation of new species through
influences on barriers to fertilization. Only a few reproductive genes have been
studied, and most of the work has been in a few model organisms. Members of the
Australian bird family Maluridae (Australian wrens), have an extremely high
level of sperm production, suggesting an unusual genetic influence on
reproduction. The first goal of this study is to identify novel reproductive
genes that are expressed in the testes. Then the mechanisms of evolution of
these genes will be examined and their diversification within the Maluridae will
be compared with control genes that have not been exposed to natural selection.
A final study, of geographic variation for one species, will give a better
understanding of the underlying source of selection on reproductive genes.

This project includes collaboration with a several Australian organizations,
which will foster the exchange of academic knowledge and scientific technology
between Australia and the United States, and it will serve as an example of
applying the most recent genetic methods to non-model organisms. Local
landowners will be educated about the project. In addition, samples used for
this study will be provided as museum voucher specimens to serve as resources to
other scientists as well as the general public.