* 0909180
* Materials World Network: Approaches to the Coupling of Dilute Spins in Oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Ram Seshadri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This Materials World Network Award by the Solid State Materials Chemistry
program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials Research
to University of California Santa Barbara will support a collaborative research
and education program that is based on exploring the concurrent existence, -- in
oxide materials -- of a band gap and ferromagnetic coupling between spins
mediated by dilute charge carriers. In contrast to metallic room-temperature
ferromagnets, the proposed research will explore the possibility of
systematically coupling, through lightly doped charge carriers, dilute spins in
wide-band-gap oxides i.e., systems which are far from possessing metallic ground
states. In addition to fundamental interest in the problem, such diluted
magnetic oxide semiconductors are expected to find uses in numerous
applications. The proposed work should also throw light on a number of other
problems that are of great current interest across the broad materials
community: (a) the paucity of p-type transparent conducting oxides; (b) the use
of correlated transition metal oxides in so-called Mottronic devices; and (c)
the search for room-temperature multiferroic materials.

The participants of this research project are in the Materials, and Chemistry
and Biochemistry Departments at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and
at the Chemistry Department at the University of Liverpool, in the United
Kingdom, and bring related yet complementary skills to address the proposed work
in a synergistic manner. Complementary skills are associated with the two PIs
employing distinct capabilities for the preparation of functional materials.
Measurement capabilities are complementary as well. The specific focus will be
on training an international cadre of materials chemists who understand the
importance for developing new materials as drivers for new technologies. An
exchange of undergraduate and graduate students between Santa Barbara and
Liverpool, and the development of modules for K-12 science education -- building
on a substantial prior record in the area -- are important aspects of the
proposed program. Specifically, experiments and demonstrations will be aimed at
inculcating an early appreciation that novel materials are drivers for new
technologies.