* 0909933
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Carex stricta tussock  formation, persistence, and potential for carbon sequestration
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Beth Lawrence, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This grant will fund doctoral dissertation research. Tussocks are carbon-
containing structures that a diversity of plant species construct in tundra,
sedge meadow, and grassland ecosystems around the world, but little is known
about how they form or how much carbon they store. In eastern North American
wetlands, the plant Carex stricta grows tussocks of 20 cm or more in height. To
investigate C. stricta tussock formation, maintenance, and how these structures
store carbon, the graduate student will use a combination of field surveys, an
outdoor growth experiment, laboratory assays, and novel 14C methodology. She
will (1) quantify the composition of tussocks collected from Wisconsin sedge
meadows, (2) compare tussock formation under six water-level and two nutrient-
addition treatments, (3) measure organic matter production and decay, and (4)
determine the age of carbon compounds in field-grown tussocks. Together, the
results will form the basis for restoring ecosystem services (i.e., carbon
storage, community structure) to degraded sedge meadows and novel wetlands, such
as stormwater basins. Research findings will be disseminated to scientists and
managers as conference presentations, papers in the peer-reviewed literature,
and leaflets for the general public. The graduate student is also collaborating
with an undergraduate student and a high school biology teacher in the
development of activities for low-income minority high school students that aim
to enhance their understanding of ecosystem functioning.