* 0909415
* BEST: A novel molecular approach to measuring In situ feeding rates of copepods in the South Eastern Bering Sea.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Edward Durbin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2012
* USD 574,183.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Durbin 0909415&lt;br/&gt;University of
Rhode island&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesozooplankton play a critical role in
determining carbon flow from primary producers to higher trophic levels. In the
SE Bering Sea interannual changes in the timing and extent of both sea ice cover
and summer stratification will affect their role in determining the path of
carbon flow, whether through the pelagic ecosystem or to the benthos. Knowledge
of the actual in situ mesozooplankton diet composition and ingestion rates is
essential to understanding the flow of carbon in this system. Information about
these rates using traditional bottle incubation techniques will be compromised
because of the strong vertical gradients in the mesozooplankton prey environment
making sampling the appropriate prey field difficult. The PIs propose a field
investigation of in situ feeding rates by copepods on the SE Bering shelf during
spring and summer using a novel molecular technique they have developed to
quantitatively measure ingestion rates on different prey species from stomach
content analysis. They will use the 18S ribosomal RNA gene as a marker to
identify different prey species present in the guts of copepods and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR) to measure copy number of this gene
for each prey species. Ingestion rates will be calculated from this gut content
information, 18S copy number/organism, and DNA digestion rates. By combining
these in situ ingestion rate measurements with zooplankton abundance
measurements and the prey field composition, they will be able to determine the
fate of phytoplankton production under the varying environmental conditions.
Ultimately, they plan to use these in situ consumption estimates to evaluate the
role of copepods in carbon flow in the Bering shelf
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;