* 0909274
* Collaborative Research: Glacier-Ocean Coupling in a Large East Greenland Fjord
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Gordon Hamilton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2014
* USD 624,540.00

This award will support a study of glacier-fjord interactions in east Greenland.
The 'Intellectual Merit' of the proposed study lies in the current understanding
that the contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet to sea level rise more than
doubled in the last seven years, mostly because of a widespread and nearly
simultaneous acceleration of many glaciers that terminate at tidewater in deep
fjords. Understanding the causes of changes in glacier dynamics, and predicting
their future trajectories is a topic of enormous scientific and societal
importance. The Greenland fjords provide an intimate connection between the ice
sheet and the ocean and, in turn, raise the possibility that the observed
warming of the ocean around southeast and western Greenland was the trigger for
recent changes in outlet glacier dynamics.

A pilot study conducted by the PIs in east Greenland, and a separate study in
west Greenland, found warm ocean waters in the proximity of Helheim Glacier and
Jakobshavn Isbr√¶, respectively, supporting the hypothesis that their
acceleration was triggered by ocean warming. While intriguing, the presence of
warm waters in Greenland's fjords alone is not enough to conclude that the ocean
is modulating glacier dynamics. A test of this hypothesis requires a more
detailed understanding of glacier/fjord interactions than is possible with the
limited amount of data currently available. This study will fill this gap by
investigating glacier-ocean interactions in a typical glacier-fjord system in
East Greenland (Sermilik Fjord and Helheim Glacier) through an intensive two-
year field program. Through summer surveys and year-round moored instruments,
the circulation and properties of the fjord on tidal to yearly time-scales will
be mapped, and the liquid fresh water flux out of the fjord will be quantified.
A collaboration with Greenlandic marine biologists will allow important ocean
data in the region outside the fjord to be obtained using tagged seals. GPS
methods and remote sensing will allow changes in the flow behavior of Helheim
Glacier to be examined in the context of changing fjord circulation. Satellite
remote sensing and field tracking of large icebergs will provide estimates of
the solid export of fresh water and its variability.

The proposed study has numerous 'Broader Impacts'. The are likely to be a
significant component of next-generation ice sheet models seeking to predict the
evolution of the Greenland Ice Sheet and future rates of sea level rise. The
project brings together an inter-disciplinary group of investigators, involves
two junior scientists embarking on their careers, and initiates an international
collaboration with Greenlandic scientists. A graduate student will be trained in
glaciology and physical oceanography, contributing to society's need for experts
in the area of ice sheet-ocean interactions. The fieldwork utilizes local
vessels and relies strongly on the knowledge of generations of local hunters who
have navigated Sermilik Fjord, thus fostering a two-way exchange between the
local community and foreign scientists. A non-technical report summarizing the
findings of ocean-glacier measurements will distributed in the local community,
which is vulnerable to rapid environmental changes affecting its primary natural
resource.