* 0909970
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogeny, Ontogeny, and Endocranial Evolution of Oviraptorosauria (Theropoda: Coelurosauria)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Mark Norell, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2011
* USD 10,740.00

Morphological features of Oviraptorosauria, a group of non-avian dinosaurs, and
extant birds have made the evolutionary placement of this group with respect to
birds difficult to discern. This study seeks to provide a robust hypothesis of
these evolutionary relationships through a phylogenetic analysis. The resulting
phylogenetic tree will be used along with appropriate statistical methods to
address questions concerning changes in the central nervous system (CNS) leading
to the origin of flight. Since the endocranial cavity approximates the
morphology of the brain, creating endocasts of this space with CT scanning
technology will allow the investigators to study how the CNS changes
morphologically along this important lineage, as well as how it changes through
the life history of these organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the public
interest in dinosaurs and the origination of characters associated with flight,
this study provides an appealing model for teaching evolutionary theory to the
public. A hypothesis of evolutionary relationships will be generated that can be
used in future studies interested in biological questions concerning this group.
The study will generate a large body of detailed morphological descriptions of
new specimens and novel anatomical systems. Additionally, digitally generated
endocranial casts will provide invaluable data for researchers studying the
neuroanatomy of dinosaurs. &lt;br/&gt;