* 0910674
* Structure, Stress, Earthquake Sources, and Dynamic Triggering in Katmai, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 197,325.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The investigators will study earthquakes, crustal structure, and stress in the
Katmai area of Alaska, taking advantage of data collected by a dense, temporary
seismic array. The seismic array was deployed in 2008, centered on Trident
volcano, and will be operated through mid-2010. Katmai was the locus of the
largest volcanic eruption in the 20th century and is one of the most seismically
active volcanic regions in the United States. Based on previous research, it is
likely that a magma reservoir resides under the Katmai Pass area. The research
focus will be on the subsurface structure beneath this area, the types of
earthquakes that are occurring and their possible implications for storage and
movement of magma, and the forces that are driving the seismic and volcanic
activity. This project is important for understanding the volcanic hazard posed
by Katmai.

This project involves the analysis of data from a temporary array of 11 three-
component, broadband seismic instruments deployed in July 2008 in a 15 km
diameter area centered on Katmai Pass, Alaska, supplemented by data from the
surrounding Alaska Volcano Observatory (AVO) network stations. The temporary
array will operate until late spring or early summer 2010. Katmai was the locus
of the largest volcanic eruption in the 20th century and is one of the most
seismically active volcanic regions in the United States. The main goals of the
study are to explore the subsurface structure, seismicity, source mechanisms,
state of stress, and earthquake triggering in the Katmai area. The research will
focus on velocity and attenuation tomography, seismicity, source mechanisms, and
shear wave splitting studies. The tomography work, including both P and S models
for velocity and attenuation, will be aimed at determining if a magma body is
present beneath the Katmai Pass area. The velocity model will be used to obtain
accurate earthquake locations and fault plane solutions. The relocated
seismicity and source mechanisms will be used to examine the character of the
seismogenic structures beneath the area, and the source mechanisms and shear
wave splitting will yield insight into the state of stress. They will also
explore the process of dynamic triggering of earthquakes using data from their
array.