* 0910025
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Elucidating an invasion of the blacklegged tick and the Lyme disease pathogen
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Jean Tsao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 07/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

Landscape fragmentation, climate change, and global trade will inevitably
continue to increase the rate of species invasions. When invaders are species of
medical importance, such as vectors, pathogens, or reservoir hosts, successful
invasion may also result in disease emergence. Lyme disease is the leading
vector-borne disease of humans in the United States, and cases are increasing in
part due to ongoing range expansions of the blacklegged tick. Over the past five
years, the research team has tracked an active invasion of blacklegged ticks and
the Lyme disease pathogen in Michigan through investigations of wildlife hosts
in the field, and have provided an early warning of this emerging threat. The
team will analyze the genetic diversity of the pathogen collected from host-
seeking ticks to infer the geographical source of the invading ticks and
pathogen as well as how they are invading across the landscape.

This research provides a model for elucidating an invasion in real-time of an
emerging disease. Broader impacts include aiding local and regional health
departments and natural resource agencies, as the data collected herein will
allow assessment of disease risk and offer points for intervention. Furthermore,
this research is the founding project for Michigan State University's new
research specialization in conservation medicine, which trains students in
ecology, microbiology, human medicine, and veterinary medicine to work together
to solve problems of emerging diseases that impact human, wildlife, and domestic
animal health.