* 0910047
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   How will climate change affect trophic interactions?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 13,000.00

Global climate change is believed to pose a huge threat to ecological systems.
But there is much uncertainty about the way interactions among species will be
affected and, consequently, how the environmental services these species provide
to human kind are going to be altered. This study reduces this uncertainty by
experimentally evaluating the capacity of species to adapt with a changing
climate. Using an experimental system of grassland plants, grasshopper
herbivores, and spider predators, this study will evaluate the ability of
predators to adapt with warming and continue to control the herbivores in the
system. To do this, the experiment will evaluate spider performance in
controlling grasshoppers along a gradient of temperature reflective of the
changes predicted by climate change models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
is especially relevant to tax payers and policy makers concerned with how
ecological and agricultural systems are going to be affected by climate change.
Insect species like grasshoppers can be quite destructive to agricultural crops,
requiring government aid to cover monetary losses. Global warming may enhance
the likelihood of this outcome. This study, on the other hand, will evaluate the
extent to which natural enemies of grasshoppers can adapt to climate change and
thereby keep damage from herbivores in check.