* 0910173
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Ponderosa Pine Migration
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Stephen Jackson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2011
* USD 12,747.00

Many species are predicted to shift their ranges over the coming decades in
response to changing climate. While much is understood about the climatic
controls on species' ranges, little is known about the temporal, ecological, or
genetic factors that influence range shifts. This project will examine the
expansion of ponderosa pine into the Bighorn Basin of north-central Wyoming to
gain an understanding of these factors. This study combines tree-ring analysis
and molecular genetic tools to assess species migration and establishment and
reveal the patterns of population growth over the landscape over a roughly 500
year time span. Project data will be used to evaluate the ecological and genetic
factors that influence colonization, range expansion, and long-term viability of
populations at their range margins.

The results of this project provide information on how climate change may
influence plant migrations and how these migrations in turn may alter ecosystem
structure and function at local to regional scales. This project will foster
dialogue between the natural resource management and academic communities
through organization of a workshop to communicate findings. A high school
student will gain research experience and interdisciplinary training through
participation in the project.