* 0910624
* Pacific Northwest Center for Human Health and Ocean Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2012
* USD 1,853,367.00

The Pacific Northwest Center for Human Health and Ocean Studies at the
University of Washington was created in response to the critical need to
understand links between ocean processes and human health. The focus of the
Center is on mechanisms that underlie development of toxic blooms of the diatom
Pseudo-nitzschia and the public health consequences of toxic events. The Center,
which has leveraged &gt;$12 million, brings together researchers from 5
different departments within the University of Washington with expertise in
fisheries and biological, chemical and physical oceanography (ocean science) to
work with researchers with expertise in molecular and cellular mechanisms of
toxicity, neuro-developmental biology, behavior and risk assessment (public
health science) and collaborate directly with researchers from 6 different
agencies and institutes. Research is coordinated across this multi-disciplinary
group through the concept of a risk chain consisting of 5 steps that begin with
physical/chemical oceanography and culminate in a mechanistic understanding of
the impact of toxin on specific receptors in the brains of humans. Center
research began in early 2003 and since then Center researchers have identified
circulation-based explanations for the sporadic nature of toxic blooms along the
WA coast; molecular approaches to quickly distinguish between different species
of Pseudo-nitzschia within whole seawater samples and thus link environmental
conditions and species distributions; genomic features that define Pseudo-
nitzschia; biosensors that can rapidly determine toxin levels within shellfish
tissues; differences in shellfish consumption of toxic Pseudo-nitzschia;
behavioral and cultural practices that serve as important risk factors for
exposure of humans to toxin-contaminated seafood; and genetic factors in mammals
that influence toxic oxidative stress responses following exposure to domoic
acid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this Accomplishment-Based Renewal,
new research at the Center will build upon the risk-chain framework that has
proven so successful thus far, further synthesizing these research efforts into
an integrative and dynamic framework by explicitly linking different steps in
the chain. Several research approaches will be used to make additional linkages
across disciplines: comparative genomics, which by definition relies on
comparisons of different types of organisms; sensing, which allows linkages
between environmental conditions and organism responses; and modeling, which
integrates across all research areas and continues our current focus. Specific
examples of future research areas include analysis of gene and protein
expression profiles of field populations of Pseudo-nitzschia; improvement of the
current domoic acid biosensor through development of readily accessible
antibodies that will enhance instrument flexibility; development of human
neuronal stem cells as a model system for mechanistic and gene-environment
studies of toxicity; integration of Pseudonitzschia species distributions into
circulation models of Puget Sound with the goal of identifying defining features
of the rare toxic events within Puget Sound; and, incorporation of age related
susceptibility factors into current risk assessment models. Focusing efforts on
these approaches will provide an iterative means of integrating new knowledge
into the risk chain framework and will facilitate Center research on policy and
monitoring practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Center researchers
will continue to foster the development of a next-generation of oceans and human
health researchers by supervising nearly 50 early-career scientists consisting
of post-doctoral researchers, graduate students, undergraduates (10 with REU
fellowships), and research scientists/staff. The Center will play a key role in
helping define the newly emerging discipline of oceans and human health by
conveying the importance of their findings through scientific venues and
different types of outreach including K-12 interactions, advice for monitoring
agencies, and interactions with potentially at-risk groups (Asian and Pacific
Islanders and Tribal Nations) that consume high levels of seafood. Outreach and
education have been defining features of the Center and will continue to be so
into the future. The goal here is to continue to integrate across ocean and
human health research to advance this new discipline by conveying the important
ramifications of this emerging field to new scientists, the general public, and
concerned interest groups (risk chain step 6).