* 0910604
* DESIGNING ATROPISOMERIC SENSORS FOR ENANTIOSELECTIVE RECOGNITION OF CHIRAL COMPOUNDS
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2012
* USD 375,000.00

Many biologically active compounds, including pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals,
flavors, fragrances, and nutrients, are chiral, and more than 50% of today?s
top-selling drugs are sold as single enantiomers. The increasing demand for
enantiopure chemicals has been accompanied by significant progress in asymmetric
synthesis, and it requires the development of analytical techniques for fast and
accurate determination of the stereochemical purity and integrity of chiral
compounds.&lt;br/&gt; The current bottleneck in drug discovery is to analyze the
enantiomeric composition and yield of these reaction mixtures. The Wolf group
will therefore develop new sensors that can be used to determine both the
enantiomeric purity and the overall concentration of a wide range of compounds,
thus providing a new entry to rapid screening of reaction mixtures and libraries
of chiral compounds. The unique design of these sensors facilitates
differentiation of enantiomers based on ultraviolet and fluorescence
spectroscopy or other optical methods. The group will develop and test sensing
assays that combine several attractive features: (1) fast determination of both
concentration and enantiomeric composition of unknown mixtures; (2) simple
optical measurements will provide accurate values with high reproducibility; (3)
laborious substrate derivatization will become unnecessary; and (4) the use of
cost-effective and sensitive techniques (UV or fluorescence spectroscopy) will
greatly reduce the amount of sensor and analyte required. Based on the
significance of enantioselective analysis outlined above, it is expected that
the fundamental and applied aspects of the proposed research will benefit
academic and industrial chemists alike. Several students from groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences will participate in this project and receive
extensive experience in stereochemistry, synthetic chemistry, stereoselective
recognition and chiral resolution. This will provide fertile training grounds
for the next generation of chemists working in the pharmaceutical, food and
agrochemical industries.