* 0910647
* Synthesis and Reactivity of Fluorinated High Oxidation State Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Linda Doerrer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professor Linda Doerrer at
Boston University to carry out fundamental and basic studies on transition metal
complexes with fluorinated groups bound to them through oxygen atoms. These
metals such as iron, cobalt, nickel and copper have been used by humans for
millennia but only now are we working to make as efficient use of them as
possible. Professor Doerrer has chosen to study these earth abundant materials
in combination with Teflon-coated groups that make them very stable under harsh
reaction conditions. When in the presence of highly reactive species that
transfer oxygen or nitrogen atoms, these robust metal-alkoxide molecules have
the ability to form new compounds more efficiently than previous generations of
molecules. The latter would partially self-destruct along the way. For
environmentally benign processes and efficient production, understanding the
fundamentals of the reaction of the metal compound with the carbon-based
substrates is critical.

This research program will have a profound influence on the lives of several
young scientists that participate in and are trained through the program,
including graduate and undergraduate students. These students will further
influence the high school students who work in and visit the Doerrer lab and see
the extension of their classroom-based ideas into the unknown realm of
contemporary research at the frontiers of inorganic chemistry.

The overall impact of this work will lead to improved understanding of materials
and methods for synthesizing high value carbon-based compounds for use in many
realms of human endeavor.