* 0910566
* RUI:  The Synthesis, Characterization, and Self-Organization of Calixarene- and Resorcinarene-Core Star Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Perry Corbin, Ashland University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 146,652.00

The chemical synthesis of polymer building blocks that have varied molecular
architectures and/or are rationally designed to self-assemble into higher-order
structures is critical to the design of multifaceted macromolecular materials.
Along these lines, this project involves the synthesis, characterization, and
self-organization of calixarene- and resorcinarene-core polylactide/polyethylene
glycol star block copolymers. Methods will be developed for synthesizing the
star polymers. Studies will then be carried out to examine the capability of the
macrocyclic-core star block copolymers to form multimeric micelles or
unimolecular micelles in aqueous solution. The ability of the putative micelles
to entrap and, subsequently, release model hydrophobic guests will also be
evaluated.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Perry Corbin of the Department of Chemistry at Ashland
University. Professor Corbin's research efforts focus on the synthesis and study
of calixarene- and resorcinarene-core star block copolymers. Because of the
structural diversity of calixarenes and resorcinarenes and their potential to be
readily functionalized, these macrocycles are ideal platforms for preparing
versatile star block copolymer amphiphiles. As such, the polymers and aggregates
to be prepared have the potential for use in varied materials applications,
including their use as nanoscale, targeted drug-delivery vehicles. The studies
to be carried out will, in turn, provide undergraduate students with important,
broad-based research experiences that will focus on molecular synthesis and
characterization, the self-organization of polymers in solution, and an
investigation of the properties of polymeric materials.