* 0910384
* Large Empirical Emerging Topics: CareerWise II:  Enhanced Resilience Training for STEM Women in an Interactive, Multimodal Web-Based Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Jennifer Bekki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,199,164.00

CareerWise-II is a continuation of CareerWise-I [supported by DRL 0634519]. This
is a research project testing the efficacy of resiliency training over the
Internet for the benefit of female doctoral students in engineering and the
physical sciences, in order to reduce their attrition from their doctoral
programs. The central research question is whether deliberate resilience
training delivered via the Internet can strengthen women students' persistence
and success in STEM doctoral programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CareerWise-II
identifies five research questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. What is the relationship
between interpersonal communication skills and student perception of supports /
barriers to degree completion / STEM careers? &lt;br/&gt;2. What is the most
effective approach for delivering online instruction in interpersonal skills for
STEM doctoral students?&lt;br/&gt;3. Do instructional design principles that
guide the development of non-interactive multimodal learning environments
generalize to interactive, web-based environments? &lt;br/&gt;4. Do principles
of instructional design derived from more structured domains (math, science)
generalize to training soft skills (interpersonal communication)? &lt;br/&gt;5.
Does systematic resilience training over the Internet strengthen women students'
persistence?&lt;br/&gt;The focus of CW-II will be on usability testing, large
scale testing (including recruiting students), and improved Internet interfaces,
including simulations. The research design is comprised of three phases, each
testing the effectiveness of different materials or combinations of materials.
Each phase has randomized trials.