* 0910164
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The genetic basis of adaptive burrowing behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Hopi Hoekstra, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Most animals display innate behaviors - behaviors that are strongly influenced
by genetics and are not strictly taught or learned. These innate behaviors can
evolve if they contribute to differential reproductive success of individuals
that display the behavior. The focus of this project is to examine how genetic
changes lead to differences in innate burrowing behavior between two species of
mice. Deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) build small burrows with only a single,
short entrance tunnel, while their sister species, oldfield mice (P.
polionotus), construct long burrows with both an entrance and an escape tunnel.
The long entrance tunnel and addition of an escape tunnel are probably
adaptations for avoiding predators in the sparsely vegetated habitat that
oldfield mice occupy. By interbreeding these two species and examining the
behavior of hybrid offspring with molecular and statistical tools, this research
will answer two primary questions: how many and which genes contribute to the
increased length and escape tunnels seen in oldfield mouse burrows? Preliminary
results suggest that changes in only a few genes may explain most of the
differences in burrow shape and size. Overall, this research aims to dissect the
genetic basis of an ecologically-relevant behavior in natural populations of
mice.

A detailed understanding of the genetics underlying burrowing in these two
species will provide an empirical framework for studying the genetics and
evolution adaptive behaviors in general. The broader impacts of this research
include: (1) engaging undergraduate students in research, and (2) explaining
both the methods of behavioral and genetic research and its importance to the
public through museum exhibits.