* 0910556
* IUPS 2009 Travel Award Program: General Assembly and the XXXVI International Congress of Physiological Sciences in Kyoto, Japan July 27- August 1, 20
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 06/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

The International Union of Physiological Sciences (IUPS) will hold its General
Assembly and the XXXVI International Congress of Physiological Sciences in
Kyoto, Japan, July 27-August 1, 2009. In order to encourage the participation of
US scientists and students in the Congress, the American Physiological Society
(APS) will administer a travel grant program offering a limited number of travel
awards to qualified scientists interested in attending the comparative
physiology program at the IUPS Congress. Special emphasis will be given to
investigators within 15 years of receiving their doctoral degree and to women
and under-represented minority scientists. The participation of US scientists in
the XXXVI IUPS is critical to the advancement of science in the United States.
Scientific discovery is international in nature and the scientific community
learns from investigators worldwide. The IUPS Congress brings together
scientists from around the world to share ideas, exchange information and
develop collaborations. By offering a travel award program, the APS expects to
promote the widespread participation of young scientists with an emphasis on
women and under-represented minorities, in the Congress. The APS also expects to
interest new investigators and students in pursuing research using comparative
approaches to understand physiological processes and traits. This
internationally recognized interdisciplinary group of investigators will explore
the rapid changes that comparative physiology has undergone as a result of the
incorporation of a variety of new tools and technologies into the discipline.
Participation in the Congress will also provide opportunities for the
development of collaborative interactions with scientists from the United States
and those working outside of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;