* 0910816
* CSR:  Large:  Collaborative Research:  CommonSense--A Distributed Mobile System for Socially-Collaborative Environmental Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Pollution sensing and diagnosis have long been separated from the people most
impacted by them. It was conducted by specialists with expensive and scarce
equipment. As a result, testing was infrequent and decisions on mitigation were
made by central planners with limited access to data. Worse yet, individuals
with the ability to dramatically limit dangerous exposure via minor changes in
behavior have been left blind to the relationship between their daily actions
and exposure to pollution. Advances in computing, sensing, and wireless
communication technologies have the potential to allow those most affected by
pollution to participate in pollution sensing, rational cost assessment, and
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a
distributed mobile system for socially-collaborative environmental monitoring,
which greatly reduces the problem of environmental sensing data scarcity,
supports richer environmental sensing data analysis, and enables better
environment awareness and protection via social collaboration. This project will
develop a system composed of inexpensive sensing and computation devices
purchased by individuals for their own edification and protection. These
embedded systems will communicate with each other and aggregate data, enabling
multi-sensor localization of pollution&lt;br/&gt;sources and quantification of
the potential damage by each polluter. By measuring pollution and modeling its
impact, it will be possible to associate pollution sources with the costs they
impose. Furthermore distributed networking will allow individuals to actively
participate in and socially collaborate on environmental monitoring and
protection.