* 0910333
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolutionary genetics of physiological variation in Ipomopsis aggregata: identifying QTL and measuring ecological selection in different environments
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Amanda Kenney, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2011
* USD 14,960.00

The efficiency with which plants use water during photosynthesis is a critical
physiological trait that determines where plants can survive and how well they
grow and reproduce. This research integrates genetic and ecological approaches
to understand the evolution of water use and related physiological traits in
Ipomopsis aggregata, a wildflower native to the United States. This project will
investigate 1) the number of genes that control water use and related
physiological traits; 2) patterns of natural selection in environments that
differ in water availability; and 3) how the environment has shaped differences
among populations in traits that affect water use. Genotype and physiological
trait data from large field experiments will be used for genetic mapping of
traits and measurements of selection. To assess population genetic variation,
genotype and climatic data will be collected from natural populations across the
range of I. aggregata.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the
genetic basis of important physiological traits in plants, and show how
differences in these traits may evolve. This work will also provide data on the
stresses plants experience in different climates and environments. Therefore,
results will be useful for predicting the effects of climate change on plants.
Additionally, this project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduates including minorities, and stimulate collaborations among
institutions and researchers in different fields of biology.&lt;br/&gt;