* 0910526
* Building Ice-Age Dyngjufj√∂ll: Processes, Products and Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Michael Ramsey, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2012
* USD 305,746.00

The processes, products and paleoenvironments of large volume, polygenetic, ice-
confined volcanoes are very poorly known. Dyngjufjoll ("Askja"), in Iceland, is
one of the largest and best exposed, formerly ice-confined,basaltic volcanoes on
Earth, but previous work has concentrated on its more recent Holocene (i.e. ice-
free) evolution. This project will focus on its older Pleistocene history by
targeting one large massif (Austurfjoll) that preserves several hundred meters
of glaciovolcanic rocks. There has been considerable interest recently in the
role of volcanogenic, subglacial ice melting and drainage as a lubricant for
rapid ice sheet movement, and its potential for sheet destabilization. Also,
source area processes and products of large-volume volcanogenic meltwater floods
(i.e.jokulhlaups)are a significant hazard to infrastructure (roads, bridges) and
the local economy in south Iceland. The results of this study will help close
some gaps in knowledge regarding the geologic and environmental impacts of
volcano-ice interaction processes. Volcanoes like Dyngjufjoll are also the most
relevant terrestrial analogs to constraining models of the interaction of large
long-lived basaltic shield volcanoes and ice on Mars. The study will be
conducted as part of an international collaboration with scientists from the UK
and Iceland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will offer insights into two
relevant aspects of the meltwater source region, namely temporal variations in
the overlying ice thickness and the nature of water drainage and ponding,
including possible jokulhlaup (i.e. release of large-volume volcanogenic
meltwater) events. There are no studies of the record of jokulhlaups at a
volcanic edifice source. Volatile analysis of pillow rind glass at Austurfjoll
will help constrain estimates of paleo-ice thicknesses in central Iceland, and
models that link deglaciation with increased rates of volcanism in this area.
The age of the Dyngjufjoll glaciovolcanic massifs are currently unknown, but up
to 16 terrestrial glacial events have been recognized in Iceland since 2.5Ma, so
there is potential for these rocks to record evidence of pre-late glacial
maximum ice thicknesses. It is proposed to apply an integrated approach to
stratigraphy using detailed quantitative glass texture and component analysis,
geochemical analysis, 40Ar-39Ar dating, detailed structural and facies mapping
and logging. This project and approach to correlation is particularly relevant
to interpreting the very many (&gt;1000) fissure-erupted, glaciovolcanic,
clastic-dominated sequences (i.e. 'tindars') in Iceland, which represent an
enormous database on the glacial history of Iceland. The results of this project
will help refine the criteria by which the presence of former ice in
glaciovolcanic (particularly clastic) sequences is recognized, and hence
contribute to the growing use of such rocks as indicators of past climate.