* 0910983
* Enabling the (U-Th)/Ne Thermchronometer: Ne Diffusion in Zircon and Titanite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2013
* USD 198,502.00

Intellectual Merit: Thermochronology - the study of temperature histories for
geologic samples using the tools of isotope and nuclear geochemistry - has
evolved into a fundamental part of earth system research. This proposal
contributes to that broader initiative by addressing issues that are important
obstacles to (U-Th)/Ne thermochronology. Proposed just a few years ago, this
method derives from the fact that alpha particles produced by the radioactive
decay of U and Th in accessory minerals produce 21Ne via reaction with 18O.
Empirical evidence suggests that 21Ne lattice diffusion is slower than that for
4He in accessory minerals, such that the (U-Th)/Ne and (U-Th)/He methods might
be used together to probe more deeply into the temperature-time evolution of a
sample than by using (U-Th)/He alone. While the basic theory of (U-Th)/Ne
thermochronology has been developed, it is currently impossible to interpret the
geologic significance of (U-Th)/Ne dates because we have no quantitative measure
of 21Ne diffusivity in minerals that might be useful for thermochronometry.
Thus, it is proposed to conduct a series of nucleogenic 21Ne diffusion
experiments on proton-irradiated zircon and titanite. In addition to 21Ne,
proton bombardment of these materials also will produce nucleogenic 3He. This
nuclear reaction forms the basis for another powerful new method, 4He/3He
thermochronology. A key assumption in that technique is that proton irradiation
produces a spatially uniform distribution of 3He in minerals. Prior to the
diffusion experiments that are at the core of the proposed study, we will test
this assumption by mapping the spatial distribution of 3He (as well as 21Ne) in
our irradiated samples using laser microprobe methods recently developed at
Arizona State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to become involved in the
fabrication and testing of new analytical instrumentation. In keeping with the
emphasis of ASU's new School of Earth and Space Exploration on integrated
science and engineering education, the proposed work will involve the
development of engineering practica for geoscience undergraduates. Informal
discussions at professional meetings in recent years suggests that there is a
need for noble gas geochronology short-courses aimed at graduate students and
professionals who are users but not providers of thermochronologic data. In
conjunction with this project, a web-based short course (including modules on
laser microprobe applications) will be developed, using the well-received MIT
OpenCourseWare structure as a model.&lt;br/&gt;