* 0910779
* Friction and aging of silica: atomistic simulations for fundamental understanding of earthquake mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Izabela Szlufarska, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2013
* USD 220,006.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

PROJECT SIGNIFICANCE Shallow tectonic earthquakes are driven by instabilities
that take place in crustal faults. Earthquake may be thought of as a dynamically
running shear crack. Friction and wear at the crack surface determine the
stability of the faulted region. The surfaces of the crack are rough and the
mechanics of their sliding is affected not only by surface properties (e.g.,
topology, chemistry), but also by processes taking place in the bulk of the
rocks near the crack interface.

Theories that are currently used to predict faulting instabilities are based on
phenomenological laws that describe time evolution of the fault. These theories
suffer from lack of understanding of what physical mechanisms are actually
evolving during frictional slip and therefore predictive capabilities of these
theories are limited. The PI will employ molecular simulations to determine
friction and adhesion of surfaces representative of crustal faults and she will
correlate the frictional response with fundamental chemical and mechanical
mechanisms taking place during sliding.

Identifying fundamental mechanisms underlying friction in crustal faults will
bring physical insights into the mechanics of earthquakes and it will provide a
physical interpretation of constitutive laws that are used for prediction of
earthquake phenomena. Understanding of friction and adhesion at the silica/water
interface will also have a significant impact on other areas of science. For
instance, undesired adhesion has been shown to be prohibitive in a reliable
design of micro- and nano-electromechanics system (MEMS/NEMS). MEMS/NEMS are
typically made of silica, which in ambient conditions quickly oxidizes and forms
a layer of amorphous silica. Reduction of adhesion in silica, particularly in
humid environments, is one of the outstanding challenges in MEMS/NEMS design.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Even nominally smooth macroscopic surfaces are rough at the
microscale. Therefore, while the outcome of an earthquake slip is observed on a
macroscale, friction behavior of faults is controlled by small contacts
(asperities) that are tens of nanometers to micrometers in size. There is
currently no theory that would allow prediction of friction coefficient at any
length scale. The challenge in developing such a theory stems from the multitude
and complexity of possible energy dissipation mechanisms that contribute to
friction, e.g., dislocation assisted slip or chemical bonding across the
interface. The complexity of the problem is increased even further if water is
present in the environment, as it is likely the case with crustal faults. Since
frictional processes occur at the atomic scale, this is a particularly exciting
area for the application of molecular simulation methods.

In the proposed project, the PI and her group will identify physical mechanisms
that govern friction of silica surfaces at a level of a single asperity. These
mechanisms will be determined as a function of temperature, humidity, and pH.
Friction and adhesion will be studied in both, the wearless and wear regime and
contributions to friction from surface chemistry and subsurface deformations
will be established. Advanced accelerated molecular dynamics techniques, based
on parallel replica dynamics, will be employed to study stick-slip behavior and
to determine the dependence of friction on velocity over a few decades of time.

Recent developments in atomistic modeling, which include the ability to simulate
large systems at the size of a single asperity contact, accelerated molecular
dynamics techniques, and reliable force fields for simulating silica/water
interface, create an opportunity to address the challenging issues related to
friction in crustal faults. The PI will closely collaborate with geologists, who
have on-going experimental projects aimed at answering questions complementary
to the ones identified in this proposal.