* 0910888
* Further Refinement of India's Proterozoic Paleogeography and Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Joseph Meert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2012
* USD 188,090.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The paleogeography of the Earth before the formation of the Pangea
supercontinent is poorly known. The goal of this research project is to better
understand Proterozoic paleogeography and, in particular, the older
supercontinents of Gondwana, Rodinia and Columbia. East Gondwana (Australia,
Antarctica, India, Madagascar and Sri Lanka) is considered a critical piece of
the Gondwanan, Rodinian and Columbian supercontinents. The main hypotheses
regarding the exact timing of East Gondwana amalgamation to be tested in this
study are: (a) the cratonic core of East Gondwana was the original continent
formed during the Archean time; (b) East Gondwana was assembled during the
Mesoproterozoic; and (c) East Gondwana assembly took place in conjunction with
the assembly of greater Gondwana during the Neoproterozoic. This project focuses
on India where relatively undeformed and unmetamorphosed Proterozoic rocks are
exposed making it possible to fill some critical gaps in India?s drift history
through the combined use of paleomagnetism and U-Pb geochronology. Specific
targets include two of the Purana basins in India along with dikes intruding the
Dharwar, Singhbhum and Bundelkhand cratons.

Paleomagnetic data in combination with reliable age information can provide
evidence for the orientation of geologic features such as orogenic belts and
dikes used in developing supercontinent amalgamation hypotheses. Results from
this research on the Indian subcontinent will be used to improve and develop
global paleogeographic models. Result will provide important constraints on past
climate change (including the most severe glaciations in earth history), the
relationship between global continental configurations and the evolution of life
in the Cambrian, and mantle dynamics leading to the formation and breakup of
supercontinents. This research will provide first order constraints for snowball
earth climate models, the Ediacaran Cambrian radiation and the loci of non-
renewable mineral deposits that typically form during continental collision and
breakup.

This project is co-supported by the Tectonics program of the Division of Earth
Sciences, and sponsored also by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (Africa, Near East, and South Asia Program).