* 0910041
* Empirical Research (Contextual Strand 2): Researching and Improving Geography Graduate Education for STEM Careers in Business, Government, and Non-profit Organizations
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Kenneth Foote, Association of American Geographers
* Continuing Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 993,031.00

This project is building on prior NSF-funded research on graduate education in
geography, as well as research performed since the mid-1990s by major
foundations. This prior work clearly indicates that STEM graduate programs are
not fully preparing students for potential careers beyond academe. As in other
social and environmental sciences, research on professional development in
geography has focused on academic career issues. The outcome is a broad-based
academic infrastructure in geography for supporting the professional development
of early career faculty. This project is premised on the belief that similar
infrastructure is needed to support the professional development of new and
transitional scholars entering Business, Government, and Nonprofit (BGN) work
settings. A key first step is to clarify the types of learning experiences, both
theoretical and applied, which will equip graduates with the competencies for
geographic work in BGN organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To take this first
step, this project is developing further a methodology designed in prior
research to assess workforce needs, expectations, and core competencies in
professional geography work. It is conducting research focused on BGN
professionals and employer organizations in order to determine the value of
coursework, internships, and other forms of educational experiences that
graduates acquire in graduate geography programs. The project scope includes
assessing the expectations of different workplace cultures, and developing
measures of how BGN professionals experience their working environments,
resulting in a better understanding of the knowledge and skills geography
graduates need to prepare themselves for entry into BGN positions.