* 0910557
* TC:Large: Collaborative Research: AUSTIN-- An Initiative to Assure Software Radios have Trusted Interactions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Naftaly Minsky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 410,000.00

TC:Large: Collaborative Research: AUSTIN?An Initiative to Assure Software Radios
have Trusted Interactions (CNS-0910557)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software and
cognitive radios will greatly improve the capabilities of wireless devices to
adapt their protocols and improve communication. Unfortunately, the benefits
that such technology will bring are coupled with the ability to easily reprogram
the protocol stack. Thus it is possible to bypass protections that have
generally been locked within firmware. If security mechanisms are not developed
to prevent the abuse of software radios, adversaries may exploit these
programmable radios at the expense of the greater good.&lt;br/&gt;Regulating
software radios requires a holistic approach, as addressing threats separately
will be ineffective against adversaries that can acquire, and reprogram these
devices. The AUSTIN project involves a multidisciplinary team from the Wireless
Information Network Laboratory (WINLAB) at Rutgers University, the
Wireless@Virginia Tech University group, and the University of Massachusetts.
AUSTIN will identify the threats facing software radios, and will address these
threats across the various interacting elements related to cognitive radio
networks. Specifically, AUSTIN will examine: (1) the theoretical underpinnings
related to distributed system regulation for software radios; (2) the
development of an architecture that includes trusted components and a security
management plane for enhanced regulation; (3) onboard defense mechanisms that
involve hardware and software-based security; and (4) a algorithms that conduct
policy regulation, anomaly detection/punishment, and secure accounting of
resources. &lt;br/&gt;Developing solutions that ensure the trustworthy operation
of software radios is critical to supporting the next generation of wireless
technology. AUSTIN will provide a holistic system view that will result in a
deeper understanding of security for highly-programmable wireless
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;