* 0910400
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The evolution of the locomotor system in Phrynosomatid lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Marguerite Butler, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2011
* USD 12,492.00

Understanding morphological adaptation is a fundamental goal of evolutionary
biology. However, this goal is challenging because most traits are composed of
many components, and it is often unclear how these components individually, and
collectively, contribute to performance. For example, in locomotion, multiple
muscles and skeletal elements contribute to movement. This study will use
morphological and performance measurements, a systems approach, and evolutionary
modeling to identify how each component of the locomotor system evolves and how
they are functionally integrated to produce locomotor systems adapted for
specific lifestyles. Desert lizards are an ideal system to study this question
because they vary widely in ecology, which appears to have selected for
different locomotor capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will further
our knowledge of the fundamental rules governing the design of terrestrial
locomotor systems. This study will be synthetic, bringing together functional
morphology, ecological physiology, and evolutionary modeling. Furthermore, it
will be the first application of a systems-approach to whole animal function in
order to identify where within the system adaptation occurs, the degree of
complexity involved, and help identify key features and selective pressures that
explain morphological diversity, a concept important for
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;