* 0910672
* C: Mathematics Attainment and African American Students: Discourse from Multiple Perspectives
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Stinson, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 09/30/2013
* USD 68,434.00

In collaboration with the Benjamin Banneker Association, Temple University,
Arcadia University, and Georgia State University convene a series of two
professional mini-conferences and one professional summit to address issues
related to the mathematical education of African American students, Pre-K-16.
Previous research (Kitchen, 2007; Stiff &amp; Harvey, 1988) suggests that there
is a negative relationship between African American students and mathematics.
This relationship is exacerbated by the underrepresentation of African American
students in advanced mathematics classes, even when they are the majority of
school populations (Martin, 2007), and the overrepresentation of African
American students in lower-track mathematics courses and special education
(Blanchett, 2006). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The series of conferences addresses the
following pressing questions: (1) In what ways do school structures and
institutional policies impact African American students' success in school
mathematics? (2) In what ways can technological tools and other forms of
multimedia be used to motivate and encourage African American students to learn
rigorous mathematics? (2) In what ways do highly qualified mathematics teachers
understand issues of race and equity, and how might teacher education programs
develop highly qualified mathematics teachers for urban schools? (3) What is the
nexus of race and identity for African American students in the South and other
spaces where African American students are the majority, and how does racial-
identity and individual agency impact their mathematics attainment? (4) What are
the best practices that facilitate learning and mathematical empowerment among
African American students, and how might culturally relevant and critical
pedagogy assist in developing academic success, cultural competence, and
critical consciousness among African American students?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous stakeholders, including classroom teachers,
school administrators, experts in STEM education research, and scholars in
psychology come together to speak to the pressing issues facing the mathematical
education of African American students. The conferences bridge research and
practice and challenge policymakers and school system leaders to establish
frameworks and infrastructures that encourage African American students to
develop positive mathematics identities and high levels of mathematics
attainment. Outcomes include articles in research and practitioner journals and
professional development materials.