* 0910903
* Student Travel to 53rd International Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon-Beam Technology and Nanofabrication; held in Marco Island Beach, May 26-29, 2009.
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Henry Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 04/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This is to request support in the amount $10,000 to enable students to attend
the 53rd International Conference on Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology
and Nanofabrication, 2009, to be held in Marco Island Beach, May 26 to May 29,
2009. In the fields of nanofabrication, electron and ion-beam lithographies,
photon and imprint lithographies, particle-beam optics, and forefront
applications of nanofabrication, this conference is preeminent. The requested
travel aid will enable students to present their research to a high level
international scientific community. They will observe how scientists and
engineers exchange innovative ideas and other information at conferences, and
they will hear first-hand presentations of up-to-date research results in
nanotechnology.

Learning how a technical conference serves as a venue for conveying information
to other is an important element of a students education. Also important is
leaning how to present, in a cogent and understandable way, the results of ones
research. The requested support will help to accomplish these ends. At the
conference students will make important personal contacts and learn of
employment opportunities. In a special student breakfast, to be held on Friday,
the conference organizers will describe to the students how the conference
program is put together and how papers are selected for oral or poster
presentation.