* 0910290
* Empirical; Contextual Research Strand; Title: Elementary Science Specialists and Classroom Generalists: Are There Differences in Science Instruction, Student Achievement, and Cost?
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Marian Pasquale, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2014
* USD 995,153.00

Abstract

Intellectual Merit This proposal focuses on science instruction at the
elementary level where few research studies exist about effective models for
teaching science. The goal of this study is to determine the degree to which
there are meaningful differences in the quantity and quality of science
instruction provided by a generalist, specialist, or blended model for classroom
instruction; whether differences in instruction are associated with student
outcomes; and which model is the most cost-effective based on financial and
human resources. The study will target 80 teachers of fourth and fifth grade
students in 42 schools in the Boston Public School District. The guiding
principles detailed in the Massachusetts Science and Technology Engineering
Curriculum Framework will serve as the operating definition of high-quality
science instruction and the theoretical framework to guide classroom
observations.

The four research questions that will guide this study include: 1. What are the
characteristics of schools that do and do not employ science specialists? What
are the characteristics of science specialists and classroom generalists? 2. How
does the quality of science instruction provided by a science specialist, a
classroom generalist, and a combination of specialist/generalist differ? How
does the quantity of science instruction provided by a science specialist, a
classroom generalist, and a combination of specialist/generalist differ? 3. If
differences in instruction exist between the models, to what extent and in what
ways are they associated with student learning? 4. What are the financial and
human-resource costs associated with each model?

A mixed methods approach will be used to collect data through surveys, three
face-to face interviews and three classroom observations. Data will be collected
from both principals and teachers over a 2.5 year period. The survey instruments
and protocols were developed by Horizon Research, Inc., and will be modified to
meet the specific needs of this study. Fourth and fifth grade student test
scores from the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System, the state's
assessment instrument, and kit-based tests will be used to determine the impact
of the different models on student achievement. The study includes a well
thought-out approach for analyzing data using an array of quantitative and
qualitative methods (e.g. general descriptive statistics, hierarchical linear
modeling, logistic regression models, one-way MANOVA estimations, coding and
coding schemes, and atlas.it).

Broader Impacts The boarder impacts of this study reside in the significance and
importance of results to district policymakers. While less that 30% of
elementary students in the United States receive science instruction from
specialists or a science specialist in addition to their regular classroom
teachers, few studies exist that describe the effect of this approach on science
teaching and student achievement. The fundamental issue that might be resolved
through this study include which of three models (generalist, specialist, or
blended) is the better one for teaching and learning science and at what cost.
This information will help policymakers make better decisions about science
instruction at the elementary level. Ways to disseminate lessons-learned to key
education stakeholders will be distributed through multiple channels and
pathways relevant to policymakers. Thus, this project adds to the limited
research in this area, advances knowledge about science instruction, highlights
the impact on student achievement, sheds light on cost effectiveness, and
provides a tool for measuring science instruction at the elementary level.