* 0910373
* Understanding and Reducing the Gender Gap in Math and Science:  Cognitive, Social, and Neural Mechanisms in Identity Threat
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Akira Miyake, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2013
* USD 999,865.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is focused on the gender gap in the
STEM disciplines through research on the impact of stereotype threat, which is
viewed as an important factor in female underrepresentation in mathematics and
science. Stereotype threat for women in math and science takes the form of a
fear that they could be judged in light of negative stereotypes. The research
rigorously tests the emerging view that identity threat
impairs&lt;br/&gt;learning and performance by reducing mental capacity,
specifically working memory capacity, cluttering individuals? minds with
negative task-irrelevant thoughts (e.g., worry) and inducing them to excessively
monitor task performance. Affirmation is hypothesized to reduce task-irrelevant
thoughts and/or excessive performance monitoring, thereby protecting working
memory capacity from the effects of identity threat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
multiple levels of analysis, the research is designed to: a) test whether
stereotype threat diminishes the math and science performance of undergraduate
women by reducing working memory capacity; b) determine the efficacy of a self-
affirmation intervention for lessening the negative impact of stereotype threat
on women's math performance and clarify the underlying cognitive mechanism
(i.e., depleted working memory capacity ) that allegedly mediates its impact;
and c) examine whether a self-affirmation intervention can improve the learning
of new scientific concepts in addition to enhancing the solving of math and
science problems. A significant strength of this proposal is the proposed
testing of working memory capacity in a more rigorous and comprehensive manner
than previously done, by examining multiple mediating mechanisms with a diverse
array of converging measures (e.g., reaction times, event-related potentials,
heart rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will yield rich data on
underlying mechanisms that should provide a foundation for conducting larger-
scale longitudinal interventions in actual STEM classrooms. The research also
has the potential to advance knowledge and understanding across several fields
and create transformative concepts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
potential to significantly reduce the gender gap in STEM fields at the
undergraduate and graduate levels through significantly reducing
underrepresentation in these disciplines and increasing performance on
standardized tests of math and science. At the same time, the proposed
activities offer a unique blend of training opportunities to undergraduate
trainees, graduate and post-grad students. The interdisciplinary team includes
leading researchers with expertise in cognitive psychology, social neuroscience,
and science education. Thus the project also can serve as a proof of concept
that an interdisciplinary approach can reveal the mechanisms underlying one of
the most significant psychological barriers to women's success in the STEM, and
that a psychological intervention targeting identity threat can improve women's
STEM learning and performance.&lt;br/&gt;