* 0910275
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The shadows cast by trees: using allometry, tree-resolving lidar, and ecostem models to inform the global view of forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Gregory Asner, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,775.00

Vegetation plays an important role in shaping our climate and weather, by
controlling the exchange of water and CO2 between the Earth and its atmosphere.
Unfortunately, there is no way to measure these processes directly at
continental scales, which limits our ability to predict future climate and even
short-term weather. The United States' collection of Earth-observing satellites
gives a nearly complete view of the global biosphere every day, but this picture
is so coarse that it can be difficult to interpret. A technique has been
developed in this researcher's laboratory to infer the sizes and numbers of
trees in coarse satellite imagery, using the shadows cast by trees. The concept
is that bigger trees and denser forests cast larger shadows, which can make a
forest appear darker. The algorithm, i.e. list of well-defined instructions for
interpreting the satellite data, depends critically on the relationship between
crown size and tree density for typical forest stands. The U.S. Forest Service
has amassed an extraordinary dataset of tree architecture (size and shape) by
species for forests in the continental U.S., but data are lacking for other
parts of the world, especially tropical regions. This research in Hawaii will
use a state-of-the art airborne system laser system to measure tree crowns, and
thereby dramatically expand our understanding of forest structure in tropical
regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will allow better
interpretation of daily coarse-resolution satellite imagery for improved weather
and climate forecasting, and for monitoring large-scale changes in forest
biomass. This research will foster collaboration with other groups working on
this topic.