* 0910633
* US - Ethiopia Planning Visit for Collaborative Training in GIS Applications and Environmental Education
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* John Moore, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 19,775.00

PI Melinda Laituri will lead a one-week Planning Visit for scientists,
university faculty members and resource managers from Colorado State University
(CSU) to Addis Ababa University (AAU), and resource management agencies in
Ethiopia to facilitate distant training and academic programs in applied
geographic information systems (GIS) for natural resource management and
environmental conservation. The Planning Visit will be the first step in
reaching several long-term goals that include building technological capacities
of scientists and resource managers in Ethiopia, developing an environmental
curriculum at Colorado State University (CSU) that will focus on developing
countries in Africa, and promoting international partnerships between
scientists, academics, and resource managers. To foster these goals, it is
intended to build a cyberinfrastructure that will deliver information and
distant education, house data, and enhance communications. The design and
development of this cyberinfrastructure will empower U.S. researchers and
educators to advance their work through international collaboration and ensure
that future generations of U.S. scientists and engineers gain professional
experience beyond our nation's borders early in their careers.

The visit will assess needs, develop a long-term strategy, and insure that
benefits have a maximum impact. It will allow participants to (1) strengthen
partnerships among U.S. and Ethiopian participants, (2) conduct a thorough
assessment of the available equipment and computational capacities, (3) evaluate
the knowledge and skill levels of the Ethiopian participants, (4) formulate a
distance learning GIS training program based on needs and capacity, and (5)
identify current environmental and social conditions that can be integrated into
distance learning training materials for Ethiopians and curricula for CSU
faculty and students targeted at African studies.