* 0910062
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A Mechanistic Investigation of Range Limits Across Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Aaron Kandur, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,999.00

A basic ecological property of all species is the geographic range and physical
conditions of the habitats in which they exist. However, our theoretical
understanding of what determines species distributions is limited due to the
difficulty of studying ecological processes occurring over large geographic
scales. The focus of this project is to understand what determines the
distribution of an ecologically important species, the mussel Mytilus
californianus, from a scale of meters to hundreds of kilometers. This project
will combine experimental and observational approaches to quantify survival,
growth, and reproduction of individuals across the full range of the species.
This species is ideally suited to a study of range limits because of its one
dimensional coastal distribution, the ease with which individuals can be
transplanted, and the capability of remote sensing to measure their
distribution. Results from this project will indicate the relative importance of
food web interactions and physical habitat conditions in restricting the
distribution of this intertidal species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will address the broader topic of how species can adapt to changing environments
through shifts in geographic range, and informs questions with practical
implications such as how species extinctions occur and how climate change is
likely to shift species distributions. Other broader impacts of this project
include outreach activities to high school teachers and students on the Olympic
Peninsula of Washington State, which is the location of the experimental work of
this project. This outreach will include classroom presentations of the research
being done as well as educational trips for high school students to the field
sites. This project will also enhance the research training of a doctoral
student.