* 0910828
* Dynamical Effects in Heterogeneous Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2014
* USD 392,307.00

Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program to study fundamental issues
related to the dynamics and mechanisms of reactions relevant to heterogeneous
catalysis. Using theoretical and computational methods, Guo and his research
group are elucidating experimentally observed mode- and bond-specificity in an
important benchmark system for molecule-surface interactions, namely the
dissociative chemisorption of methane on metal surfaces. The research requires
the determination of the Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surface for the
reaction using density functional theory, followed by multidimensional quantum
dynamics calculations. These studies represent a systematic and comprehensive
approach to fundamental surface reaction dynamics and are shedding much needed
light on energy flow, activation mechanism, and the origin of the mode- and
bond-selectivity.

Heterogeneous catalysis represents an important pillar in a modern chemical
industry because of its role in the production of various chemicals ranging from
fertilizers to plastics. It is also essential in many other vital areas such as
environmental protection (e.g., catalytic converters in automobiles) and future
energy technology (e.g., hydrogen fuel). Insights gained in these studies
suggest future strategies to improve catalytic efficiency. In addition, these
high-level theories offer benchmarks for more approximate dynamic models and
stimulate theoretical studies of other surface reactions.

