* 0910616
* Factors Influencing the Local Dynamics of Redox Metalloproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Bowler, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 520,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Bruce Bowler at the University of Montana to
carry out fundamental studies on the relationship between the conformational
dynamics of metalloproteins and their functions, using cytochrome c as a model
system. Cytochrome c is involved in electron transfer chemistry related to
energy production in living cells. It also mediates programmed cell death. The
heme of this protein sits in a crevice near the surface of the protein and the
opening and closing of this crevice is believed to play a role in its function.
The dynamics of heme crevice opening are observed using electron transfer
reactions with inorganic compounds and also through the binding of small
molecules to the iron atom of the heme. Mutations of amino acids adjacent to the
heme crevice are being used to test the effect of local structural stiffness on
the dynamics of the heme crevice. Mutations, which affect the stability of
portions of the protein outside of the heme pocket, are also being used to test
the effect of more distant parts of the protein structure on the dynamics of the
functionally important heme crevice. This research grant provides training for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows thus enhancing our research
infrastructure by growing the pool of trained scientists. The University of
Montana enrolls 8% minority students, half of whom are Native Americans, and the
Department of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry hosts an NSF-sponsored Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program that recruits heavily from tribal
colleges in Montana. Thus, underrepresented minorities are expected to
participate in this research. Understanding the factors that control protein
dynamics and thus function will provide a base of knowledge that will permit
rational manipulation of protein function, allowing design of proteins with both
optimized and novel activities with potential importance for industrially-
important chemical transformations. For cytochrome c, specifically, this
knowledge could be used to design components for molecular electronics devices.