* 0910831
* ETBC: Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Effects of Large-Scale Vegetation Change on Coupled Water, Carbon, and Nutrient Cycles: Beetle Kill in Western Montane Forests
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Paul Brooks, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 362,483.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the Effects of Large-Scale
Vegetation Change on Coupled Water, Carbon and Nutrient Cycles: Beetle Kill in
Western Montane Forest&lt;br/&gt;We are quantifying how rapid, extensive changes
in forest structure and composition associated with Mountain Pine Beetle (MPB)
infestation of western montane forests affect the coupling of water, carbon, and
nitrogen cycles. MPB infestation and associated fungal pathogens radically
change ecosystem structure by killing host trees, altering surface energy and
water partitioning, reducing carbon uptake, and putting organic matter into soil
on short and long time scales. The widespread extent of this disturbance
presents a major challenge for governments and resource managers who must
respond to the changes, yet lack a predictive understanding of how these systems
will respond to the disturbance over various temporal and spatial scales. This
disturbance allows us to test emerging theories of direct and indirect effects
of vegetation change on coupled biogeochemical cycles following a disturbance
that initially changes only the amount of living biomass while leaving soil
hydrologic and chemical characteristics unchanged. By working at sites with
different levels of MPB impact, we are evaluating how the dramatic loss of tree
function both directly (i.e. transpiration and carbon fixation) and indirectly
(i.e. snow capture, redistribution, and surface energy balance) affects water,
carbon and nitrogen cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work is organized around
two, broad questions that require both an interdisciplinary approach and close
integration of observation and modeling. How do changes in vegetation structure
associated with MPB alter the partitioning of energy and water? And How do these
changes in energy and water availability affect local to regional scale
biogeochemical cycles? We have assembled a diverse team of biogeochemists,
ecologists, hydrologists, and atmospheric scientists to address these questions
using measurements, modeling tools, and conceptual approaches from each
discipline. Our approach includes intensive, coordinated hydrological,
biogeochemical, and ecological observations designed to quantify the internal
coupling of water, carbon, and nutrient cycling, as well as how these processes
are expressed in both land surface-atmosphere exchanges and catchment solute
export. These observations are closely integrated with two process models, one
from the landsurface community and one from the catchment community, to evaluate
our current understanding of how vegetation change alters coupled cycles. To
extend our work beyond the relatively short time-scale of our observations, we
coordinate with several ongoing projects, including the Boulder Creek CZO and
the Niwot Ridge LTER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By quantifying both the biological
and physical controls that forest vegetation has on water and biogeochemical
cycles, our project will both improve our basic understand of the coupling
between water, energy, carbon, and nitrogen. Through coordination with land
surface and catchment modeling communities we will incorporate this knowledge
into the broader community. Our educational activities build on successful
efforts at all institutions, while coordination with land and water resource
managers will ensure our knowledge is transferred to the applied science
community.&lt;br/&gt;