* 0910495
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Stress and Reproduction:  Mechanisms and Functions of Acute Stress Effects on Brain Aromatase Activity
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,02/29/2012
* Molly Dickens, Dickens                 Molly          J
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 02/29/2012
* USD 122,852.00

0910495 Dickens

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Molly
Dickens to work with Dr. Jacques Balthazart at the University of Liege in
Belgium.

When an animal encounters a stressor in the wild, the immediate goal is
survival. Since escaping a predator, for example, is more an immediate concern
than breeding, a quick suppression of reproductive behavior is often thought to
be an important adaptive response to an acute stressor. However, when an animal
is chronically stressed, this temporary suppression of reproduction can become
long-term and detrimental for the animal?s fitness. Chronic stress-related
suppression of reproduction is especially problematic for conservation efforts
and understanding this suppression is increasingly important as species
preservation depends more heavily on stressful human mediation such as captive
breeding, reintroduction and translocation. In order to fully understand the
chronic stress effects on reproductive behavior, the underlying mechanisms of
the adaptive connection between sexual behavior and acute stress must be
understood. The PI is addressing this link between acute stress and reproductive
behavior utilizing the well-characterized Japanese quail model in collaboration
with Dr. Jacques Balthazart, who established the conceptual groundwork for
understanding the neurological basis of reproductive behaviors in Japanese
quail. In adult male Japanese quail, sexual behaviors are activated rapidly
(within a minute) by 17 beta-estradiol (E2) derived from aromatization of
testosterone (T) and preliminary data suggest that acute restraint stress or
injection of corticosterone (CORT), alters activity of the aromatase enzyme. The
goal of the project is to investigate this interaction to determine the
mechanistic and functional role of acute stress acting on aromatase-dependent
reproductive behaviors. The PI and host are first addressing when this action
occurs by testing the latency of changes in aromatase activity following stress,
or peripheral injections of stress hormones. In addition, they are testing where
this action occurs and how the action is communicated to aromatase-containing
brain regions. The PI and host are also evaluating the functionality of the link
by testing the hypothesis that if stress alters aromatase activity then changes
in aromatase-dependent reproductive behaviors will correspond to these
alterations. To test this hypothesis, the PI and host are tracking changes in
frequency of copulatory behaviors due to acute stress and hormone injections,
determining how the changes depend on degree of stressor severity, and
evaluating the role of stress on learning of reproductive behaviors. The PI and
host predict that acute stress and the related hormones will alter reproductive
behavior through changes in aromatase activity in the preoptic nucleus of male
quail. The PI intends to use the knowledge gained from these experiments to
eventually investigate how chronic stress leads to long-term suppression of
reproductive behavior as it pertains to difficulties with conservation efforts.



