* 0910300
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Evolution of moss organellar genomes and gene transfer from mosses to Amborella
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* zachary taylor, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,815.00

All living organisms are powered by tiny structures known as mitochondria, which
have their own DNA. Mosses are tiny plants that occur all over the world; even
though there are thousands of species of moss, only one moss mitochondrial
genome (i.e. all the DNA) has ever been sequenced. This project will sequence
the entire mitochondrial genome from each of ten diverse species of moss, and
will assess genome size, gene order, and DNA mutation rate. All these properties
vary among mitochondrial genomes of larger plants, but are largely unknown in
the mosses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also permit interpretation of
another striking biological phenomenon. The mitochondrial DNA in plants is
remarkably dynamic, and frequently picks up DNA from other parts of the cell in
which it exists. Recently, the Palmer lab has shown that the mitochondria of a
small tree known as Amborella have acquired the entire mitochondrial DNA from
two separate species of moss. This was a surprise, because there is no known
mechanism by which this massive transfer of DNA might take place. In trying to
understand this phenomenon, it would help to know exactly which mosses shared
their mitochondrial DNA with Amborella. This can be done by comparing the
sequences of the moss DNA in Amborella with the sequences being generated in
this project. It is possible that Amborella acquired the extra mitochondrial DNA
from mosses living on its trunk.