* 0910851
* CSR:Large:Collaborative Research:Reclaiming Moore's Law through Ultra Energy Efficient Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,993,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore?s law promises consistent
increasing transistor densities for the foreseeable future. However, device
scaling no longer delivers the energy gains that drove the semiconductor growth
of the past several decades. This has created a design paradox: more gates can
now fit on a die, but cannot actually be used due to strict power limits. In
this project, we will address this energy crisis through the universal
application of ?near-threshold computing? (NTC), where devices operate at or
near their threshold voltage to obtain 10X or higher energy efficiency
improvements. To accomplish this we focus on three key challenges that to date
have kept low voltage operation from widespread use: 1) 10X loss in performance,
2) 5X increase in performance variation, and 3) 5 orders of magnitude increase
in functional failure. We present a synergistic approach combining methods from
algorithm and architecture levels to the circuit and technology levels. We will
demonstrate NTC for applications that range from sensor-based platforms which
critically depend on ultra-low power (&amp;#8804;mW) and reduced form factor
(mm3) to unlock new applications, to high-performance platforms in large data-
centers, which dissipate so much power that they require co-location near
dedicated cooling facilities. Our end goal is to reduce national energy
consumption and environmental impact by providing dramatic gains in energy
efficiency while also opening up new application areas in health care by
providing for in situ monitoring of biological functions with minimum
intervention.