* 0910690
* Symposium on Synthesis and Applications of Intermetallic Compounds, 238th ACS National Meeting, Washington, D. C., August 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Julia Chan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal funds for a symposium
entitled ?Synthesis and Applications of Intermetallic Compounds? at the 238th
American Chemical Society National Meeting, to be held in Washington DC from
August 16-20, 2009. A broad spectrum of important topics in modern
intermetallics covered:&lt;br/&gt;? Synthesis of intermetallics for energy (e.g.
hydrogen storage and thermoelectrics) and magnetic applications, along with
novel synthetic approaches and strategies (including synthesis of nanoparticles,
and use of flux, microwave synthesis, metathesis, etc).&lt;br/&gt;? Innovative
chemical strategies and understanding of intermetallics (including intermetallic
nanomaterials, new chemical bonding paradigms) &lt;br/&gt;? New characterization
techniques and novel physical properties of intermetallics are also
presented.&lt;br/&gt;Chemists interested in the synthetic design of
intermetallics will also have the opportunity to learn about the potential
physical properties of new materials at different length scales (from nanoscale
to bulk phases). Theoretical chemists will be exposed to state-of-the-art
synthetic design capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal funds a symposium with three oral
sessions and one poster session entitled ?Synthesis and Applications of
Intermetallic Compounds? at the 238th American Chemical Society National
Meeting, to be held in Washington DC from August 16-20, 2009. The symposium will
focus on synthesis, chemistry, and applications of intermetallics that directly
impact a wide range of areas, including energy-related and alternative energy
applications, such as superconductivity, thermoelectrics, and materials with
novel mechanical properties. The potential impacts of this symposium are the
interactions of high profile scientists with junior faculty and students. In
this symposium, over half of the speakers are women and underrepresented
minorities. In addition, many students and postdocs of the invited speakers are
presenting their work in a poster
session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;