* 0910202
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The role of reproductive trait shifts in the diversification of Oenothera (Onagraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Peter Raven, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,873.00

The evolution and diversification of many flowering plants is linked to the
interactions of flowers with the insects and other animals that pollinate them
(pollination system), as well as to the ability of a single plant to self-
fertilize or cross-pollinate with others of its species (breeding system). These
traits vary widely among flowering plant species, but some species are very
specialized in the pollinators and the type of fertilization they use. One
hypothesis that has been long debated is whether having flowers that are
specialized for particular pollinators leads to the evolutionary diversification
of more plant species. This project aims to study pollinator and breeding
systems in a group of several dozen species in the evening primrose plant family
to test this hypothesis. The researchers will use DNA sequences of several genes
to reconstruct the evolutionary tree of these evening primroses, and the team
will examine details of the pollination process, such as types of pollinators
and the nectar and pollen gathered by them. They will then determine whether
shifts in pollinator and breeding systems are associated with the evolution of
greater numbers of species.

The broader impacts of the study include the training of undergraduates in field
and laboratory research and the development of collaborations with plant
ecologists. The grant supports the research of a female graduate student, who
will do outreach work with local high schools and give lectures to conservation
groups. Evening primroses are one of many groups of plants that depend upon
animal pollinators for their reproduction, and the details of these interactions
in the group are important to understand the process of plant reproduction.

