* 0910457
* Archaeological Investigation of Historic Kormantse, Ghana:Material Culture and African Cultural Identities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* E. Kofi Agorsah, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 127,378.00

With the support of National Science Foundation (NSF) Dr. E. Kofi Agorsah will
undertake an archaeological investigation of the cultural formation and
transformation of the historic Kormantse settlement on the Gold Coast, to
examine its cultural responses to colonization. Although popular among scholars
as the place of origin and pride of many Diaspora societies, little is known
about Kormantse, its material culture, population's cultural identities and
contributions in the colonial encounter, making it an "imaginary" reference
population and settlement for African Diaspora societies. The project will
pioneer scientific explanation for the connections using ethnographic and
archaeological evidence; reconstruct the processes and manifestations by which
the settlement's 16th to 20th century local and New World trans-Atlantic trade
populations, negotiated their survival and identities; examine the role and
impact of the numerous African populations in the formation of New World African
cultures; identify material traces that would reflect the internal and external
trade contacts, exchanges, migration routes and patterns of market traffic.
Evidence of changing burial and social practices as indices of the community's
shifting identity will determine the local community's adjustment to changing
conditions and colonial impact. Artifact differentiation, sources of goods,
trade routes, makers' marks and scientific dates, will help reconstruct the
process of emerging and continuing social distinctions, establish the nature and
process of cultural developments reflective of the formation and transformation
of individual and interactive African and African Diaspora identities and
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence from Kormantse, as a focal point and
outlet for the population movements between the West African interior and
coastal areas and the Americas, will help reconstruct the nature of colonial
cultural exchanges. Introduction of forensic and bio-anthropological techniques
into the area's archaeology for the first time, will provide pertinent
information about the age, sex, and pathology and help create demographic and
biological profiles, generate inferences concerning ecological adaptation,
activity patterns, dietary influences and overall health. Bio-archaeological
evidence and scientific analysis of soil, fauna, flora and other material will
increase the data pool of participating American and local institutions,
increase comparative capacity, open-up further collaborative opportunities and
expand the range of inter-disciplinary academic contributions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the research will convert the Kormantse site
from an "imaginary" historic to a de facto site with material culture depicting
its role in the colonial encounter, educate and expand knowledge of its real
worth and restore it to its well-deserved historical and cultural relevance for
the Americas. Sharing the Kormantse data with the Du Bois Database and the
African Burial Ground of New York, among others, will create new and refreshing
perspectives on cultural identities linking Africa and the African Diaspora. The
research constitutes a contribution to international student collaborative
capacity-building, exchanges and field research training opportunities and
strengthen developing educational partnerships with local Museums and cultural
institutions; solidify public outreach; open up new tourist activities and
provide material for local efforts toward a permanent field laboratory and site
Museum for student courses, internships, exchanges scientific educational
experience, while stimulating local and international interest, curiosity and
support.