* 0910660
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Combining Foundational and Lightweight Formal Methods to Build Certifiably Dependable Software
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* J. Gregory Morrisett, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 570,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research focuses on combining foundational and lightweight formal methods
to verify the safety, security, and dependability of large-scale software
systems. Foundational approaches (to formal methods) emphasize expressiveness
and generality, but they have not been successfully scaled to large-scale
systems. Lightweight approaches emphasize automation and scalability, but they
are less effective on low-level programs and on providing explicit proof
witness. The PIs are developing new high-level and low-level lightweight methods
and adapting them into various foundational verification systems. More
specifically, at the high level, the PIs are developing lightweight dependent-
type systems and separation-logic shape analysis, and connecting current methods
such as conventional type systems, slicing analysis, and flow analysis; at the
low level, the PIs are designing specialized provers and decision procedures to
verify low-level programs and to support certified linking of heterogeneous
components. If successful, this research will dramatically improve the
scalability of foundational verification systems and provide new powerful
technologies for building trustworthy software systems. Combining lightweight
and foundational approaches also provides a common thread that will pull
different verification communities together and unify them into a single
framework.