* 0910262
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Role of Permafrost and Soil Development in Boreal-Forest Responses to Holocene Climatic Change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Human-induced climate change is anticipated to cause major shifts in biome
boundaries. Projections of vegetation responses to climate change typically
assume that vegetation is in equilibrium with climate; i.e., that the
distribution of vegetation types is a direct result of climate conditions. This
doctoral dissertation research project will use a paleoecological approach to
test whether the dominant forest type in Alaska (black spruce muskeg) is in
climatic equilibrium. The investigators of this project have collected
preliminary data that challenge long-standing ideas about how boreal-forest
ecosystems responded to past climatic change. Specifically, the establishment of
black spruce (a moisture-demanding tree) ~5000 years ago did not correspond to
an increase in moisture availability, and the subsequent black spruce
communities exhibited great stability despite pronounced moisture fluctuations.
The goal of this project is to examine whether a climatic cooling resulted in
permafrost accretion, which in turn increased soil moisture and led to the
establishment of black spruce. The investigators will reconstruct Holocene
changes in soil moisture, permafrost, and vegetation using peat cores from two
permafrost-underlain bogs. The proposed study promises to enhance our
understanding of the role of permafrost in boreal-forest dynamics. Evidence
supporting the putative climate-permafrost-vegetation linkages would imply rapid
and irreversible change in ecosystem state upon local loss of permafrost in
response to warming. This project, which is a key to the completion of a
doctoral dissertation, will also involve research training for an undergraduate
student.