* 0910038
* Dissertation Research:Speciation is Reinforced by Natural Selecion in Plants: A Test Within The Genus Mimulus
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Dena Grossenbacher, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 01/31/2012
* USD 13,609.00

Selection for increased reproductive isolation, termed reinforcement, was first
proposed by Dobzhansky in 1937 and remains a controversial topic in the study of
species formation. Reinforcement is increasingly being tested in many closely
related organisms, however, only a single study has tested its role in plant
species formation and no study has directly measured natural selection for
increased reproductive isolation in the face of ongoing gene exchange.
Comparative and experimental methods will be used to examine the role of
reinforcement in the plant genus Mimulus, a model system in evolution and
ecology. Increased floral divergence was observed between closely related
species pairs with overlapping ranges, a pattern consistent with reinforcement.
Research funded by this award will address whether the observed floral
divergence is associated with mating system shifts and directly measure
selection on floral traits that increase reproductive isolation in the field.
Self-pollination rates of multiple populations of 16 species pairs will be
quantified in the greenhouse, and molecular tools will be used to confirm self-
pollination rates in natural populations in the field. Those studies will be
followed by a field-based genotypic selection experiment to measure selection on
floral traits that increase reproductive isolation. This research will
constitute a strong test of a mechanism that is thought to play an important
role in the formation of new species. It will have both strong intellectual
merit and, because it will have the potential to improve public understanding of
the evolutionary process, strong broader impacts. Other broader impacts of this
project include mentoring of two undergraduate students who will participate in
the research, and support for a doctoral student.