* 0910167
* Development and Application of a Multilevel Evaluation Procedure for Examining State and School Educational Contexts with NAEP
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Gregory Camilli, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 307,949.00

The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) mathematics exam renders
aggregate scores based on the assumption that each test item measures a single
underlying proficiency (e.g., an area of mathematics). Prior work of the
investigators suggests that there may be more information that can be mined from
the NAEP exam that may be used for policymaking at the instructional level, such
as policymaking for schools). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the NAEP item response
data, the investigators propose a two-fold goal: (1) to understand school and
state influences on student mathematics achievement, and (2) to improve
measurement and statistical analysis techniques for the evaluation of
mathematics education. A considerable portion of the research will focus on the
creation of measurement and statistical techniques (goal two) that will be
demonstrated in the advancement of goal one analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will use Item Response Theory (IRT) and Hierarchical Linear
Modeling (HLM) analyses to produce their own statistically-based classification
of NAEP items that, when contrasted with the existing (official) NAEP
conceptually-based classification system, should reveal information that can be
attributed at the school and state levels simultaneously. This will allow the
researchers to use the data and their (error) variance--both in IRT and HLM--to
examine how schools differ on any number of preselected, relevant policy
characteristics. To do this, however, requires that the investigators build new
statistical tools and will require that this very premise be tested in the form
of a hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the results of this feasibility
study will determine if a test designed for assessing national (only) progress
can be used to explain the relative mathematical strengths of schools. This
approach could be used to evaluate policy initiatives focused at the school
level using NAEP and potentially other large-scale assessment data.