* 0910361
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Predicting Restoration Outcomes In Exotic-Invaded Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Evan Siemann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Restoring habitats that have been invaded by exotic, non-native plant species is
often challenging. Efforts to promote success of desired species must be
balanced with efforts to control detrimental exotic species. Furthermore,
likelihood of success and cost of successful restoration can vary dramatically
among equivalently invaded habitats and thus are difficult to predict. In this
project, wetlands and grasslands in Texas invaded by exotic Chinese tallow trees
will be used as a model system to better understand mechanisms driving
restoration outcomes. The necessary and appropriate management methods (and thus
cost) depend on how intensely tallow trees return following their removal. This
is hypothesized to depend on soil moisture and the local availability of tallow
and native plant seeds. At 12 tallow-invaded habitats located across a moisture
gradient, moisture, native seed availability, tallow seed availability and
management methods will be manipulated. Experimental results and data on initial
habitat characteristics from each site will be used to develop a model that
predicts restoration outcomes based on site characteristics. In addition to
advancing understanding of how environmental factors influence invasions and
plant community development, this work will have broader impacts for
conservation and restoration. The ability to predict restoration outcomes could
allow land managers to prioritize efforts where chances of success are high and
costs are low. This would increase the extent of successful restoration and
tallow control on a landscape scale, benefiting wildlife as well as land
managers and landowners struggling with tallow.