* 0910597
* Exploiting Allenes: Synthesis and Reactivity of Strained Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kay Brummond, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This project will continue work to explore the chemistry of allenes, an
underutilized functional group in the synthetic chemist's repertoire. Exploiting
the reactivity of this moiety led to the discovery of a thermal [2 + 2]
cycloaddition reaction of an allene-yne to afford an alkylidene cyclobutene, the
topic of this proposal. Prior to this work, reports of this unsaturated,
strained moiety were rare. Ready access to this ring system will facilitate
investigations into their chemical reactivity and synthetic utility.
Computational and synthetic studies will be undertaken to understand the
mechanism of the thermal [2 + 2] cycloaddition reaction of allene-ynes. The
scope of the thermal [2 + 2] cycloaddition reaction of allene-ynes will be
expanded and the synthetic utility of alkylidene cyclobutenes will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Kay Brummond of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. Discovery and synthesis
of new arrays of functionality through the development of innovative reactions
is the primary aim of Professor Brummond's research program. Realization of the
goals of this proposal will provide a more general understanding of the
chemistry of strained compounds and an expansion of chemical space, thus
enhancing the discovery of new biological probes and pharmaceuticals.