* 0910017
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Microevolution of cell size and cell number regulation in Nasonia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* David Loehlin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

How organisms regulate the size and shape of tissues, and how changes in this
regulation lead to the incredible diversity of form and shape in nature, largely
remains a mystery. This project explores these questions using a well-defined
case of recent divergence in morphology between closely related species in the
emerging insect genetic model system, Nasonia. The size of male wings differs
dramatically between Nasonia species. In one species male wings are very small
and males cannot fly, whereas in another the wings are large and males do fly.
The structure of a major gene affecting this sex-specific trait will be
determined by positional mapping. Then, the downstream regulatory processes
through which this gene changes wing cell size and number will be identified in
a genome expression experiment. Finally, the fitness consequences behind wing
size reduction will be tested under different
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new information on
the regulation of cell growth and replication, processes that are fundamental to
development and that contribute to diseases such as cancer and diabetes. The
proposed studies will integrate discovery across biological disciplines, from
genetics to development, molecular biology, genomics and adaptation. Training
for a graduate student in these cross-disciplinary approaches is provided,
including travel to a genome biology center to learn new methods and conduct
experiments. This training will be used to develop undergraduate laboratory
exercises in computational genetics. Finally, an ongoing undergraduate research
mentoring effort, which includes students from underrepresented gender and
ethnic groups in science, will be expanded.