* 0910847
* Flash Gordon: A Data Intensive Computer
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2017
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2017
* USD 21,448,911.00

ABSTRACT UCSD 0910847 Norman, Michael L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports the acquisition, deployment and operation of a new supercomputing
system suitable for data-intensive applications. The system, to be known as
Flash Gordon, will be deployed by the University of California at San Diego at
the San Diego Supercomputer Center and integrated into the TeraGrid. The system,
which has been designed by Appro International Incorporated, with partners Intel
and ScaleMP, seeks to bridge the widening latency gap between main memory and
rotating disk storage in modern computing systems. It uses flash memory to
provide a level of dense, affordable, low-latency storage that can be configured
as either extended swap space or a very fast file system. The system will
consist of very large shared virtual-memory, cache-coherent "super-nodes" to
support a versatile set of programming paradigms. Peak performance will exceed
200 teraflops/s in double precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flash Gordon's large
addressable virtual memory, low-latency flash memory, and user-friendly
programming environment will provide a step-up in capability for data-intensive
applications that scale poorly on current large-scale architectures, providing a
resource that will enable transformative research in many research domains. Even
sequential codes will be able to address up to terabytes of fast virtual memory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of scientific challenges, as described in the
proposal, that this resource will allow researchers to tackle, include the
following. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;De Novo Genome Assembly: Gene sequencers
produce information about many small fragments of a genome. Some recent assembly
algorithms use a graph-based approach, much more readily executed on a shared-
memory system. Using Flash Gordon, researchers will be able to rapidly assemble
complex genomes such as mammalian genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy:
Modern astronomy databases can be large; for example, the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey is approximately six terabytes in size. Typically, the analysis
algorithms that researchers use to perform complex searches for astronomical
phenomena can be implemented more easily on shared-memory systems. Flash Gordon
will enable researchers to load a copy of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey into the
flash memory associated with a super-node, greatly extending the types of
analyses astronomers can make.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrophysics: Cosmological
simulations produce many terabytes of output describing the simulated universe.
Detailed analysis of the results of these simulations, to find features such as
collapsed halos, galaxy mergers, dwarf galaxies, and galaxy clusters, often
requires density-based cluster analysis that does not parallelize well. With
Flash Gordon, these analyses can be accelerated by exploiting the large SMP
partitions and fast flash memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction Networks:
Interaction networks, graphs representing the relationships between objects, are
used in research in areas such as epidemiology, phylogenetics, systems biology,
and population biology. These interaction networks can represent relationships
between types of data stored in different databases; for example, the
combination of social network databases with medical records and genomic
profiles to explore questions such as genetic resistance to disease. Flash
Gordon will speed analysis of large interaction networks because the databases
can be stored on the solid-state disks, greatly reducing access time and
permitting more complex types of analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
will leverage a number of ongoing educational activities at UCSD to expand and
diversify the community of users that can utilize this computational resource,
including successful outreach programs for women and minorities from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering. The project will also create
a summer training program for undergraduates.