* 0910947
* Structural and Functional Studies of Carbohydrate-Carbohydrate Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Amit Basu, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2013
* USD 409,900.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Amit Basu of Brown University
who outlines an approach for studying carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions
(CCI) that occur between cell surface glycolipids found in the myelin sheath, a
multi-layer of membranes found in the nervous system. During the proposed
funding period, Professor Basu's group will, 1) Continue to study CCI using both
established model systems as well as those developed in their labs; 2) Develop a
quantitative analysis of CCI; and 3) Investigate the use of glycoconjugates to
bind to and perturb the function of glycosignaling domains in oligodendrocytes.
This will be accomplished by preparing propargyl glycosides of galactose and its
analogs, and linking these sugars to dendrimers, silica nanoparticles, and
polymers. The interaction of these glycoconjugates with immobilized
glycoconjugates will be examined using surface plasmon resonance measurements.
Finally, the interaction of the glycoconjugates with oligodendrocytes, and their
effect on cell surface architecture and signal transduction will be
investigated.

Research by Professor Basu will develop a clearer picture of cell adhesion,
which is a fundamental biological phenomenon involved in various scientific
fields with significant societal impact such as embryonic development,
infectious disease, cancer, and bioterrorism. Students involved with these
projects will be trained to conduct interdisciplinary research. This research
impacts a broad number of fields such as, organic chemistry, polymer chemistry,
materials, neuroscience, and membrane biology. Professor Basu is involved with
the Leadership Alliance, a consortium of 33 institutions that provide summer
research internships to develop underrepresented students into outstanding
leaders and role models in academia, business and the public sector. Professor
Basu is an advocate at the institutional level for promoting and developing
curricular reform and innovation, having served on a University Science and
Education committee tasked with evaluating and improving science education at
Brown and the Task Force on Undergraduate Education, which examined the entire
liberal arts curriculum on campus. He is currently a member of the Science
Center Advisory Board and was appointed as a Faculty Advising Fellow (FAF) in
Fall 2008. The latter is a three year appointment to a position that seeks to
strengthen the faculty-student advising relationship. As a FAF, Professor Basu
has initiated a program to discuss research opportunities and bring scientific
seminars to students in an informal residential setting. He is actively engaged
in outreach, and is scheduled to visit both a local kindergarten and elementary
school this winter to lead hands-on activities in science.