* 0910346
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Analysis of host adaptive genetic variation and its role in anthrax dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 01/31/2012
* USD 14,830.00

Anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) is a highly infectious disease that threatens human
health, agricultural production, and biodiversity. It occurs in episodic
outbreaks in wild and domestic hoofed herbivores, and also in carnivores and
humans. Genetic studies suggest anthrax originated in sub-Saharan Africa and
then spread globally. Today, the number and severity of anthrax outbreaks in
human, livestock, and wildlife populations have increased worldwide. Still,
little is known about what drives the observed patterns of anthrax occurrence
across populations and species. A host's ability to respond to bacterial
infection depends on inherent genetic factors. Genetic diversity may be
particularly important in functional genes, such as those involved in general
immune response or specific to anthrax. The goal of this research is to
investigate how variation in host genes is related to anthrax susceptibility
within and across African wildlife species. The researchers will assess genetic
data from a spectrum of resistant to susceptible host species in Etosha National
Parka, Namibia, particularly the diversity in the Major Histocompatibility
Complex and of an anthrax toxin receptor gene that plays a critical role in
anthrax progression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
relate to the fact that managing anthrax is a global priority and the results of
this work could greatly improve local control efforts in Namibia and other
regions of the world. Further, the work will contribute to the development of a
comprehensive predictive model of anthrax dynamics that can be used to evaluate
management efforts related to vaccination, confinement, or culling of hosts, as
well as build the research capacity of Namibian
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;