* 0910527
* Study of Theoretically Interesting Molecules and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 10/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Weston Borden, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 600,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Weston T. Borden of the
University of North Texas who will perform research that will increase our
understanding of the electronic structures and reactions of organic and
organometallic molecules. Among the molecules on which Density Functional Theory
(DFT) and ab initio calculations will be performed are: (a) tetrakis-annelated
cyclooctetraene derivatives, in which the ground state is expected to be formed
by transfer of a pair of electrons from high-lying sigma molecular orbitals
(MOs) into one of the non-bonding MOs of the eight-membered ring, (b)
substituted [2.2.2]propellanes, in which twelve fluoro, twelve methyl, and six
carbonyl groups are all predicted to provide remarkable strengthening of the
central C-C bond toward cleavage, (c) hexakis(trifluoromethyl)prismane, in which
the six trifluoromethyl groups have been found experimentally to stabilize the
molecule against ring opening to the corresponding Dewar benzene, and (d) a
novel tetraradical in which the effect of geminal fluorines on the ordering of
the low-lying electronic states (a quartet, three triplets, and two singlets)
will be calculated, in advance of experiments to be performed by a collaborator
at Hiroshima University in Japan.

Research by Professor Borden in the previous award period has produced quality
publications and this is expected to continue. The broader impacts of Professor
Borden's activities as an Associate Editor at the Journal of the American
Chemical Society has contributed to maintaining the quality of the Journal as
well as leading to Professor Borden editing a new online Journal called JACS
Selects, featuring the best papers published in JACS in a particular area of
chemistry. Being able to choose for JACS Selects not only the best papers
published in JACS but also the experts best qualified to comment on each of
these papers, would be impossible if the PI were not an active researcher
himself. Professor Borden will also continue to mentor his post-docs and
graduate students, to help them learn to (a) recognize unusual findings in both
experimental and computational chemistry, (b) find explanations of these
findings, (c) make predictions based on the explanations, and (d) communicate
these explanations and predictions to other researchers, both orally and in
writing. He will also pay special attention to mentoring members of his research
group who belong to underrepresented groups to help them to become first-rate
researchers.