* 0910545
* Collaborative Research: Sedimentary Basin Response to Paleocene-Eocene Spreading Ridge Subduction in South-Central Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jeffrey Trop, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 87,288.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research group will give one of
the first detailed accounts of the sedimentary basin response to oceanic
spreading-ridge subduction, a common tectonic process that fundamentally
reshapes and reorganizes convergent continental margins. Forearc basins, one of
the most common along convergent margins, are large sediment repositories that
have the potential to preserve a detailed record of spreading-ridge subduction
processes. Preliminary work indicates that the Matanuska Valley region of
southern Alaska is a fertile area, perhaps the best on Earth, to examine the
long term sedimentary record of spreading-ridge subduction in a forearc basin.
The proposed research also has direct implications for US citizens. The
Paleocene?Eocene strata to be studied are economically important for coal and
methane reserves. Understanding ridge subduction will also be important for
hydrocarbon exploration in the forearc basin in the Cook Inlet. In addition, a
major objective of the research is better characterization of the Castle
Mountain fault system, activity along which presents a serious hazard for
&gt;300,000 people that live in the Anchorage-Palmer-Wasilla region. The
scientific outreach plan involves a two-day field trip with K?12 Native American
students from rural Alaskan communities, as well as undergraduate students from
the University of Alaska, where they will learn about one of the best exposed
convergent margins on Earth. The PIs will help students understand the impact of
tectonic processes that shape their local environment and communities. The
Native American students have grown up around geological issues (gold and coal
mining, petroleum exploration, earthquakes, etc.), but many probably have not
made connections between these issues and tectonic processes along convergent
margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forearc basin strata in south-central Alaska
provide a superb opportunity to study sedimentary basin response to spreading
ridge subduction. Well-exposed strata over 2800 m thick crop out in the
Matanuska Valley region between Cretaceous-Paleocene arc plutons to the north
and Cretaceous accretionary prism strata to the south. The proposed
interdisciplinary study will evaluate three hypotheses: (1) That the main phase
of Paleocene-Eocene basin development and sediment accumulation was synchronous
with spreading ridge subduction and slab window magmatism in southern Alaska;
(2) That spreading ridge subduction modified the depositional and structural
configuration of the basin, resulting in subaerial uplift of the formerly marine
forearc basin followed by rapid subsidence and nonmarine deposition; and (3)
That spreading ridge subduction triggered exhumation of arc plutons and
metamorphic rocks, and that this process is recorded in the detrital composition
of the forearc basin strata. A new approach in the proposed research is that
strata of the forearc basin will be used to not only determine the types of
magmatic and sedimentary processes that occur in forearc basins during ridge
subduction but also to serve as a bridge for understanding the timing of related
processes across both the accretionary prism and the magmatic arc parts of
convergent margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;