* 0910663
* NeTSE:  Large:  NaNoNetworking:  A New Frontier in Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

Nanotechnologies promise new solutions for applications in biomedical,
environmental, industrial, military and other fields. At the nano-scale, a nano-
machine can be considered as the most basic functional unit, which is able to
perform very simple tasks. Nanonetworks, i.e., the interconnection of nano-
machines, will expand the capabilities of single nano-machines by providing them
a way to cooperate and share information. Traditional communication technologies
are not directly applicable to nanonetworks and need to undergo a profound
revision in order to meet the requirements of this new environment. Instead of
electromagnetic or acoustic waves, the use of molecules to encode and transmit
the information represents a new communication paradigm, which demands novel
solutions, including the characterization of molecular communication mechanisms,
the definition of physical channel models or the development of architectures
and networking protocols for nano-machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: With this planning effort for a larger NaNoNetworking (N3) project, the
principal investigators (PIs) will undertake the first steps to address the
above challenges toward the realization of this new communication paradigm. The
research team will further develop their vision for a future nanonetwork
paradigm and will determine concrete applications. The PIs will also incorporate
new researchers with required areas expertise, of Experimental Molecular Biology
and Theoretical Physics, into the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The envisioned N3 Project is expected to pave the way for research in
nanonetworking and could have a significant impact on research in
nanotechnologies and nanonetworks since the N3 Project would represent the
entrance of the communications, computer science, and biology communities into
this converging field. With this planning effort the researchers will take a
first step toward the realization of the nanonetwork with initial research and
the development of a large proposal on this topic.&lt;br/&gt;