* 0910113
* The genetic consequences of autopolyploidy in Galax urceolata (Diapensiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* Stein Servick, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,040.00

Many plants have multiple copies of their entire genome within every cell; such
plants are called polyploids. In most known cases, a plant becomes polyploid by
hybridizing with another plant, which appears to trigger copying of the genome.
This sort of polyploidy is studied extensively. However, in a few species the
genome seems to have copied itself without hybridization, a phenomenon known as
autopolyploidy. The evolutionary importance of autopolyploidy is unknown. Galax
urceolata (Diapensiaceae) is a flowering plant that occurs only in the
Appalachian Mountains and adjacent regions, and includes both polyploid and non-
polyploid individuals. This study will use DNA sequences and statistical
analysis of chromosome numbers to study autopolyploid evolution in G. urceolata.
It is possible that G. urceolata actually represents more than one species, but
that the species are cryptic, not easily recognized on the basis of superficial
shape or form. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from this study will help in
conservation of species in the Appalachian Mountains. Data will be published in
international peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific conferences, and
contributions will be made to The Polyploidy Portal, a website dedicated to the
sharing of information, current research, and educational materials. This
project also provides significant educational value through (1) training of a
doctoral student and (2) outreach to undergraduate students in proper laboratory
techniques and molecular analyses. &lt;br/&gt;