* 0910365
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Spider Silk Evolution Across Ancient &amp; Recent Phylogenetic Divergences
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Cheryl Hayashi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 06/30/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Silk is essential to the ecology and evolutionary success of spiders. Despite
the clear significance of silk to spiders, little is known about how silk genes
are shaped over time by natural selection. This project furthers investigation
of the evolutionary and functional changes of silks spun by species of the genus
Aliatypus. These spiders rely on silk for constructing burrows and trapdoors,
without which they could not survive. Silk genes from different Aliatypus
species will be sequenced to determine the relationships and rates of change
among the genes. These results will reveal how silk evolves among closely-
related species and how molecules adapt to local environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its extraordinary mechanical properties,
spider silk is being used to develop novel biomimetic materials that are tougher
than Kevlar but also biodegradable. This research will help bioengineers
understand which elements of silk sequences correspond to particular functions
or environments. Additionally, understanding the dynamics of silk gene variation
has relevance to other repetitive, structural proteins, such as biomedically
important collagens, elastins, and amyloids. Furthermore, Starrett will
contribute to the cataloging of native fauna in the biologically diverse
Southwest and enable undergraduates to gain both field and laboratory research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;