* 0910535
* Investigating the Presence of Preseismic Velocity Changes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* David Schaff, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2012
* USD 211,156.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Earthquakes strike without warning and are some of the most destructive and
devastating forces of nature in terms of loss of life. In May, 2008 the Wenchuan
earthquake in China killed 80,000 people with 20,000 still missing. The 2004
Sumatra earthquake generated a giant tsunami that left 225,000 casualties in its
wake, affecting eleven countries. In 1976 the Tangshan earthquake in China
again, killed 240,000 people, the deadliest in recorded history. Statistics
compiled at Columbia University indicate that of all natural disasters world-
wide including floods, droughts, hurricanes, tornadoes, and fires?earthquakes
rank the highest for total number of casualties. Many of the other natural
disasters provide some type of warning so that at least lives can be saved even
if property damage is extensive. Understandably people have diligently sought
for some clues to foretell of impending great earthquakes in hopes of
alleviating some of this loss and suffering. But earthquake prediction remains
an extremely challenging problem. Most of the evidence of precursors is
anecdotal and has not been scientifically verified in a rigorously controlled
setting that produces reproducible results.

Professional seismologists have been doing their best to contribute what they
could to the challenge of earthquake prediction. There has been a long history
of looking for precursory variations in the velocity of seismic waves or other
waveform attributes preceding large earthquakes. The search for preseismic
velocity changes has been called the holy grail of seismology. This project will
continue taking small steps in that pursuit. Progress has been made. It is now
scientifically well-documented that coseismic and postseismic velocity changes
have been measured by a variety of means for several large earthquakes all
demonstrating consistent behavior. The data in these studies, however, do not
have the temporal sampling required to confirm the existence or non-existence of
a preseismic velocity change. The findings are inconclusive simply because of a
lack of data. We present in this proposal three different strategies designed to
greatly improve the insufficient temporal sampling in the preseismic period.
They involve new data and new technologies that are state-of-the-art and have
recently come on the scene. The first approach is to do a comprehensive analysis
of new repeating event sequences that have become available as a source for
repeatable waves in the same location. The abundant new data sources for the
repeating events substantially improves the temporal sampling for this now
standard method for measuring velocity variations. The second approach takes
advantage of the hot, new field of ambient seismic noise correlations which just
recently has been applied for velocity change monitoring. The technique utilizes
continuous data streams from permanent stations and so is able to finely sample
velocity variations in the days leading up to large earthquakes. We propose
enhancements to this method from our correlation detector research to better be
able to extract the signal from the noise. The third strategy is to develop a
prototype time-dependent double-difference tomography code to invert for where
the changes are occurring spatially and to be able to use the majority of the
microseismicity.

Both laboratory experiments and theories have concluded that there should be
measureable velocity changes in the crust preceding large earthquakes. They have
yet to be consistently and reliably measured in the field. The reason for this
may be due to lack of high quality data since we don?t know where and when the
next earthquake will strike. However, an extremely well controlled experiment at
Parkfield has recently observed velocity changes preceding two earthquakes
presenting the most convincing evidence to date that these predicted changes do
occur in the field. But conducting many more of these types of experiments is
economically infeasible and so alternative strategies are needed to confirm the
existence of preseismic velocity changes before other large earthquakes.

The question that seismologists are most often asked by the lay public is, "Can
we predict earthquakes yet?" The answer is not currently. While it is a far off
goal, the general population clearly cares about this issue and desires that a
portion of the resources they provide would be allocated towards that end.
Engineers can build safer buildings to reduce the loss of life substantially,
but in many of the poorer countries which also happen to be the ones that suffer
the greatest number of casualties, this is economically prohibitive and so they
would benefit the most from better earthquake forecasting.