* 0910313
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Temperature gradients along latitude and elevation:  Effects on dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,10/31/2011
* Carlos Guarnizo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 10/31/2011
* USD 14,960.00

Tropical-zone highlands are always colder than lowlands; temperatures do not
change across seasons the way they do in temperate-zone highlands. As a result,
tropical montane organisms may be adapted to narrow temperature ranges and thus
physiologically incapable of moving up or down mountains. In contrast temperate
montane organisms are probably adapted to wider temperature ranges due to
seasonal cycles, making them more likely to move between elevations. This
prediction, called the Janzen Effect, explains why in tropical regions different
elevations hold different species whereas in temperate regions a given species
can live at a range of altitudes. Very few tests of the Janzen Effect exist.
This research will determine if the Janzen Effect occurs in Andean frog species.
In other words, do frog species in the tropical Andes move up or down the
mountains less often than species in the temperate Andes? Movement rates will be
estimated using genetic techniques. This study will help to understand the
mechanisms of diversification of tropical animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
implications of this project extend to all ectotherms ("cold blooded animals"),
because their physiology is directly affected by the external environment. This
study will produce predictions about whether some populations of organisms might
be more resilient to montane climate variation resulting from global warming.
Students from small towns in the Andes will actively participate in scientific
discussions with the Co-PI about the origin and diversification of their own
Andean flora and fauna and will have direct contact with current field
techniques and procedures in molecular evolution.