* 0910714
* Graduate workshop on zeta functions, L-functions and their applications; Summer 2009, Orem, UT
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Roger Baker, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 01/31/2010
* USD 18,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Baker, Roger
C.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0910714 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Brigham
Young University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Graduate workshop on zeta functions,
L-functions and their applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Graduate
Workshop on Zeta Functions, L-functions and Their Applications will be held at
Utah Valley University on June 1-4, 2009. NSF funds will be used for travel and
lodging for 20 participants including plenary speakers and students. The Riemann
zeta function has gained enormous importance in the eyes of number theorists
since its properties (expressed in terms easily understandable to a modern
undergraduate studying complex analysis) were developed by Riemann in a renowned
lecture in Berlin in 1859. Since then, the function has been used to prove the
fundamental theorem on the distribution of prime numbers, and many other
important results in number theory. The Dirichlet L-functions, and other zeta
functions and L-functions invented since that time by Dedekind, Hecke, Artin and
others, have vastly extended the range of application of Riemann's ideas, yet
many conundrums remain about their properties. The workshop will have three sets
of lectures by experts in the field: Brian Conrey, Ram Murty and Steve Gonek.
Also, there will be about 16 talks by junior mathematicians and senior
researchers. The three principal lecturers will discuss the ideas of zeta
functions and L-functions beginning with the Riemann zeta function and Dirichlet
L-functions, Dedekind zeta functions, and L-functions of number fields. They
will also introduce automorphic L-functions, Artin L-functions and L-functions
of varieties. Introductory concepts and results will be given in some detail.
Modern topics such as the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture and the random matrix
approach to results and conjectures concerning zeta functions and L-functions
will also be outlined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is highly desirable to give
graduate students working in number theory a broad picture of the state of the
art in this subject area. The major component of the conference is the
involvement of graduate students. This includes a certain number of talks
reserved for graduate students who have results in the area to report. In
addition, the conference will provide an opportunity for graduate students to
interact with established researchers. This interaction will be promoted by
scheduling breaks in which the participants will be encouraged to break up into
groups to discuss research ideas. At the end of the workshop there will be a
round table discussion on open problems and directions for future research. This
will help stimulate the interest of graduate students and new PhDs.&lt;br/&gt;