* 0910565
* RUI: Selective Oxidative Transformations Using Water-Soluble Hypervalent Iodine Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* T.K. Vinod, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2013
* USD 210,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will continue work on the development and optimization of different
chemoselective oxidation procedures using water-soluble hypervalent iodine
reagents. Development of user and eco-friendly procedures for the selective
introduction of alpha, beta-unsaturation in ketones over aldehydes, introduction
of alpha, beta-unsaturation with predictable regiochemistry in unsymmetrical
ketones, potential and possible selective oxidation of aliphatic aldehydes over
aromatic aldehydes are some of the important goals sought during the present
project period. The project also seeks to test the theoretical predictions on
the reactivity of o-Iodoxybenzoic Acid derivatives with substituents ortho to
the hypervalent iodine center. Underlying green chemistry themes of the project,
the use of aqueous solvent mixtures as reaction media and the feasibility of
carrying out the synthetically useful oxidative transformations under catalytic
conditions in the presence of environmentally friendly co-oxidants are
worthwhile aspects of the current project.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor T. K. Vinod of the Department of Chemistry at Western
Illinois University. Professor Vinod and his students are developing procedures,
including catalytic procedures, for the selective oxidation of functional groups
in aqueous solvent mixtures. The training of high school, BS and MS students in
the art of chemical research and the underlying green chemistry theme (by
devising safer chemical procedures) are broader and long-term merits of this
project. Successful development of the chemoselective oxidation methodologies
outlined in the current proposal will have an impact on synthesis in the
pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.