* 0910936
* The Language of Bardi (BCJ) Precontact Narratives
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Claire Bowern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2012
* USD 12,885.00

Detailed linguistic fieldwork on the Indigenous languages of Australia did not
begin in earnest until the 1960s. One of the few earlier sources is the
manuscript collection of Gerhardt Laves, an American who went to Australia in
1928 and spent approximately 18 months doing linguistic research on six
languages. One of them, Bardi, is now spoken by approximately 25 elderly people
in northwestern Australia. Laves' Bardi records are extraordinary. They were
written at a time before the full impact of European settlement had caused
extensive language loss in Australia's North-West and record a language and
culture which has since changed significantly. Although the texts are legible
and the language accurately represented, the materials are very difficult to
read without excellent eyesight and a good knowledge of Bardi. This NSF-funded
project will bring together a team of linguists and Bardi community members to
work on the texts to produce an annotated edition, under the direction of Dr
Claire Bowern. The linguists will digitize the texts, word process them, and
provide rough translations on the basis of Laves' notes and the Dr Bowern's
knowledge of the language. They will then work with Bardi speakers to refine the
translations, discuss the grammar of the Bardi language, and work out the
context of the stories. The result will be a book of the texts, with
translations, annotations, and discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
important project, linguistically and culturally, for Bardi people, linguists,
and for science more generally. Linguistically, the Laves texts represent the
earliest accurately recorded materials for Bardi, and preliminary work indicates
that there have been subtle but numerous changes in the language over the last
hundred years. We know little about variation and change in small linguistic
communities like this, and within Australia the Bardi materials provide a rare
opportunity to get accurate longitudinal information about language change. This
in turn allows the study of change in languages with very complex inflection,
which is both understudied and of wide relevance in linguistics. Culturally, the
texts are very important. They provide information about pre-contact traditional
law, mythology and everyday social interaction, and are a very detailed record
of a way of life no longer practiced. Most of this knowledge is still held by
the oldest people in the Bardi community but has not been written down, and work
on describing and explicating the events in the Laves materials is a wonderful
opportunity to study pre-contact culture. Finally, the texts themselves are an
important language learning and cultural resource for Bardi people themselves,
and repatriation of these materials is very important. The materials will likely
figure prominently in future language revitalization programs. With so much of
the world's linguistic heritage in danger, this project provides a model of how
early materials may be used to benefit both local communities and science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;