* 0910081
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Relationships of Lizardfishes and their Allies (Euteleostei: Aulopiformes) and the Evolution of Deep Sea Adaptations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Edward Wiley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2011
* USD 13,180.00

Elucidating the phylogenetic relationships and character evolution of deep-sea
lizardfishes and their allies (Euteleostei: Aulopiformes) are the goals of this
study. Aulopiform fishes include some of the most bizarre deep-sea fishes, with
members of the group exhibiting spectacularly diverse evolutionary adaptations.
Currently there are no robust phylogenies of the Aulopiformes that utilize
molecular data, and previous morphological studies of the group have resulted in
conflicting interpretations of aulopiform evolutionary relationships. This study
will produce a robust phylogenetic framework based on molecular and
morphological data analsyes, and use this framework to trace the evolution of
adaptations to deep-sea environments (e.g., telescopic eyes, bioluminescence,
simultaneous hermaphroditism).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance the
discovery and knowledge of deep-sea evolutionary adaptations, including the
reproductive strategy of simultaneous hermaphroditism -- one of the rarest
reproductive strategies among vertebrates. This award will provide graduate
training in morphological and molecular phylogenetic techniques, and provide
undergraduate training in systematic methodology. Data obtained from this study
will be cataloged in online databases, including those associated with the
Euteleost Tree of Life project.&lt;br/&gt;