* 0910858
* Exploring Potential Energy Surfaces for Strong Field Chemistry, Unimolecular Dissociations and Bio-organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* H. Bernhard Schlegel, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2012
* USD 436,000.00

H. Bernhard Schlegel of Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program in the Chemistry Division to
explore potential energy surfaces for a number of projects, including strong-
field chemistry, unimolecular dissociations, and bio-organic chemistry. New
computational methods will be developed in areas such as reaction path
optimization, automated potential energy surface searching and ab-initio
molecular dynamics. Schlegel will continue to pursue advances in time-dependent
SCF studies (TDSCF) by incorporating DFT methods and a CIS based approach,
developing further technical improvements as well as applications. Ab-initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) investigations will be improved by using bond-
additivity corrections, and Schlegel will explore if AIMD can be performed in
the presence of a laser field. Improved methods for finding transition states
will also be developed, and the use of bond-additivity corrections to improve
the accuracy of molecular dynamics simulations will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is wide ranging and affects a
variety of scientific disciplines, from physics and materials science to
biology. As part of these studies Schlegel will collaborate with various
experimental groups, which helps ensure that this work has a broad impact on a
wide variety of topics. He has a successful record of training students, not
only from his own research group, but also from the groups of his collaborators,
to become creative independent scientists. Schlegel freely disseminates the
computer codes that he generates for the use of the general research community,
including both computational and experimental scientists.&lt;br/&gt;