* 0910913
* TC: Large: A Formal Platform for Analyzing Internet Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Sandip Ray, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 799,943.00

Trustworthy Reactive Routing Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Warren A. Hunt, Jr.
and Sandip Ray&lt;br/&gt; Department of Computer Sciences&lt;br/&gt; University
of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
{hunt,sandip}@cs.utexas.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive concurrent systems,
such as routers, consist of a number of&lt;br/&gt;interacting processes that
perform non-terminating computations&lt;br/&gt;while receiving and transmitting
messages. The design of such&lt;br/&gt;routing systems is error-prone, and non-
determinism inherent in&lt;br/&gt;concurrent communications makes it hard to
detect or diagnose such&lt;br/&gt;errors. Our effort will develop ACL2-based
tools for ensuring&lt;br/&gt;trustworthy execution of large-scale reactive
routing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We aim to develop a scalable, mechanized
infrastructure for&lt;br/&gt;certifying correct and secure execution of reactive
routing system&lt;br/&gt;implementations through: a generic framework for
modeling and&lt;br/&gt;specifying systems at a number of abstraction layers;
a&lt;br/&gt;compositional methodology for mathematically analyzing such
models;&lt;br/&gt;and developing a suite of tools and techniques to mechanize
and&lt;br/&gt;automate such analysis within a unified logical foundation.
Our&lt;br/&gt;research exploits ACL2's general-purpose reasoning engine
while&lt;br/&gt;augmenting the tool suite with a streamlined modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;specification methodology. We will develop a collection of
targeted&lt;br/&gt;tools for verifying safety, liveness, and security properties
of&lt;br/&gt;such systems while staying within a single logic and proof
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate verification of correspondence
between protocol&lt;br/&gt;layers, we propose to enhance ACL2's reasoning engine
with automated&lt;br/&gt;verification tools based on advances in BDD- and SAT-
based&lt;br/&gt;techniques. The invention and proof of inductive invariants is
one&lt;br/&gt;of the most time-consuming activities in reactive
system&lt;br/&gt;verification, and we will integrate into ACL2 a general-
purpose&lt;br/&gt;symbolic simulation capability; this technique can
symbolically&lt;br/&gt;simulate system models over a large number of computation
steps,&lt;br/&gt;thereby often obviating the construction of single-step
inductive&lt;br/&gt;invariants. The expected results will help automate the
mechanical&lt;br/&gt;verification of reactive systems such as routers and
CPSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;