* 0910043
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Determining how environmental heterogeneity and species traits interact to affect species invasion and coexistence over large spatio-temporal scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Sally Hacker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 9,756.00

&lt;br/&gt;Biological invasions pose one of the greatest threats to global
biodiversity and have profound economic impacts. However, predicting whether
invasions will cause extinctions of native species or if natives can persist in
the face of invasion remains challenging because these outcomes depend on both
characteristics of the species involved and characteristics of the environment.
This project seeks to explain patterns observed in two large-scale, long-term
data sets in the heavily invaded California grasslands. The investigators will
determine how similar are invasive plant species observed in field plots in
terms of their phylogenetic relatedness, country of origin, and ecological
traits. Spatial variation in the abiotic environment, especially soil
characteristics, will also be measured in these field plots. Together, this
information will be analyzed to determine the relative importance of
environmental variation versus invasive species traits in contributing to local
extinctions of native species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has important
implications to land management; it will inform efforts directed at restoration
and maintenance of native species diversity. The research will be conducted
within the University of California Natural Reserve System, thus its data and
findings will be explicitly available to all reserve system managers and the
public through the reserve system's online research database and outreach
publications. Furthermore, the investigators will provide seminars and tours of
field plots to reserve visitors. This project supports the thesis research of a
doctoral student and will provide opportunities for involvement of
undergraduates in field research.