* 0910296
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genomic and phenotypic evolution in synthetic and natural allotetraploid Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jennifer Modliszewski, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 02/28/2013
* USD 14,960.00

Whole genome duplication, also known as polyploidy, has occurred many times
during the evolution of a wide variety of organisms, including most valuable
crops, and may be a critical mechanism for the evolutionary origin of novel
traits. The genetic mechanisms and evolutionary forces that govern the fate of
newly duplicated genes, and how these forces lead to broad-scale genomic changes
are unknown. This study will utilize ultra high-throughput DNA sequencing
technology to test specific hypotheses regarding evolution in polyploids in the
emerging model wildflower genus Mimulus. The genomic and phenotypic evolution
that has taken place in naturally-occurring polyploids will be compared to
experimentally-generated synthetic polyploids. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study
will provide novel insight into the effects of polyploidy on ecologically-
important traits, including traits affecting the survival and reproduction of
organisms in relation to their environment. Because many crops are of polyploid
origin, a thorough understanding of the immediate and long-term effects of
polyploidy may provide promising avenues for crop improvement. The proposed
research also will provide many novel avenues for talented undergraduate and
high school students to conduct independent, but related research projects in
ecology, evolution, genomics, and bioinformatics.