* 0910911
* Study of Coseismic Damage and Post-mainshock Healing on the Longmen-Shan Fault Ruptured in the 2008 M8 Wenchuan Earthquake in China
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Yong-Gang Li, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2011
* USD 108,558.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Longmen-Shan Fault (LSF) located at
the east margin of the Tibetan Plateau in western China is featured by active
tectonics. It was broken in total length of 300 km with the maximum slip larger
than 9 m in the devastating M8 Wenchuan earthquake on May 12, 2008. Its rupture
length, slip and magnitude are comparable with those of the 1857 and 1906 big
earthquakes in California. The PI and student will study the co-seismic rock
damage and post-mainshock healing on the LSF associated with this M8 earthquake
using the data recorded at the Sichuan Seismic Network (SSN) stations and
portable seismographs deployed at the ruptures after the Wenchuan earthquake. We
shall identify clusters of repeated earthquakes among more than ten thousands of
Wenchuan aftershocks and use the waveform data from them to measure temporal
changes in seismic velocity caused by the Wenchuan earthquake. They will also
delineate the subsurface structure of the low-velocity damage zone on the LSF
using fault-zone trapped waves generated by aftershocks recorded at near-fault
stations. The results from the Longmen-Shan Fault will be compare to those
obtained from our previous studies for the process of rock damage and heal at
the Parkfield San Andreas Fault and rupture zones of the 1992 M7.4 Lands and
1999 M7.2 Hector Mine earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the density
of the data recorded at the Sichuan Seismic Network for the pre-shock and
aftershock sequence of the 2008 M8 Wenchuan earthquake, this study will be one
of a few cases to illuminate the in-situ fault-zone rock damage and healing at
seismogenic depths associated with a big M8 earthquake. The wealth of unexpected
data from the M8 Wenchuan earthquake will improve the resolution in our study of
the spatio-temporal variations in properties of the active faults and the depth
extent of the damage zone. The spatial extent of fault-zone damage and the loss
and recouping of strength across the earthquake cycle are critical ingredients
in understanding of fault mechanics and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a
comparison of big earthquakes in China with those in US, the most basic
information on the in-situ state of the fault zone aids the understanding of
earthquake processes and hazards globally. The proposed work will allow us to
determine the evolution of fault-zone physical properties with a big earthquake,
document characteristics of damaging earthquakes and help us to evaluate
potential earthquake risk in seismogenic regions in USA and China. This research
project on the M8 Wenchuan earthquake will be carried out under the Sino-US
Earthquake Study Protocol. The project will involve post-doctoral and graduate
researcher.