* 0910581
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: 3Dsec: Trustworthy System Security through 3-D Integrated Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2014
* USD 482,000.00

While hardware resources for computation and data storage are now
abundant,&lt;br/&gt;economic factors prevent specialized hardware security
mechanisms from being&lt;br/&gt;integrated into commodity parts. System owners
are caught between the need to exploit&lt;br/&gt;cheap, fast, commodity
microprocessors and the need to ensure that critical
security&lt;br/&gt;properties hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
explore a novel way to augment commodity hardware after fabrication&lt;br/&gt;to
enhance secure operation. The basic approach is to add a separate silicon
layer,&lt;br/&gt;housing select security features, onto an existing integrated
circuit. This 3-D Integration&lt;br/&gt;decouples the function and economics of
security policy enforcement from the&lt;br/&gt;underlying computing hardware. As
a result, security enhancements are manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;options applicable
only to those systems that require them, which resolves the&lt;br/&gt;economic
quandary. We plan to identify a minimal and realizable set of circuit-
level&lt;br/&gt;security capabilities enabled by this approach, which can be
judiciously controlled by&lt;br/&gt;the software layers. This will significantly
assist in reducing both the software complexity&lt;br/&gt;often associated with
security mechanisms and system vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;This research
introduces a fundamentally new method to incorporate
security&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms into hardware and has the potential to
significantly shift the economics of&lt;br/&gt;trustworthy systems. A broader
impact will result through collaborative and educational&lt;br/&gt;activities.
Graduate and undergraduate student research associates will
transfer&lt;br/&gt;knowledge to future teachers, researchers and Information
Assurance professionals;&lt;br/&gt;and project publications will provide direct
technical transfer to the embedded-systems&lt;br/&gt;and hardware-design
communities.