* 0910237
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Biogeography of Open Ocean Hydrozoans (Cnidaria: Medusozoa)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Paulyn Cartwright, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,990.00

The vastness of the open ocean can present obstacles for studying biodiversity
and distributions of organisms that inhabit this environment. To address this
issue, this dissertation research project proposes to modify existing methods
for modeling potential distributions of organisms based on their ecological
requirements. Specifically ecological niche modeling methods will be used to
examine species distributions in three dimensional space, taking the
interactions between vertical (depth) and horizontal (latitudinal and
longitudinal) axes into account. The hypothesis to be tested is that deep open
ocean waters, through their environmental uniformity (e.g., deep-water
temperatures are low from the Tropics to the polar regions), provide a means for
maintaining continuity among distant populations of those species living there,
which results in relatively low species diversity. By contrast, shallow water
environments are fragmented, which results in geographic isolation between
populations and thus resulting in relatively high species diversity. Potential
distribution models will be generated and their predictions tested using
molecular genetics. Hydrozoan jellyfishes in the open ocean will be studied in
this project and through integration of ecological modeling with molecular
analyses the research should contribute to a better understanding of how open
ocean biogeographic patterns and biodiversity are generated and
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to furthering the understanding of
open ocean environments, there will be opportunities for undergraduate students
to partake in this project in order to give them hands-on experience in ongoing
research. Results from this research will be communicated to the general public
using the online portal of the Sant Ocean Hall of the National Natural History
Museum, as well as the project homepage of the Assembling the Cnidarian Tree of
Life project. Furthermore, strategies and computer code created for this project
will be made available to other researchers through the internet and specimens
collected will be deposited at major public museums.&lt;br/&gt;