* 0910729
* Can Catalysts Dance?  Catalytic Choreography in Olefin Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2012
* USD 567,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Robert M. Waymouth of
Stanford University who proposes studies to devise new kinetic strategies for
the catalytic conversion of olefins into high-value materials and chemical
intermediates. Specific aims are to develop synthetic strategies to generate
polyolefins of defined sequence distribution and to generate new classes of
telechelic oligomers derived from readily available olefin feedstocks. Specific
intellectual gains anticipated from the proposed work include: (1) an
understanding of the role of conformational dynamics to generate "smart"
catalysts that can access multiple kinetic states, (2) an understanding of the
necessary and sufficient criteria for chain-shuttling polymerization as a
strategy to generate multi-state catalysts, and (3) further insights on
metallacycle mechanisms for selectively oligomerizing ethylene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by Professor Waymouth will engage students in a
highly interdisciplinary research area that combines organic and organometallic
syntheses, computational methods, mechanistic inorganic and organometallic
chemistry, catalytic olefin polymerization, and analysis of polymer structure
and properties. The catalytic polymerization of olefins constitutes one of the
major technological achievements of the 20th Century. Olefin polymerization
catalysis is prototypical translational science, where new scientific insights
and advances in catalyst developments have transformed industrial practice. In
addition to the impact of Professor Waymouth's research and his mentoring
activities, this NSF sponsored research will be coupled with a number of
initiatives that will broaden the impact of his scholarly activities. Professor
Waymouth plans to recruit a high school science teacher to spend the summer of
2009 in his laboratory to develop teaching modules associated with
macromolecular science, and to the extent appropriate, the intriguing features
of multiblock polyolefins. He has taken an active role in recruiting and
mentoring women, underrepresented, and disabled students. &lt;br/&gt;