* 0910124
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecosystem response to nutrient subsidies from annual salmon migrations in streams- an inter-biome comparison
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Jennifer Tank, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,152.00

Pacific salmon are an important nutrient subsidy in streams in their native
range throughout the northern Pacific Rim, and recent introductions have
expanded their influence to other regions such as the Great Lakes. During annual
salmon migrations and spawning, salmon-derived nutrients (SDN) enter streams and
influence both organisms and ecosystem function. For example, stream algae and
macroinvertebrates increase during salmon runs and decaying salmon carcasses
provide for longer-term SDN storage in streams. Previous research has shown that
the effect of SDN in streams is not always consistent, but dependent on stream
structure and regional climate patterns. In this study, a suite of ecosystem-
scale metrics will be measured on streams in the Great Lakes region to
complement a similar dataset from Southeast Alaska. These two regions have
differing stream structure and climate, and the comparison will provide an
understanding of the underlying controls that determine ecosystem response to
SDN subsidies. As a result of human actions, some streams have diminished salmon
runs, particularly from dams or over-fishing, while others receive increasingly
larger runs as a result of hatchery stocking. Therefore, a thorough
understanding of how stream structure and climatic conditions determine the
influence of SDN subsidies is necessary for effective management of current
salmon runs in both native and introduced ranges.

The comparative inter-biome approach will allow managers to assess and predict
the response of SDN subsidies on a range of stream ecosystems, enhancing the
potential success of stream restoration and salmon conservation projects.
Results will be disseminated to appropriate Federal agencies and non-
governmental organizations such as The Nature Conservancy.