* 0910059
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Comparative phylogeography of Erigonum (Polygonaceae) endemic to California's Channel Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Lynn Riley, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 12/31/2011
* USD 11,090.00

Although islands have long been recognized as ideal natural laboratories for
evolutionary studies, evolutionary patterns and processes on near shore islands
are relatively unexamined compared to those on distant islands, such as Hawaii.
Near shore islands are likely to experience higher rates of colonization and
subsequent gene flow among populations, and thus exhibit less evolutionary
differentiation from each other and from mainland relatives. These predictions,
however, remain largely untested. This study will investigate the patterns of
colonization and divergence among native buckwheats endemic to California's
Channel Islands. Understanding the patterns of gene flow and differentiation
over small geographic distances will allow a more nuanced understanding of how
island area and distance from the mainland affect evolutionary dynamics on
islands and other isolated areas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will promote
appreciation of the unique Channel Islands flora and the findings will be
immediately applicable to the management of rare Channel Island buckwheats.
Moreover, the molecular methods developed will enhance conservation studies of
other rare island plants. The project will enhance science education by
providing undergraduate research opportunities and instructional modules for
students at the University of South Dakota, a rural predominantly undergraduate
institution that serves a high proportion of first generation college students.
Funding also will enrich local K-12 education through outreach activities and
supply interpretive information for Channel Island natural history programs.