* 0910322
* An Investigation into Time-Dependent Fault Zone Properties at Seismogenic Depth on the San Andreas Fault near Parkfield
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Douglas Dreger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2011
* USD 210,474.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project aims to improve our understanding of the nucleation process of
earthquakes by contributing better seismological constraints of time-dependent
fault zone properties at seismogenic depth. The availability of a large number
of high-quality seismic data from a dense borehole seismograph network at
Parkfield, California introduces opportunities for unraveling detailed view of
subsurface fault-zone properties. We seek to develop new approaches to take
advantage of numerous identified sequences of characteristic repeating
earthquakes, and to determine three time-dependent properties at seismogenic
depth: 1) fault-zone strength, 2) rheological behaviors, and 3) anelastic model
of the inner fault zone. The project will explore temporal variations in source
properties of repeating earthquake sequence as a proxy for changes in fault
strength to gain a better understanding of the role of time-dependent fault
strength on the mechanics of fault deformation and the earthquake nucleation
process. We seek to significantly expand repeating seismicity data to allow for
much improved spatiotemporal resolution of fault strength along the San Andreas
Fault. The other focuses of this project will involve understanding space- and
time-varying rheological properties at depth and imaging transient or systematic
structural changes within the narrow fault core in the postseismic period
following the 2004 M6 Parkfield earthquake.

This project will investigate time-varying fault-zone strength at seismogenic
depth that will effect the triggering and sequencing of earthquakes, by taking
the advantage of the numerous identified repeating earthquakes accumulating from
a dense borehole seismograph network at Parkfield, California. The other
activities of this project will explore spatiotemporal variations in fault-zone
rheological properties and will characterize temporal changes in the central
core of fault zone in postseismic deformation period, in order to gain a more
comprehensive picture of the role of time-varying fault zone properties on the
earthquake nucleation process. The project will directly contribute improved
estimates of earthquake potential on the San Andreas Fault by improved knowledge
of subsurface time-dependent fault zone properties. Results from the project
will be used in earthquake hazard mitigation efforts by local communities and
organizations. The project will include the education and research of a graduate
student.