* 0910794
* Reversals of karst springs: Implications for water budgets, water quality, and speleogenesis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 384,989.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Reversal of springs during river
flooding (e.g., formation of estavelles) are likely to carry organic carbon to
oligotrophic environments where it will be remineralized, changing
concentrations of nutrients and terminal electron acceptors such as dissolved
oxygen (DO), NO3, and Fe and Mn oxides, and increase pCO2. Elevated pCO2 should
drive dissolution at the discharge point rather than at sinking streams.
Reversals will be controlled by head gradients between the spring, conduits,
groundwater, and rivers, but this simplistic view is complicated by antecedent
conditions, the rates of diffuse versus allogenic recharge, hydraulic properties
of the aquifer, and aquifer confinement. These potential effects of spring
reversals lead to questions addressed here including: (1) What are the
relationships between hydraulic head in the aquifer, discharge, diffuse
recharge, and aquifer confinement? (2) At what rate is backflooding water
returned to the surface? (3) What are the primary solid-fluid reactions
controlling backflooded water compositions? &lt;br/&gt;These questions will be
addressed at four springs (Madison Blue, Troy, Peacock, and Fanning) along the
Suwannee River in north-central Florida, all of which experience frequent
reversals. Madison Blue, Troy and Fanning springs are sites of on-going
monitoring programs that have generated much legacy data about flow and
chemistry, which will supplement new data collected as part of this project.
Samples will be collected at low frequency during base flow to observe
background chemical compositions and at high resolution during a reversal event
to construct flood chemographs. Specific conductivity, temperature, DO, and pH
will be monitored with reliable off the shelf logging instruments. Data
collection and analyses will include estimates of reversal magnitudes using
available and new discharge data. Sr isotope ratios and age of water (3H/3He
ratios and CFC concentrations) will be used to separate fractions of flood water
and groundwater. Major element concentrations will be used to assess saturation
states of the water. Measurements of DO, NO3, NH4, Fe2+, Fe3+, Mn, sulfate,
sulfide, dissolved inorganic and organic carbon concentrations, and
?Ô13CDICvalues will be used to estimate the magnitude of organic matter
remineralization. Data modeling will include MODFLOW to simulate flow and
PHREEQC to estimate redox and saturation states.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
Similar to many karst areas, the Suwannee River Basin is experiencing rapid land
use changes and elevated groundwater withdrawals. The basin is also home to a
variety of endangered stygobitic fauna. These issues require careful management
of water quality and quantity, both of which will be affected by spring
reversals. The Suwannee River has also been proposed as a site for the WATERS
network, and its largest tributary, the Santa Fe River, is the site of a funded
¡§test-bed¡¨ project. The test bed project will be linked to this project
through combined data handling and storage using Hydrologic Information System
(HIS).&lt;br/&gt;Study sites are located in state parks, allowing interaction
with the general population. Cave diving is common at the parks, and divers will
volunteer for sample collection. The project will provide training for
undergraduates, who will work with legacy data, graduate students, who will work
on the project for their thesis or dissertations. Results will be used as
examples in formal classroom training in several courses currently taught at the
University of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;