* 0910258
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Genetic consequences of the shift to asexuality in bryophytes:  Insights from the hornwort &amp;lt;I&amp;gt;Megaceros aenigmaticus&amp;lt;/I&amp;gt;
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Bernard Goffinet, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2012
* USD 9,594.00

Hornworts are primitive plants growing in damp, humid habitats that lack seeds
and vascular tissue. These simple plants exhibit a complex variety of breeding
systems, with some species engaging in sexual reproduction and others
propagating asexually. The reasons for the evolution of asexuality and its
effects on genetic variation in plants are important issues in plant evolution.
This project will examine the loss of sexual reproducing in a species of
hornwort growing in the Southern Appalachian Mountains. These asexual hornworts
were thought to be an endemic species restricted to the Appalachians. But
recently other members of the species were found in Costa Rica, and in that
locale the species reproduces sexually. Using gene sequence data the researchers
will determine the relationships of the Appalachian and Costa Rican hornwort
populations and the effect of the loss of sex on genetic variation in natural
populations. The work will address broad issues in the evolution of plant
sexuality and genetic variation in natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide scientific data relevant to the conservation of this
unusual hornwort in North America. The graduate student will participate in
local biodiversity activities such as BioBlitz, a citizen science activity
involving the general public in making a census of species in an area, and he
will present public lectures at the Great Smoky Mountain National Park and other
venues. The research will support several international collaborative projects
with researchers in Central America.