* 0910268
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Consequences of plant species and genetic diversity for microbial community composition and function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jennifer Rudgers, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,572.00

Soil microbes are vitally important to ecosystem function. Bacteria and fungi
decompose dead plant and animal matter and make the nutrients contained within
them available for plants to use for growth and other functions; the living
plant material is then available for consumption by other organisms. Despite
their ecological value and ubiquity, little is known about how soil microbial
communities are affected by the diversity of the plant communities with which
they co-exist. Individual plant species cultivate different microbial
communities, and recent work is showing that the genetic identity of the plant,
as well as the species identity, may affect its associated microbes. Using
constructed sand dune plant communities in Michigan that mimic levels of species
diversity and genetic diversity found in nature, this study is one of the first
to address how plant species diversity and genetic diversity influence microbial
community structure and function. The microbial community will be characterized
using several techniques, providing detailed information on the diversity of
microbes present as well as their roles in the environment. Establishing
linkages between plant and microbial diversity will illuminate this potential
avenue for plants to influence ecosystem function via soils.

Results from this study will provide valuable information to conservationists
and restoration ecologists by elucidating the relative roles of multiples levels
of diversity for ecosystem function. Furthermore, this project will help restore
a critically endangered ecosystem (freshwater sand dunes) and provide
information on optimal restoration practices. Results will be widely distributed
to conservation groups, including the Alliance for the Great Lakes, the Nature
Conservancy, and the Friends of Sleeping Bear Dunes, and government agencies,
including the National Park Service and the Environmental Protection Agency.
This research also offers several opportunities for undergraduate students
interested in field ecology.