* 0910695
* NetSE: Large: Collaborative Research: Improving Internet Incentives
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2012
* Shyam Parekh, Nokia of America Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,020.00

The Internet suffers from insufficient service quality to reliably support many
real-time, high bitrate applications. This shortcoming is due in large part to
users or providers not considering the effect their choices have on others ? in
other words the resulting externalities. For example, users who download movies
during the work day reduce the quality of the network for more time-critical
applications; in a non-neutral network, individual ISPs may overcharge high-
value applications if they do not consider the interactions of such charges
across ISPs. Depending on the circumstances, the problem can be due to a
combination of the following three effects: i) the technology of the network
does not enable the user or provider to make better choices; ii) the network
does not give the user or provider the information to make better choices; iii)
the user or provider lacks an incentive to make better choices even if he can.
This project will investigate how these effects impact service quality in the
network. Using this analysis as a basis, remedies for these effects will be
investigated. The remedies may include combinations of new protocols and
technology, pricing mechanisms, and regulation ? including requirements and/or
mechanisms for information disclosure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental scientific and engineering
questions in networking. The scientific questions include suitable formulation
and analysis of the strategic choices that the users, content providers, service
providers, and other parties in the network face when they interact. The
properties of the resulting equilibrium strategies and their distributed
computation raise novel mathematical and algorithmic questions of broad
relevance. Other fundamental scientific issues addressed include how to provide
incentives for network evolution and for improved reliability. Engineering
questions concern the scalability of the proposed algorithms and protocols,
their security and robustness, how they can be deployed incrementally, and their
extensibility as new technologies, services, and applications get implemented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The investigators expect that
the work will contribute to a paradigm shift in the design of the future
network. The focus on externalities, which is central to our project, has been
largely unexplored and our preliminary investigations demonstrate its
substantial importance. The investigations undertaken in the course of this
project will suggest how network design should be modified to account for
externalities and network informational imperfections. This project, with its
focus on the intersection of the engineering and economic issues of network
services, will offer ideal research experience to the project?s Ph.D. students.
It is expected that the experiences and results from this project will greatly
benefit the PI?s courses as well, in particular by making students aware of the
inherent tradeoffs in engineering systems that function in a market context.