* 0910570
* A Novel Multifunctional SPM Probe with Modular Quick-Change Tips for Fully Automated Probe-Based Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,08/31/2012
* Kam Leang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 252,372.00

The goal of this research is to address the critical issues of throughput,
repeatability, scalability, and limited functionality of probe-based
nanofabrication by designing, fabricating, and testing a novel active cantilever
probe with an automated ability to interchange probe tips (tools). Probe-based
fabrication enables unmatched spatial/feature resolution and the ability to
assemble and pattern hybrid (inorganic and organic) device architectures.
However, practical nanofabrication with probe tips is limited by the issues of
throughput, tip wear, tip chemical cross contamination, and scalability all of
which act to decrease the quality, reliability, and efficiency of probe-based
fabrication.

This unique nano probe system addresses these issues by enabling automated
interchanging of probe tips. By simply switching tips, the probe can be used for
nano deposition, patterning, machining, metrology, and various other
nanofabrication processes. Located at the distal end of an SPM cantilever is an
electrically activated MEMS-based microgripper, which is designed to
automatically load/unload tips from an array of modular probe tips (tools).
Automation is achieved using a novel control scheme to determine the relative
location between the microgripper and tool tip. This research will contribute
new knowledge via feasibility studies of (1) active cantilevers for SPM probe-
based fabrication and (2) thermal-proximity sensing.

This system is a nanoscale analog of macroscale computer numerical control (CNC)
manufacturing machines that have the ability for fully-automated rapid tool
changes without operator interruption. The ability to provide fully automated
on-demand probe tip changes will improve the overall efficiency of probe-based
nanofabrication, allow for multifunctional probe capabilities, and improve
process reliability and quality by enabling the ability to replenish/replace
worn or chemically fouled tips in an efficient manner. In addition, this
research program will broaden participation of underrepresented students in
engineering by providing training for undergraduate and graduate students in
nanotechnology, participation of underrepresented students through recruitment
and support of graduate research assistants and mentoring of undergraduate
researchers, and outreach to K-12 schools in the greater Richmond area through a
unique "Nano Day at VCU" event. Additionally, the proposed research will be
integrated into the mechanical engineering curriculum by creating teaching
modules in nanoscale control systems, sensing, and probe-based nanofabrication.

