* 0910765
* CIF: Large: Sensing Sensors: Compressed sampling with Co-design of Hardware and Algorithms Across Multiple Layers in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Anna Gilbert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,865,386.00

This research program will develop and demonstrate theory and techniques for
efficient collection, transmission and processing of information in wirelessly-
connected sensor networks. This fundamental research is aimed towards
development of a revolutionary wireless sensor node, optimized for
infrastructure monitoring, and characterized by ultra-low power consumption.
Power consumption, installation complexity and installation cost are significant
bottlenecks to the widespread deployment of wireless infrastructure monitoring
that will be addressed by this research. This research program improves energy
efficiency and battery lifetime through the use of compressed sampling in
sensing, physical communication and network communication and through the co-
design of hardware and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theme of the research
is the development of compressive sampling techniques. Compressive sampling
techniques will be developed to reduce the number of samples that need to taken
by sensors, to optimize the placement of sensing nodes, and to minimize the
amount of data transmitted by the sensing nodes. This research will develop new
theoretical approaches to signal sampling, to ultra-wideband (UWB) wireless
communication of acquired information, and to sensor network architecture and
protocols. Development of new theory and algorithms will go hand-in-hand with
the development of new circuit techniques. New integrated circuit techniques for
analog-to-digital conversion and wireless communication will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Center for Structural Health Monitoring
through Compressed Sensing will be formed to broaden the impact of this
research. The scope of the education component of this program targets grade-
school, undergraduate and graduate students. An interdisciplinary curriculum of
courses in Math, Civil Engineering and Electrical Engineering will be created.
The center will also develop an extensive outreach education program.&lt;br/&gt;