* 0910578
* RUI: Surface and Analytical Chemistry to Elucidate Fundamental Biofilm Properties and Mechanisms of Biofilm Control
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Eileen Spain, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2014
* USD 430,500.00

Professors Eileen M. Spain of Occidental College, Megan A. Ferguson of SUNY New
Paltz, and Megan E. Nunez of Mt Holyoke College are supported by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate the
chemical and physical properties of bacterial biofilms, and the mechanisms by
which they are consumed by predators, such as Bdellovibrio. Two separate
approaches are considered. The first focuses on the use of atomic force
microscopy (AFM) to characterize the properties of bacterial cells during
various stages of biofilm formation. Specifically, the force measurement modes
of the AFM will be used to measure cellular spring constants, surface
biomolecule compression, and adhesion to the tip. The second approach focuses on
the role of Bdellovibrio in attacking the biofilms of Gram-negative organisms.
Quorum sensing in Bdellovibrio, and the pigments produced by Bdellovibrio, will
be investigated. The ultimate goals of the proposed research are to determine
how Bdellovibrio predation is affected by the physical properties of biofilm
cells, and what property of the prey cell surface allows the predator to
recognize it as edible. Understanding how bacteria communicate within the same
and different species and how predators recognize prey cells in biofilms has
tremendous relevance to microbiology, medicine, ecology and biodefense.
Undergraduate students from diverse ethnic and socioeconomic background at three
primarily undergraduate institutions will be exposed to interdisciplinary
research at the interface between chemistry and microbiology.