* 0910171
* DISSERATION RESEARCH:   Evolution of development of the progamic phase in Nymphaeales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Joseph Williams, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 05/31/2011
* USD 10,974.00

Evolution of development of the progamic phase in Nymphaeales

A defining feature of angiosperms is the flower, and flowers are tremendously
diverse in the way they look and develop. Much of the diversity of flowers may
arise from their role in attracting pollen and/or pollinators. At the same time,
flowers must also allow pollen to germinate and form a compatible pollen tube
that carries sperm to egg. Although pollination has to occur before a pollen
tube can grow, little is known about how evolutionary changes in pollinator
attraction correlate with events that happen afterward from pollen tube growth
to fertilization. This research uses natural- and hand-pollination experiments
to describe fertilization biology in the water lilies (Nymphaeales), a group
with diverse flowers and pollination mechanisms. Such data will then be used to
correlate evolutionary changes in floral form with post-pollination biology. The
specific goal of this award is to gather data from Trithuria (Hydatellaceae), a
tiny and poorly understood Australasian plant that is remarkably different from
other water lilies.

The water lilies represent an independent flowering plant lineage that diverged
from the rest of angiosperms over 125 million years ago, and so evolutionary
transitions in floral and fertilization biology within this lineage are of great
interest to comparative biologists. This project has provided research
opportunities for three undergraduates and one local educator, and will provide
funding for two additional students to assist with fieldwork in Australia and
lab work in the USA. It also facilitates collaboration between University of
Tennessee and Western Australian researchers.