* 0910812
* FutureGrid:  An Experimental, High-Performance Grid Test-bed
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Jose Fortes, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2014
* USD 10,133,500.00

This project provides a capability that makes it possible for researchers to
tackle complex research challenges in computer science related to the use and
security of grids and clouds. These include topics ranging from authentication,
authorization, scheduling, virtualization, middleware design, interface design
and cybersecurity, to the optimization of grid-enabled and cloud-enabled
computational schemes for researchers in astronomy, chemistry, biology,
engineering, atmospheric science and epidemiology. The project team will provide
a significant new experimental computing grid and cloud test-bed, named
FutureGrid, to the research community, together with user support for third-
party researchers conducting experiments on FutureGrid.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The test-bed will make it possible for researchers to conduct
experiments by submitting an experiment ?plan? that is then executed via a
sophisticated workflow engine, preserving the provenance and state information
necessary to allow reproducibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The test-bed includes
a geographically distributed set of heterogeneous computing systems, a data
management system that will hold both metadata and a growing library of software
images, and a dedicated network allowing isolatable, secure experiments. The
test-bed will support virtual machine-based environments, as well as native
operating systems for experiments aimed at minimizing overhead and maximizing
performance. The project partners will integrate existing open-source software
packages to create an easy-to-use software environment that supports the
instantiation, execution and recording of grid and cloud computing experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of the project is to understand the
behavior and utility of cloud computing approaches. Researchers will be able to
measure the overhead of cloud technology by requesting linked experiments on
both virtual and bare-metal systems. FutureGrid will enable US scientists to
develop and test new approaches to parallel, grid and cloud computing, and
compare and collaborate with international efforts in this area. The FutureGrid
project will provide an experimental platform that accommodates batch, grid and
cloud computing, allowing researchers to attack a range of research questions
associated with optimizing, integrating and scheduling the different service
models. The FutureGrid also provides a test-bed for middleware development and,
because of its private network, allows middleware researchers to do controlled
experiments under different network conditions and to test approaches to
middleware that include direct interaction with the network control layer.
Another component of the project is the development of benchmarks appropriate
for grid computing, including workflow-based benchmarks derived from
applications in astronomy, bioinformatics, seismology and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FutureGrid will form part of NSF's TeraGrid
high-performance cyberinfrastructure. It will increase the capability of the
TeraGrid to support innovative computer science research requiring access to
lower levels of the grid software stack, the networking software stack, and to
virtualization and workflow orchestration tools. Full integration into the
TeraGrid is anticipated by 1st October 2011. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and
broader outreach activities include the dissemination of curricular materials on
the use of FutureGrid, pre-packaged FutureGrid virtual machines configured for
particular course modules, and educational modules based on virtual appliance
networks and social networking technologies that will focus on education in
networking, parallel computing, virtualization and distributed computing. The
project will advance education and training in distributed computing at academic
institutions with less diverse computational resources. It will do this through
the development of instructional resources that include preconfigured
environments that provide students with sandboxed virtual clusters. These can be
used for teaching courses in parallel, cloud, and grid computing. Such resources
will also provide academic institutions with a simple opportunity to experiment
with cloud technology to see if such technology can enhance their campus
resources. The FutureGrid project leverages the fruits of several software
development projects funded by the National Science Foundation and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;