* 0910721
* NEW THEORY AND METHODS FOR RAINFALL EXTREMES
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniele Veneziano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 530,000.00

ABSTRACT

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit A long tradition links the modeling and analysis of rainfall
extremes to Gumbel?s extreme-value (EV) theory (and more recently Pickands?
extreme-excess or EE theory). This includes methods that use annual-maximum and
peak-over-threshold rainfall information. However, for realistic scale-invariant
rainfall models one can show that neither EV nor EE theory applies. This is true
not just for rainfall averages over long durations d but also under . The basic
reason is that the annual maxima depend on a range of the marginal distribution
much below the upper tail.

To analyze the annual maxima of scale-invariant rainfall processes under , one
must use another branch of probability known as large deviation (LD) theory.
When LD theory is applied, one finds that for short averaging durations the
distribution of the annual maximum is always of the EV2 type and is different
from what EV and EE theories predict. In the all-important case when d is
finite, the exact annual-maximum distribution is not of any EV type, but can be
accurately approximated by an EV2 distribution. This explains the frequent
observation that annual maxima are better fitted by EV2 models also when
Gumbel?s theory predicts an EV1 asymptotic distribution.

We propose to develop a new approach to rainfall extremes that covers both
asymptotic cases (e.g. ) and non-asymptotic conditions and to translate the new
approach into practical procedures. For decades, hydrology textbooks and risk
analysis practice have assumed that extreme precipitation follows Gumbel?s
theory of extremes. We propose a fundamental change to this paradigm. The new
framework is conceptually more appropriate and stems from an area of probability
theory that stochastic hydrology has up to now ignored. The proposed research
will have far-reaching consequences on the way we conceptualize rainfall
extremes and assess hydrologic risks.

The new approach will be tested using national rainfall databases. Simple
modeling assumptions will be used to relate average rainfall maxima to floods
and to evaluate the potential effects of climatic changes on rainfall extremes.

Broader Impacts This project will support the research of one post-doc (for 5
months) and 2 graduate students (one student during the first year). Involvement
of undergraduate researchers will be sought and efforts will be made to attract
women and under-represented minorities, in conformance with MIT policies. To
better disseminate the results among the research, teaching and practicing
communities, we intend to publish a comprehensive monograph covering the new
theory of hydrologic extremes and related implementation methodologies, in
addition to using traditional scholarly dissemination channels.

