* 0910491
* Collaborative Research:  Pacific Research Center for Marine Biomedicine
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexandria Boehm, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2013
* USD 393,100.00

This accomplishment-based renewal of the Pacific Research Center for Marine
Biomedicine (PRCMB) will be a collaboration between the University of Hawaii,
Stanford, and Jackson State University. Research activities will be focused on
two areas: (1) pathogens in tropical marine waters and (2) marine toxins and
pharmaceutical lead discovery. This new research follows logically from
accomplishments and discoveries made during the first phase of PRCMB funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pathogen and pathogen indicator work will focus on two
streams that discharge to the ocean, one tropical (Kaelepulu on the island of
Oahu) and the other temperate (San Pedro Creek in California). Monthly sampling
at the two streams will be used to characterize seasonal variability in pathogen
indicators and pathogen (bacterial and viral) concentrations using both culture-
dependent and culture-independent (PCR-based) methods. These studies will be
complemented by high-frequency sampling (ten-minute and hourly) during storm and
dry-weather conditions to provide insights concerning spatial and temporal
variability. Health-risk models (Quantitative Microbial Risk Assessment) will be
developed using pathogen and pathogen indicator concentrations as input.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The marine toxin work will concern ciguatoxin and
beta?{methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), both of which were the focus of recent PRCMB
studies. Taking advantage of (1) the refinement of an assay (n2a) that is now
capable of detecting ciguatoxin in fish tissue at concentrations ten times below
the threshold associated with ciguatera symptomology and (2) a collaboration
with Hawaiian recreational fishermen, PRCMB scientists will extract and
concentrate sufficient ciguatoxin from fish tissue to obtain a molecular
structure and will then, in collaboration with scientists at the University of
Washington, work toward the development of an antibody-based assay for
ciguatoxin. Ciguatoxin research will also involve (1) exploratory refinement of
the n2a assay based on generation of nitric oxide by the n2a cell line and (2)
an investigation of environmental conditions that trigger ciguatoxin production
by taxonomically defined strains of the dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus. The BMAA
work will build on initial studies to determine the prevalence of BMAA in marine
cyanobacteria and the transfer of this toxin to higher trophic levels. The
pharmaceutical studies will take advantage of the more than 2,500 microbial
isolates in the PRCMB culture collection that have not yet been screened for
bioactivity. Extracts of these cultures will be used in cell-based and molecular
assays to determine if they affect the growth of microbial pathogens (Candida
albicans, Escherichia coli, Staphlyococcus aureus, multi-drug resistant S.
aureus, and vancomycin resistant Enterococcus faecium) or if they exert effects
on human adenocarcinma cells, on protein kinase C, or on mitogen-activated
protein kinase. Identification of the compounds responsible for reproducible
bioactivity in these extracts will be accomplished through bioassay-guided
fractionation and spectroscopic analysis (e.g., mass spectrometry, high-field
nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed work fall into several categories. One is certainly the
public health endpoints: (i) credible methods that can be used to determine
whether coastal waters are safe for recreational use, (ii) a simple, inexpensive
assay for ciguatoxin in fish, (iii) a better appreciation of the threat to human
health associated with the movement of BMAA through marine food chains, and (iv)
the discovery of novel compounds with application to the treatment of human
health problems. Second, this is a collaborative proposal with an historically
black university (Jackson State University) and a female principal investigator
from Stanford. Finally, the PRCMB will continue to train students and to
collaborate with other institutions and Ocean and Human Health centers.