* 0910191
* Empirical Research: Breaking through the Reputational Ceiling: Professional Networks as a Determinant of Advancement, Mobility, and Career Outcomes for Women and Minorities in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Eric Welch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,371,053.00

The proposal addresses the characteristics and role of networks in career
advancement, outcomes, and mentoring for women and underrepresented minority
academic scientists in non-Research I institutions. The questions driving the
research concern the structural and resource determinants of
underrepresentation, career success and satisfaction of women and
underrepresented minorities PhDs who have faculty appointments in Research II
and Comprehensive institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to use OLS
regression and structural equation modeling to answer research questions related
to gender differences, relationships between network structure and outcomes, and
the association of background characteristics on networks. The PIs will survey
women and minority scientists in civil engineering, chemistry, physics and
computer science. They will use event history analysis to study career
trajectories from the curriculum vitae. To ensure limited bias, the PIs will
compare characteristics of the respondents with the general population in terms
of rank, gender, and field. Finally, another survey and interviews will target
named mentees. The interviews will add an important qualitative dimension to the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study addresses significant questions about how
women and minorities at Research II and Comprehensive institutions access and
use professional networks and to what effect. The PIs state that the project can
inform education policy as it continues to seek new mechanisms to encourage and
foster greater representation of women and minorities in STEM fields. The
findings would provide a more nuanced assessment of the complex interactive
environment that creates structures and provides resources that are critical to
the career trajectory of minority STEM faculty.