* 0910091
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Liochelidae of the Indo-Pacific Region: Systematics and Biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Lorenzo Prendini, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,750.00

The complex geological history of the Indo-Pacific region -- involving
interactions between five tectonic plates, numerous microcontinents, and
volcanic island arcs -- has produced one of the world's richest, yet least well
known, biotas. As with other organisms in this region, the diversity and
endemism of Indo-Pacific scorpions is high. This project investigates the
diversity, evolution and biogeography of the scorpion family Liochelidae in the
Indo-Pacific, using anatomical and molecular data. Liochelid scorpions are ideal
model organisms for evolutionary and biogeographical studies due to their
restricted dispersal ability, specific habitat requirements and high rate of
endemism. Congruence between the evolutionary history of these scorpions and
geotectonic events during the last 35 million years will be assessed using
molecular clocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The urgency of surveying, inventorying
and describing the biota of the Indo-Pacific region cannot be underemphasized
given the rapid destruction of natural habitats and accelerating extinction of
species. Liochelid scorpions, which mostly inhabit threatened tropical forests,
are good indicators of environmental disturbance and areas of endemism. A
synthesis of their diversity and distribution will provide data for conservation
and biodiversity management in the Indo-Pacific. The biogeographical analysis
presented by this project will also provide data for geologists, who
increasingly rely on such studies to corroborate geological hypotheses.