* 0910336
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Systematics, Evolution, and Biogeography of Lepechinia (Lamiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Bryan Drew, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,214.00

Systematics, evolution, and biogeography of Lepechinia (Lamiaceae)

Abstract

The mint family (Lamiaceae) is a group of flowering plants that is well known
for providing herbs used in cooking and ornamentals used in gardening. Many wild
species also colour the landscape of the U.S. In California, a group of mint
species in the genus Lepechinia occur in the area known as the California
Floristic Province, a region extending from Southern Oregon to Northern Baja.
This project will use DNA sequences of Lepechinia and fossils to determine when
the California Floristic Province originated. Additional DNA sequences will be
used to determine how closely related Lepechinia is to other groups of mints.
Finally, the DNA data will be used to assess how the morphology and breeding
system of Lepechinia have changed during evolution.

The California Floristic Province has many plant species that occur nowhere else
in the world. Because of its high diversity and unique set of species, there has
been considerable interest in understanding how long it has been in existence
and how it formed. Lepechinia and its close relative Salvia (a familiar garden
plant) can help to determine the age of the flora. Preliminary results of this
study show that the California clades of Lepechinia and Salvia originated
between 10 and 20 million years ago, probably from ancestors that lived farther
to the south.