* 0910270
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Disentangling local and regional processes operating in a simple metacommunity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Myra Hughey, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Understanding the processes that maintain biodiversity is of fundamental
importance to ecologists and conservationists. In spatially structured habitats,
ranging from tidal pools to forest fragments, explaining patterns of species
distribution and abundance requires investigation of processes occurring at
different spatial scales. Locally, predatory and competitive interactions affect
species presence within habitats. Regionally, dispersal and colonization
influence species presence across habitats. Processes at both scales likely
contribute to the patterns of diversity and distribution observed in nature,
however, their relative importance is not well understood. This study will
evaluate the contributions of local and regional processes to patterns of
variation among local communities. The community under investigation consists of
four insects associated with red-eyed treefrog egg masses: a social wasp that
eats frog eggs; two flies whose larvae infest egg masses; and a parasitoid wasp
that attacks fly larvae. Research will examine 1) locally, how competition and
parasitism influence the identity and abundance of insects emerging from egg
masses and 2) regionally, how damage caused by egg-eating wasps (which is
attractive to flies) and the spatial arrangement of egg masses influence where
insects colonize. This research fills an important gap in our understanding of
how local interactions and spatial dynamics combine to explain patterns of
distribution and abundance. This dissertation trains one doctoral student as
well as assistants from the US and Latin America. Results will be broadly
disseminated to scientific audiences and used in public outreach and educational
presentations in the US and in Panama.

