* 0910008
* Dissertation Research:   Phosphorus Cycling in Shallow Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Lauren Kinsman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,999.00

Phosphorus is a nutrient required by all living things, but its use in
industrial fertilizers and other products has increased its occurrence to
polluting levels in many agricultural and urban watersheds. Excess phosphorus
often causes eutrophication in freshwater ecosystems. Eutrophication remains a
pervasive problem in the U.S. and can impact aquatic ecosystems as blooms of
toxic phytoplankton, reduced water clarity, changes in plant communities, and
fish kills. Due to the ability of the sediments to accumulate phosphorus,
wetlands are often managed to store phosphorus and prevent entry into downstream
ecosystems. The ability of wetland sediments to bind phosphorus varies, and at
times wetlands can become sources of, rather than sinks for, phosphorus. The
ways in which phosphorus binds to and is released from sediments has been
studied extensively in deep lakes, but less so in shallow wetlands. Shallow
wetlands differ from lakes in that they often dry and re-flood and tend to have
sediments with more organic matter (decomposing plant material). This study
investigates how water level fluctuations influence phosphorus binding and
release in wetland sediments of varying characteristics.

The findings of this research will not only inform understanding of how sediment
controls plant growth in freshwater ecosystems through P release, but will have
direct applications to management of many freshwater ecosystems. The findings of
this research will provide insight into how best to manage wetlands to promote
phosphorus accumulation in sediments and prevent its release to downstream
ecosystems. In addition to management implications of the research itself,
researchers will educate the general public through development of K-12
curricula aimed at teaching the definition, ecology, and functional roles of
wetlands and wetland sediment. Lesson plans will be developed through a
partnership with teachers at Lawton Community Schools in Southwest Michigan, and
will be taught to students there with direct assessment of student learning.
Assessments of student learning from lesson plans will aide in refining lesson
plans for publication in education literature. Finally, undergraduate students
interested in ecology will be given opportunities to conduct independent
research experiences as part of this project.