* 0910321
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  A Cytogenetic Characterization of the Mimulus Guttatus Genome
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Kelly, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,260.00

Changes in chromosome structure and composition are an essential feature of
genome evolution and also contribute to speciation in many organisms. Despite
the prevalence of karyotypic (chromosomal) changes, the evolutionary forces that
produce and maintain these mutations are poorly understood. The proposed studies
will provide a description of chromosome structure for an emerging model system
used in plant evolutionary research?Mimulus guttatus (yellow monkeyflower). The
first aim is to produce the ?karyotype? for this species, i.e. the physical
description of the 14 chromosome pairs. The second aim is to integrate the
distinct genomic maps that have been produced by physical information and by
genetic recombination of markers. The third aim of this research is to
investigate a specific inversion, which is a kind of mutation that affects a
large region of a chromosome, in natural populations. These studies will have
broad impacts on the Mimulus research community. There has been extensive
development of genomic methods for Mimulus, but the study of genome structure
has lagged behind. Given the widespread karyotype evolution within Mimulus, the
advancement of methods developed for this project will open entirely new avenues
of genetic research. As the project progresses, methods will be disseminated to
undergraduates, graduate students, post-docs, and faculty via publications,
scientific meetings, and direct tutorials.