* 0910108
* Gender-Ethnic Identification and the Development of STEM Achievement Behaviors
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,10/31/2011
* Nicole Else-Quest, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 10/31/2011
* USD 432,053.00

This is a longitudinal, quantitative study to examine the roles of gender and
ethnic identification in the development of high school students STEM values,
expectancies, and achievement behaviors within the framework of the Eccles
Expectancy Value Model of achievement behaviors, which proposes that engaging in
certain educational behaviors, such as course taking are the product of an
individual's expectations for success and its perceived value or importance. The
PI seeks to expand this model to specifically address the unique contributions
of social identity factors in STEM engagement. This study will follow the
students via self-reports across 3 years to gather insight into continuity and
change over time. Participants will be adolescent 10th, 11th and 12th graders,
who are a mixture of white, black, Latino and Asian Americans. Parents or
primary guardians of the adolescents will be included in the study. The initial
sample of 256 students (32 per gender x ethnic group) was extended to include
100 additional students and parents. The participants will be a representative
sample of public high school students and their families in the school district
of Philadelphia PA.

The research will examine possible conflicts between gender and ethnic
stereotypes. One example is a perceived conflict between the math competency
associated with Asians and the negative gender stereotype associated with an
Asian female. The primary research questions are: 1) How do gender and ethnicity
interact in academic identification and STEM achievement behaviors; 2) Which
factors put female and ethnic minority students at risk for not pursuing STEM;
and 3) Are these constructs and processes stable from 10th to 12th grade. The
quantitative analyses will focus on regression analysis; however, structured
equation modeling (SEM) may also be utilized.

The proposed study will provide new knowledge and understanding to the fields of
educational, social, and developmental psychology, STEM education, and education
policy through the development of a stronger conceptualization of the
social/cognitive factors responsible for the participation of girls and ethnic
minorities in STEM. The project will provide data absent in earlier studies on
attitudes of students of color as well as a point of departure for education
researchers and policymakers, whose goal is to develop effective motivational
strategies to increase the participation of female students of color in STEM
education and careers. Further the knowledge to be gained from this research is
central to the development of curricular programs designed to target such
groups, i.e., programs that respond to the specific educational disseminated
among parents and the community as well as scientists and educators. The PI will
mentor graduate psychology students in research methods; undergraduate students
and females will be given preference in recruitment.