* 0910584
* AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Random Processes and Randomized Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Eric Vigoda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2012
* USD 780,000.00

Randomness has emerged as a core concept and tool in computation. From modeling
phenomena to efficient algorithms to proof techniques, the applications of
randomness are ubiquitous and powerful. Notable examples include: construction
of important combinatorial objects such as expanders, rigorously establishing
phase transitions in physical models, finding polynomial-time algorithms for
fundamental sampling problems and approximating #P-hard counting problems,
designing probabilistically checkable proofs (PCP's) and establishing the
hardness of approximation, and discovering simpler and often faster algorithms
for a variety of computational problems. In the course of these tremendous
developments, several general-purpose techniques have emerged, and random
sampling has become a fundamental, universal tool across sciences, engineering
and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together leading
researchers in randomized algorithms to solve hard problems in random sampling,
to identify techniques, and to develop new analytical tools. The applications
come from a range of fields, including complexity, physics, biology, operations
research and mathematics. The most general and widely-studied technique for
sampling is simulating a Markov chain by taking a random walk on a suitable
state space. The Markov Chain method and its application to sampling, counting
and integration, broadly known as the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, is
a central theme of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
project focuses on applications of randomized algorithms and random sampling to
rigorously address problems across several disciplines. Within computer science
these topics include: massive data sets, where sampling is critical both for
finding low-dimensional representations and clustering; routing networks, where
sampling has many applications from monitoring and path allocation to
optimization; machine learning; and property testing. Recent interactions
between computer science and other scientic disciplines have led to many new
rigorous applications of sampling, as well as new insights in how to design and
analyze efficient algorithms with performance guarantees; for instance, phase
transitions in the underlying physical models can cause local Markov chains to
be inefficient. The project explores deeper connections between physics and
random sampling, including conjectured correlations between reconstruction
problems and thresholds for the efficiency of local algorithms. Many related
problems arise in biology, such as phylogenetic tree reconstruction and analysis
of complex biological networks. In nanotechology, models of self-assembly are
simple Markov chains. In mathematics, the techniques used in the analysis of
sampling algorithms in general and Markov chains in particular have drawn
heavily on probability theory, both discrete and
continuous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The college of computing at
Georgia Tech is home to the new Algorithms and Randomness Center (ARC) with many
faculty and students sharing this expertise. The project's activities include
designing a summer school for graduate students in randomized algorithms and
designing a course for training students from diverse backgrounds and hosting
workshops focusing on both theoretical and applied aspects of randomized
algorithms. Participation of women and under-represented groups in all of these
activities will be encouraged, and the workshops will include tutorials to
increase accessibility. These coordinated efforts in education and research will
solidify the impact of ARC and make it a premier center for algorithms,
randomness and complexity.