* 0910431
* SDCI Data Improvement:  Data Grids for Community Driven Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Reagan Moore, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,164,954.00

OCI 0721400&lt;br/&gt;Reagan Moore&lt;br/&gt;University of California at San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;SDCI Data Improvement: Data Grids for Community Driven
Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative research between academic
institutions is facilitated through the creation of shared data collections. The
de facto standard for distributed data management is the Storage Resource Broker
data grid (SRB) developed by the Data Intensive Computing Environment group at
the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC). The SRB is used extensively in
national and international projects in support of data grids for sharing data,
digital libraries for publishing and discovering data, persistent archives for
preserving data, and real-time systems for federating sensor data. The SRB is
generic cyberinfrastructure (software middleware) that is used in production
managing over 2 PBs of data across scientific domains such as astronomy,
biology, ecology, high energy physics, medicine, oceanography, seismology, and
the humanities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit &lt;br/&gt;The SRB
provides critical cyberinfrastructure by abstracting the main objects (files,
streams, metadata, resources, users) needed for data sharing, discovery and
access. Based on the experience in developing the SRB and feedback from a robust
user community, we have found that abstraction of data management policies is
also needed. To automate execution of management policies, we are developing the
next generation of distributed data management technology called the integrated
Rule Oriented Data System (iRODS). The system integrates rule-based data
management with server-side workflow technology for executing micro-services
(software modules that perform well-defined tasks). The ability to characterize
management policies as rules controlling the execution of micro-services makes
it possible for the first time to define both user-specific and community-wide
policies, automate the execution of the management policies, and validate
assertions about repository management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concepts
behind iRODS provide a platform for developing customizable and verifiable
middleware systems. The rule based system combines ideas and techniques from
guarded logic programs (forward-chaining and backtracking), databases (triggers
and ECA rules), and abstract workflow systems. Procedural and declarative
semantics control modular software for not only customization but also program
verification. The modularity provided by declarative chaining of micro-services
enables rule-based validation of remote operation execution. The innovative
application of management virtualization supports automation of policy execution
for data grids, digital libraries, persistent repositories and archives, as well
as educational environments that are expected to contribute to many of the
scientific breakthroughs of the 21st century. The new approach enables planned
evolution of all components of cyberinfrastructure that support distributed data
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has three aims: to maintain
support for the SRB data management software; &lt;br/&gt;to develop and support
the next generation of rule-based data cyber-infrastructure and to develop a
transition framework to migrate to the new data management infrastructure. The
aim is to develop evolvable solutions to bring the full power of a national
cyberinfrastructure to communities of scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The SRB software enables inter-
disciplinary data sharing as well as discipline specific collaborations. The
customization and abstraction features of data management policies in the iRODS
software will help both small and large communities share data using uniform
cyberinfrastucture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;