* 0910712
* RUI: Using the Products of Volcano-Ice Interaction to Constrain Paleo-ice Conditions II: Documenting Fluctuations in Continental Ice-sheets
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Benjamin Edwards, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 184,920.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest challenges for
modern science is trying to predict the future implications of global climate
change. While significant progress is being made towards understanding present-
day controls on climate, in order to predict the direction of future climate
change we must understand the Earth's climate cycle during the recent geological
past. Information collected from the Earth's oceans and ice samples from
Greenland and Antarctic ice help to understand changes in local and global
temperature. However, much less information is available about how past
temperature changes have affected snowfall and the formation of glaciers in
North America. One of the most important records of continental climate in
western North America is preserved within deposits formed by volcanic eruptions
that occurred beneath snow and ice in northwestern British Columbia, Canada.
This project will attempt to determine the eruption dates for several of those
volcanoes in order to improve the on-land record of how continental climate, in
northern latitudes, has responded to past changes in global temperature. Many of
these volcanoes record the presence of ice during periods of the recent
geological past when global temperatures were much cooler than today. Other
volcanic deposits appear to have formed when no large ice masses were present;
these deposits are also important as they document periods when continental
climate may have been relatively warmer. Comparison of the continental record to
the oceanic record will help scientists better make integrated global climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to conduct a
comprehensive field, geochemical and geochronological study of 34 basaltic
glaciovolcanic and subaerial centers in the Tuya-Kawdy area in northern British
Columbia, Canada, to determine if fluctuations in continental ice-sheet volumes
affected the eruption frequencies and compositions of Pleistocene volcanism. The
results of the proposed research will have important implications for two linked
but separate scientific areas: (1) magma-ice dynamics and (2) Pleistocene
paleoclimate. The proposed research will provide a detailed record of the
presence, position and minimum thickness of the northern part of the Cordilleran
ice sheet (CIS) throughout the Pleistocene. Glaciovolcanic deposits can survive
erosion by multiple ice advances, and consequently are one of the few means of
documenting the former presence of ice-bodies older than the Last Glacial
Maximum (~30-20 ka); such deposits are crucial for investigating long-term
responses of volcanism to ice fluctuations. Preliminary work in the Tuya-Kawdy
area has already documented glaciovolcanic eruptions at ~700 ka and ~1.8 Ma. An
expanded database will significantly improve our ability to understand how
changes in Pleistocene climate, as recorded by marine proxies, correlate with
the presence of continental ice sheets in northwestern North America. This study
will be the most comprehensive to use glaciovolcanism to document the
presence/absence of a major ice sheet in northwestern North America and attempt
to correlate its fluctuations with the marine proxy ice-volume record. The
results will give important constraints for understanding the terrestrial
response to changes in ocean temperatures, ice sheet dynamics, biodiversity in
deglaciated landscapes, and Pleistocene erosion rates.