* 0910917
* Vibrationally Controlled Reactions of Complexes in Liquids and Gases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 06/30/2013
* USD 700,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project, supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program and conducted in the laboratory of Professor F. Fleming Crim
at the University of Wisconsin - Madison, is a coordinated study of chemical
dynamics in liquids and gases in order to identify and understand the important
similarities and acute differences between the two. The key aspect is comparing
the influence of vibrational excitation on bimolecular reactions in the two
settings and using vibrational excitation to control the course of the
reactions. These experiments follow reactions both within vibrationally excited
complexes and between vibrationally excited solute molecules and complexes.
Single collision studies of the same reactions in a molecular beam provide a
point of comparison by observing the influence of vibrational excitation without
the complication of the surrounding solvent. Such observations delineate the
requirements for control of chemical reactions and test theoretical descriptions
incisively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental science in this project gives
undergraduates and graduate students the experience and skills required to
contribute to the scientific and technical enterprise in industry, government,
and academe, as proven by the history of past students. New opportunities
designed to integrate research, teaching, and learning more completely at the
University of Wisconsin - Madison make it likely that this research project will
inspire beginning scientists and carry advanced students toward a variety of
professional goals even more effectively. The principal investigator on this
project also works with both education and policy related groups nationally, a
participation facilitated and enhanced by his continuing research activities.