* 0910176
* Empirical Research: Emerging Research: Learning by Teaching a Synthetic Student: Using SimStudent to Study the Effect of Tutor Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Gabriel Stylianides, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Kolodner
* 01/31/2014
* USD 553,239.00

The purpose of the Self-Explanation study is to investigate whether prompting
students to explain problem-solving steps made by themselves would facilitate
tutor learning. In the proposed learning environment, 8th grade students will be
prompted to explain the reasoning behind their tutoring activities when teaching
SimStudent. The proposed learning-by-teaching environment is designed for
Algebra students to learn two major types of knowledge, namely: procedural
skills to manipulate algebraic expressions and solve equations; and conceptual
knowledge to justify skill applications when solving problems. The research
question is: Does asking students to provide explanations for their reasoning
behind the tutoring activities facilitate tutor learning? The hypothesis to be
tested is: If students provide explanations on their reasoning behind the
tutoring, then the effect of tutor learning will be facilitated. Students will
be randomly assigned to one of the two experimental conditions: the treatment
condition where the students will be prompted to provide explanations on their
tutoring activities; and the control condition where the students will use the
base-line Learning-by-Teaching environment. Pre- and post-tests will be used to
measure students' learning achievement in conceptual and procedural knowledge.
Student comparisons using the learning gain as the dependent variable will be
the focus of analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study focuses on Algebra I
linear equation solving, which is a critical area in the middle school algebra
curriculum as indicated in both the Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics (PSSM) publication of the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics (NCTM) and the more recently released document Curriculum Focal
Points for Prekindergarten through Grade 8 Mathematics. It is well known that
prompting students to self-explain facilitates learning both when they are asked
to explain correct worked-out examples and when they are asked to explain errors
made by others. The study tests the hypothesis that self-explanation is also
effective in tutor learning. Students will be asked to explain: correct steps
when they demonstrate steps to their SimStudent; incorrect steps when they catch
SimStudent making an error and want to indicate why the step is wrong; and 3)
their choice of problems to teach to SimStudent, for instance, based on the
observation on what mistakes SimStudent make when given a quiz.