* 0910500
* SHF:Large:Collaborative Research:TRELLYS: Community-Based Design and Implementation of a
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Tim Sheard, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2014
* USD 668,182.00

The cost-effective construction of functionally correct software systems remains
an unmet challenge for Computer Science. Although industrial best practices for
software construction (such as testing, code reviews, automatic bug finding)
have low cost, they cannot provide strong guarantees about correctness.
Classical verification methods, on the other hand, are not cost-effective.
Recently, the research community has been exploring the idea of dependent types,
which extend the expressive power of programming languages to support
verification. These rich types allow the programmer to express non-trivial
invariant properties of her data and code as a part of her program. That way,
verification is incremental, localized and at source-language
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-institution collaborative project is for
the design and implementation of a programming language with dependent types,
called Trellys. Technically, Trellys is call-by-value functional programming
language with full-spectrum dependency. Overall, the project combines numerous
fragmented research results into a coherent language design, by building a
robust open-source implementation. The design draws on diverse solutions to the
technical problems that arise from extending traditional programming languages
accommodate dependent types: type and effect inference, language
interoperability, compilation, and concurrency.