* 0910071
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Migration or Adoption? Modeling the Late Copper Age on the Great Hungarian Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Timothy Parsons, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. William A. Parkinson, Timothy Parsons will test two
competing models that seek to explain the dramatic social changes that occurred
during the Late Copper Age on the Great Hungarian Plain (ca. 3500 BC), when the
homogeneous "Baden Culture" began to extend across much of central and eastern
Europe. These models are 1) a model of indigenous change; and 2) a model of
migratory change. The indigenous change model posits that the social and
settlement changes associated with the Late Copper Age developed out of
increased local and interregional interaction. The migration model assumes that
local populations would have been replaced or absorbed into invading
populations. Parsons hypothesizes that intensified interactions between
populations throughout Hungary and the surrounding region resulted from an
increase in the ease of mobility as horse-riding and the use of wheeled carts
became more common place. The archaeological signature of this pattern is
indicated in the regional homogeneity of Baden material culture throughout the
Carpathian Basin.

Research focusing on the development of regionally homogenous material culture
is important because it addresses several significant questions about how human
societies were organized, and how they changed over time. In particular, this
project will permit the formulation of more general anthropological models for
understanding the spread of similar material culture over large geographic
regions. The generalized anthropological processes underpinning these patterns -
migration, diffusion, and social organization - cannot be understood without
careful consideration of settlement and material culture patterns at both the
local and regional levels. Because migration is difficult to identify in the
archaeological record, this project examines changes in material culture that
would have been caused by outside populations (i.e., changes in site locations
and site size, and changes in how ceramics are designed and produced). The
project will approach these questions by conducting archaeological fieldwork at
Copper Age settlements in the Körös River Valley. Specifically, the project
will: 1) identify changes in Middle Copper Age, Late Copper Age, and Early
Bronze Age ceramic design and manufacturing techniques that may indicate the
presence of an outside population's influence on local manufacture; 2) specify
how settlement patterns changed during the periods leading up to the Late Copper
Age Baden period; and, 3) use ceramic and settlement data to understand how
populations on the Hungarian Plain reacted to Baden influence.

The models generated as a result of this research, which focuses on the Great
Hungarian Plain, can be used by anthropologists and archaeologists dealing with
similar questions in different contexts throughout the world. Beyond issues of
interest to social scientists, this project encourages international
collaborative scientific research, and strengthens academic and research ties
between the American and Hungarian scholarly communities. American undergraduate
research assistants will benefit by having access to new archaeological data
sets, making this project an excellent educational experience and a chance to
engage in collaborative research with Hungarians and Americans. The results of
this research will be published in American and European scholarly journals, a
doctoral dissertation, and will be presented at academic conferences on both
continents. The preparation of a website will enhance public visibility of the
project and make the raw data available online. Furthermore, both Parsons as
well as the undergraduate assistants will gain training in the methods of
analysis mentioned above.