* 0910900
* NetSE: Large: Collaborative Research:  FieldStream: Network Data Services for Exposure Biology Studies in Natural Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Deepak Ganesan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 360,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining physiological/behavioral
data from human subjects in their natural environments is essential to
conducting ecologically valid social and behavioral research. While several body
area wireless sensor network (BAWSN) systems exist today for physiological data
collection, their use has been restricted to controlled settings (laboratories,
driving/flying scenarios, etc.); significant noise, motion artifacts, and
existence of other uncontrollable confounding factors are the often cited
reasons for not using physiological measurements from natural environments. In
order to provide scientifically valid data from natural environments, a BAWSN
system must meet several unique requirements (1) Stringent data quality without
sensing redundancy, (2) Personalization to account for wide between person
differences in physiological measurements, and (3) Real-time inferencing to
allow for subject confirmation and timely intervention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In this project, a multidisciplinary
team of researchers spanning various computing disciplines and behavioral
sciences are developing a general purpose framework called FieldStream that will
make it possible for BAWSN systems to provide long term unattended collection of
objective, continuous, and reliable physiological/behavioral data from natural
environments that can be used for conducting population based scientific
studies. FieldStream is being incorporated in two real-life projects ? NIH
sponsored AutoSense at Memphis and NSF sponsored Urban Sensing at UCLA, to help
validate the assumptions, establish the feasibility of developed solutions, and
to uncover new requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: By making it
possible to obtain scientifically valid objective data from the field,
FieldStream promises to help solve several behavioral problems of critical
importance to human society that have remained unanswered for lack of such data.