* 0910285
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   A large-scale, multilocus, coalescent-based analysis of ecological zonation and population differentiation in Andean birds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Stephens
* 05/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

The humid forests that cover the tropical mountains of South America sustain one
of the highest diversity of bird species in the world. This huge avifauna is
packed in different elevation zones and stretches along the narrow strip of
cloud forest of the Andes, from Bolivia to Venezuela. The geographic
distributions of the birds from this habitat are fragmented by low-elevation dry
valleys, which function as barriers to interbreeding between populations. The
isolation imposed by these valleys has the potential to promote the genetic and
phenotypic divergence of bird populations, and may ultimately result in the
formation of new species. This diversification could have been intensified
during the forest movements up and down the mountain slopes that resulted from
climatic changes in the glacial age. For example, in the coldest periods of the
glaciations, montane forests moved downslope several hundred meters bridging the
gap across valley barriers and facilitating the contact of formerly isolated
populations. These ideas are addressed by means of a large-scale comparative
analysis of the genetics of population divergence. Approximately 250 species of
birds will be studied in the slopes of two large valleys in the Andes. Five
species will be the subjects of a more intensive genetic analysis to infer
historical factors associated with habitat movements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation not only will provide new insights into the mechanisms driving
diversification, but also will increase our knowledge of biodiversity for its
conservation. Furthermore it will enhance training in biology to undergraduate
female students in Colombia and Venezuela. The graduate student is mentoring two
student theses and has made presentations to university and national park
staff.&lt;br/&gt;