* 0910824
* Trapping single small molecules in solution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Adam Cohen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 06/30/2013
* USD 551,873.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Professor Adam E. Cohen of Harvard University is supported
by an award from the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to develop a trap
capable of suppressing the Brownian motion of single small molecules in
solution, with molecular diameters as small as 1 nm. The trap combines photon-
by-photon tracking and real-time electrokinetic feedback to induce an
electrokinetic motion that cancels the Brownian motion of one molecule. The
Cohen Lab will study the random Brownian jumps of a molecule struggling to
escape from the trap, as well as the responses of a molecule to electrokinetic
and optical perturbations. The researchers' goal is to develop a platform via
which nearly any fluorescent or fluorescently labeled molecule can be studied at
the single-molecule level, without relying on chemical immobilization on a
surface. The trap will be used to study the bending dynamics of single small
molecules of DNA.

Many biomolecules show strikingly more complex behavior at the single-molecule
level than is observable in bulk, ensemble-averaged experiments. This complexity
arises from dynamic heterogeneity corresponding to distinct configurations of
the atoms. Often sparsely populated molecular sub-states are important for the
biological function. The task of studying biomolecules one-by-one is complicated
by the fact that the molecules do not hold still in free solution, a consequence
of Brownian motion, while surface immobilization may disrupt the molecular
function. The present research promises to increase the range of molecules that
can be studied at the single-molecule level. This research combines
nanofabrication, optics, microfluidics, electronics, computer programming, and
biochemistry. The student and postdoc working on the project will gain
experience in all of these diverse areas. In addition, high school students will
spend summers working on the trap. Results of the research will be widely
disseminated in public lectures and videos available on the Internet, as well as
conventional scientific publications.