* 0910710
* RI: Large: Collaborative Research: Understanding Uncertainty in Rats and Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jeffrey Krichmar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 799,849.00

Humans, rats and other vertebrates, relying on their advanced nervous systems,
are far superior at dealing with the uncertainties of the world than are
artificial systems. Thus, a machine, whose behavior is guided by a
neurobiologically inspired system, might demonstrate the flexible, autonomous
behavior normally attributed to biological organisms. Biological organisms have
the ability to respond quickly to an ever-changing world. Because this
adaptability is so critical for survival, all vertebrates have sub-cortical
structures, which comprise the neuromodulatory systems, to handle uncertainty
and change in the environment. Attention, which is influenced by
neuromodulation, plays a significant role in animal's ability to respond to such
changes. Different neuromodulatory systems are thought to play important and
distinct roles in attention. A collaborative approach, which compares rodent
experiments with robots having simulated nervous systems, will examine these
attentional systems. These experiments will lead to a better understanding of
how animals cope with uncertainty in the environment, and will lead to the
design of a robot capable of flexible and complex behavior. This work has the
potential of being paradigm-shifting technology that could find its way in many
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an interdisciplinary approach, a
robotic system, whose design is based on the vertebrate neuromodulatory system
and its effect on attention, will be constructed and tested under similar
experimental conditions to the rat, and then in a more practical application.
This approach, which combines computational modeling and robotics with rodent
behavioral and electrophysiological experiments, will lead to a better
understanding of how areas of the brain allocate attentional resources and cause
the organism to respond rapidly to essential events and objects. Two of these
neuromodulatory systems, the cholinergic and noradrenergic, are thought to play
important and distinct roles in attention. Expected uncertainty, the known
degree of unreliability of predictive relationships in the environment, drives
activity within the cholinergic system. Unexpected uncertainty, large changes in
the environment that violate prior expectations, drives activity within the
noradrenergic system. These systems modulate activity in brain areas to properly
allocate the attention to stimuli in the environment necessary for adequate
learning to occur and fluid behavior to be maintained. This knowledge will be
used to construct a robust, intelligent robotic system whose capability to adapt
to change, and behave effectively in a noisy, complex environment will rival
that of a biological system. &lt;br/&gt;