* 0910341
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Integrative Morphological Evolution in Philippine Forest Lizards of the Genus Sphenomorphus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Rafe Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,800.00

&lt;br/&gt; The evolution of a miniaturized body form has occurred many times in
vertebrate animals. This project will investigate the evolutionary process of
miniaturization within the diminutive skinks in the genus Sphenomorphus from the
Philippines. These lizards have evolved miniaturized species during multiple,
independent events, allowing for a test of correlation between morphological
development and adult body form. The incorporation of genetic data, adult
morphology, ecology, and ontogenetic development allows for an integrative
approach to understanding the evolution of miniaturized body form in
skinks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This study will be the first integrative
examination of ontogenetic change associated with miniaturization in lizards.
Furthermore, this study is the first phylogenetic examination of a diverse group
of Southeast Asian skinks that have a long history of taxonomic ambiguity
reaching back to the 19th century. Fieldwork will be conducted in collaboration
with Filipino students from multiple universities, allowing training in field
methodologies and developmental biology. Collection of molecular and
morphological data will involve the training of undergraduates at the University
of Kansas, providing them with experience in scientific research. All data
collected will be available to the public through an online database of skink
morphology and taxonomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;