* 0910915
* Workshop on Physical Organic Chemistry; January 2010, Key West, FL
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Brent Iverson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2010
* USD 32,920.00

The Workshop on Physical Organic Chemistry is an annual conference for the
discussion of topics that span bioorganic chemistry, polymer chemistry,
materials chemistry, gas-phase reactions, mechanistic organic chemistry and
supramolecular chemistry. Although the range of topics is broad, the field
covered by the workshop has grown to include not only physical organic chemists
but those who use the methodology, synthetic strategy, and tools developed by
physical organic chemists. Attendance at the workshop is limited to about twenty
participants, all of whom present informal talks on new, unpublished research
results. Conferences are held at remote sites in order to minimize distractions
and encourage informal discussions. The goal is to provide a safe environment
where cutting-edge research can be discussed and a forum for the exchange of
ideas. A strong effort is made to create a diverse environment of participants
that will include women, underrepresented groups, young investigators, and
senior investigators. Attention is also paid to including researchers from
diverse geographical areas and from both small and large schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program (OMC) supports the on-going Workshops on Physical Organic Chemistry,
which is organized by the co-PIs, Professors Nancy S. Goroff of SUNY at Stony
Brook, Theodore G. Goodson from the University of Michigan, and Brent L. Iverson
from the University of Texas. The Workshop will provide opportunities for the
generation of new ideas, and facilitate collaborations. The Workshop benefits
the OMC Program by identifying new research areas and by helping to develop new,
young investigators who will become new awardees, reviewers and advisors for the
National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;