* 0910372
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Effects of Microbes and Antimicrobial Compounds on Behavior of Cnidarian Larvae
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Stuart Sandin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2010
* USD 14,976.00

Coral reefs are a source of food, tourism revenue and cultural pride for people
in the United States and around the world, yet a suite of assaults including
fishing, terrestrial runoff, sewage input, chemical pollution, global change and
disease have pushed most coral reefs to the point of collapse. Individual corals
grow extremely slowly, therefore future recovery of coral reefs will depend
primarily on the successful sexual reproduction of the few corals that remain.
In their larval stage, corals conduct complex swimming and searching behaviors
to select their settlement locations. Previous work demonstrated that water
column bacteria and antibiotic treatments alter the swimming rate and settlement
rate, respectively, of lab-raised coral larvae. Therefore, interactions with
bacteria are important for the successful completion of the coral life cycle.
This project will use field collections during coral spawning, behavioral
assays, and fluorescence-based microscopy to determine how coral larvae
physically interact with bacteria and which of these interactions with bacteria
are most important for normal larval behavior. The results of this research will
help foster coral population recovery in Pacific and Caribbean reef ecoystems.
The results will also add to the scientific understanding of animal reproduction
and development, animal behavior, and interactions between animals and bacteria.
During the project, at least two students will be trained in research diving and
fieldwork methods, and at least one student will be trained in molecular biology
and microscopy.