* 0910488
* High-resolution laser photoionization, photoelectron, and photodissociation studies of state-selected transition metal-hydrides, carbides, nitrides, and oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Cheuk-Yiu Ng, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2012
* USD 429,492.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professor Cheuk-Yiu Ng of the University of California, Davis, and his research
group will measure the ionization energies, bond dissociation energies, and
vibrational and rotational constants of diatomic molecules MX and their cations
MX+, where M is a 3d transition metal (M = Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni or Cu) and
X is a main group non-metal (X = H, C, N, or O). The general experimental
strategy takes advantage of the fact that most MX species possess long-lived,
low-lying electronic states that allow a variety of double resonance techniques
(initial visible excitation followed by photoionization, photoelectron, or
photodissociation) to be applied which can circumvent the normal problems of
spectral congestion or signals due to impurity species. Photodissociation
studies will involve a two-color velocity-mapped ion-imaging method, which
should make it possible to determine accurately not only MX dissociation
energies, but the branching ratios of the various dissociation
channels.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the specific questions related to diatomic molecules
containing transition metals, the techniques developed during this research
project will have important impacts in other areas of physical chemistry,
astrochemistry, and virtually any other chemical science arena where precise
spectral and dissociation energy information is needed. This research project
will also provide an excellent vehicle for the training of students and post-
doctoral researchers who themselves may go on to develop novel laser based
techniques. Finally, Prof. Ng is a participant in the undergraduate research
program (MORE/CAMP/MURPPS) for underrepresented minority students at UC
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;