* 0910692
* Collaborative Proposal: Redox Processes in the Sedimentary Porewaters of Prairie Pothole Lakes: Implications for the Attenuation of Pesticides
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* William Arnold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2011
* USD 74,970.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Prairie pothole
lakes (PPL) are important hydrologic features in the glacial till of the Upper
Midwest. A number of these lakes have developed unique water chemistries,
including extremely high (10?s to 100?s of millimolar) levels of sulfate.
Sulfate in these waters undergoes reduction in the sediments to produce reduced
sulfur species that can act as both nucleophiles and reductants. In sulfate poor
lakes, Fe(II) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) may also become important
reductants, but this will be influenced by DOM composition. To date nothing is
known about the biogeochemistry of naturally occurring reductants in PPL
sediments. Given their unique water chemistry we hypothesize that both reductive
and non-reductive reactions are able to abiotically transform certain heavily
used agrochemicals in prairie pothole sediments. The extent to which this can
occur will be determined by the presence and amount of reactive chemical species
present. These species include dissolved reduced sulfur species (bisulfide and
polysulfides) and to a lesser extent a combination of Fe(II) and dissolved
organic matter in potholes that lack high levels of reduced sulfur. We will
conduct a one year ?pilot? study in the Cottonwood Lakes of North Dakota to
learn more about the abundance and reductive potential of sulfur species,
Fe(II), and DOM in these systems. Sediments and water samples will be collected
to screen for pesticides commonly used in the region. Porewaters will be
carefully collected under anoxic conditions to quantify the concentration of the
important reductants, and determine their ability to transform two commonly used
herbicides trifluralin and alachlor. We will also conduct electrochemical
studies to assess the speciation of the various reductants using voltammetry.
&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this pilot-project is to demonstrate to the
scientific community at large the promise that these unique aquatic ecosystems
have to naturally attenuate pesticides. It will provide us with valuable
background information regarding the type and amount of reactive chemical
species present in sediment porewaters and their potential to transform
pesticides. Once armed with this information we will be able to examine the role
of these lakes within a larger hydrologic context. &lt;br/&gt;