* 0910206
* Collaborative Research: Mental Abacus Education and Spatial Representations of Number
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Barner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2013
* USD 520,449.00

How does learning mathematics in a spatial format affect children's
understanding of number, and the basic cognitive processes that support it? The
proposed project will explore this question by investigating users of 'mental
abacus' a system of mental arithmetic practiced by children throughout the
world. Children who use mental abacus first learn to do arithmetic on a physical
device, and then internalize these computations by creating a mental image of an
abacus. By moving beads in their mental representation, children perform
computations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, all with
astonishing speed and accuracy. In three sets of experiments, we will explore
how visualizing beads on an abacus to do arithmetic affects abilities such as
estimation and comparison of amount, visual attention and working memory, and
children's understanding of early numerical concepts, such as addition, place
value, and commutativity. Participants will include children in Gujarat
Province, India, who are highly trained in abacus, as well as children and
adults in the US. Our hypothesis is that learning to do math in a spatial format
facilitates not only early understanding of number, but also lays the groundwork
for learning advanced mathematics, by training the underlying cognitive
processes that support numerical reasoning.