* 0910294
* Dissertation Research:   Tradeoff of Carbon and Water with Agricultural Conversion of Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Climate change and water shortages are two serious global environmental issues
that are projected to worsen in the near future. However, humans may be able to
mitigate these problems by promoting certain ecosystem processes, a concept
known as ecosystem services. Two examples are storing carbon from atmospheric
carbon dioxide, one of the main contributors to climate change, into plants and
soil, and recharging rainfall to groundwater. Vegetation controls these services
because it stores carbon, but uses water to do so. Human activities, such as
conversion of natural vegetation to agriculture, hence can alter the
effectiveness of these services. Recognizing the tradeoff between vegetation's
control over carbon and water, this research will address how agriculture
changes grassland carbon and water storages. The U.S. Great Plains are
particularly important because they store large amounts of carbon, occur in
drier climates, and contain more than half of U.S. agriculture. Water inputs
from irrigation and rain should enhance plant production, which form the basis
for carbon storage, but plant production may decrease water availability and
deep water storage. To establish a general relationship between water inputs and
the services, the study is conducted at six sites along a rainfall gradient in
the southern Great Plains in which irrigated and rain-fed agricultures, and
grasslands are compared. Deep soil is sampled for carbon and tracer ions to
estimate carbon and recharge to groundwater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include estimation of environmental benefits and costs of agricultural
conversion in consideration of multiple ecosystem services. Undergraduate and
Masters students will be mentored, and results will be shared with landowners,
experimental agricultural stations and local Water Development Boards.