* 0910552
* Theoretical Studies of Inorganic, Organometallic, and Bioinorganic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Michael Hall, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 02/28/2014
* USD 426,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Michael B. Hall at Texas A&M University to
carry out fundamental/basic studies on the mechanisms of transition metal
catalyzed reactions involving the activation of both hydrocarbons and hydrogen
by using density functional theory and ab initio quantum calculations.
Activation of the carbon-hydrogen and carbon-carbon bonds in hydrocarbons is the
first step in catalytic cycles that produce useful, high-value products.
Furthermore, with vast methane reserves, the direct conversion of methane to
other more reactive and useful products is an important step for our future
energy and material needs, and the activation, production, and storage of
molecular hydrogen are keys in the use of hydrogen as a secondary fuel source.
These calculations provide an understanding of these important reactions in
sufficient detail to contribute to the development of new catalysts. The close
coupling of theory and experiment through collaborative arrangements, a hallmark
of this award, stimulates rapid progress on these important chemical problems
and keeps the effort focused on the most important questions. The students and
postdoctoral associates at Texas A&M University receive essential education and
training such that they will be well equipped to meet future scientific
challenges, while the large number of collaborators now associated with the
laboratory brings the educational aspects to a much broader audience. In
addition this award supports a faculty collaborator and one undergraduate
student from Prairie View A&M University (HBCU). This award also supports the
development of the Fenske-Hall electronic structure method with its own
graphical user interface that can be incorporated into teaching both
undergraduate and graduate students about chemical bonding concepts. The
teaching value of this program is extremely high as it is the only simple
technique available that combines (1) a free graphical user interface, (2) all
elements capability (including transition metals) and (3) fragment analysis and
construction, which clarifies the bonding in large systems by simplifying their
construction from simple metal-ligand fragments. Finally, this research lays the
foundations for improving catalytic reactions that are essential in developing
new energy sources and in efficiently utilizing our hydrocarbon reserves.