* 0910426
* Probing the Deep Rheology of Tibet: Unique Constraints from Recent Dip-slip Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin R. Phillips
* 09/30/2010
* USD 91,845.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

There is much debate about the most fundamental aspects of the style of
continental deformation in the India-Eurasia collision zone. One school of
thought envisions Tibet to be a thickened, weak and fluid-like zone, while
others consider the active tectonics in the region as that of rigid microplates
bounded by major faults. An alternative view suggests a primary role of a low-
viscosity channel in the lower crust. To resolve this debate, better knowledge
of the flow strength or rheology of the deep interior of the Tibetan plateau is
needed. The aim of this project is to rigorously determine the rheological
properties of Tibet?s interior from geodetically measured post-earthquake
deformation following a number of recent major earthquakes. Synthetic Aperture
Radar interferometric data collected by satellites provide valuable information
about subtle surface deformation resulting from postseismic relaxation processes
at depth. Such measurements effectively probe the constitutive properties of
viscous flow at depth resulting from earthquake-induced stress changes. This
work will also improve understanding of the role of post-earthquake deformation
in triggering of additional quakes. Quantitative information about the viscous
strength of the deep Tibetan crust will allow for improved models of the
tectonic evolution and current dynamics of the collision zone.

Building on an earlier investigation of the deformation following two strike-
slip earthquakes on the Kunlun fault, this research utilizes InSAR time series
of postseismic deformation following eight recent moderate to large dip-slip
earthquakes to probe the rheological properties of the Tibetan lower crust.
Importantly, the deformation transients due to afterslip, poroelastic rebound
and viscous relaxation following dip-slip earthquakes differ much more
distinctly than they do for strike-slip events. Most of these events are normal
faulting ruptures that occurred in the interior of the Tibet plateau, while the
devastating May 2008 Wenchuan earthquake was a thrust event that occurred on the
southeastern margin of the plateau. For this event, InSAR data is complemented
by GPS measurements. Careful analysis of the spatio-temporal evolution of the
deformation transients and comprehensive model analysis can separate different
stress relaxation processes and define the constitutive properties of material
at depth. The occurrence of the earthquakes around the plateau offers a unique
opportunity to assess the degree of lateral heterogeneity in rheological
structure across the region. We also carefully incorporate knowledge of a wide
range of complementary geophysical and geological studies of Tibet. In addition
to leading to a better understanding of current and future seismic hazards in
the Tibetan region, improved fundamental knowledge of postseismic mechanisms in
general will be helpful to future studies of changes in stress, and therefore
change in seismic hazard, following large earthquakes.