* 0910975
* Trace Element Partitioning in Magmatic Zircon:  Empirical and  Experimental Studies at Sub-micron Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 05/31/2011
* USD 175,374.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: Zircon is a widespread component of siliceous igneous rocks and hosts a
wide range of trace elements (e.g., REE) and isotopic species (e.g., O, Hf, Pb
and U) that are useful for geochronologic, petrogenetic and geochemical studies
of the crust. Zircon can provide unique constraints on early earth history
because its refractory nature allows it to be preserved in sedimentary and
metasedimentary rocks when other vestiges of its parent rock have been
destroyed. However, zircons are typically small (tens to hundreds of microns)
and often preserve complex, micron-scale compositional zonation that cannot be
resolved by conventional microanalytical techniques (e.g., laser ablation or
most secondary ion mass spectrometers). Therefore it is critical to develop
analytical approaches to studying zircon geochemistry at the small spatial
scales characteristic of its compositional zonation, and to understand the
processes that control zircon compositions on such scales. In this study,
micron-scale trace-element distributions will be determined in natural zircons
and in synthetic zircons grown under controlled conditions. Particular goals
include:&lt;br/&gt;o Develop and standardize methods for quantitative analysis
of trace elements in zircons at µm and sub-µm scales using the nanoSIMS high-
resolution ion microprobe&lt;br/&gt;o Examine trace element distributions within
natural zircons, in an effort to identify element/element ratios and/or spatial
patterns of zonation that are typical of equilibrium vs. non-equilibrium growth
processes&lt;br/&gt;o Experimentally extend calibrations of equilibrium
partitioning of trace elements between zircon and melt, particularly at
temperatures comparable to natural granitic melts&lt;br/&gt;o Experimentally
examine kinetic controls of trace element incorporation in magmatic zircons
grown during controlled cooling.&lt;br/&gt;Analytical will be obtained using the
Cameca nanoSIMS ion microprobe, which is the only existing instrument capable of
sensitive (ppm-level) and precise (% level relative precision) measurements at
scales less than 1 micron. Such instruments have existed for more than a decade,
but have only recently become available to the earthscience community. This
project represents the first substantive study to use the nanoSIMS to examine
trace element distributions in terrestrial igneous
minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will support one Ph.D
student at Caltech and indirectly support high school and undergraduate student
summer internships, which depend on the existence of a cadre of funded graduate
students working in active labs. This study will also demonstrate a method for
measuring trace element abundances in zircons at sub-micron scales, with
sensitivity and precision suitable for petrogenetic studies of natural
materials; thus it will contribute to the development of instruments and methods
for geochemistry. Finally, this study will provide insight into the physical
controls of µm-scale variations in trace element variations of zircons,
facilitating their use in a wide range of geologic, petrologic and
geochronologic applications.