* 0910679
* Bioorganometallic Chemistry of Enzyme Active Sites with Focus on Hydrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Marcetta Darensbourg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 810,000.00

The Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemisry
program supports work by Professor Marcetta Darensbourg at the Texas A&M
University in College Station, TX, to carry out fundamental studies on small
molecule models of enzyme active sites responsible for controlling hydrogen
metabolism in nature. In this research, synthetic analogues of the unique metal-
organic fragments found in hydrogenase enzymes are prepared and assayed for
their ability to mimic the hydrogen-producing and hydrogen-consuming catalysis
found in organisms that subsist on a micro-hydrogen economy. The atom-atom
connections, the geometrical structure, and spectroscopic footprints of these
natural catalysts are reproduced in the small molecules. The intricate and
facilitating role of the surrounding protein matrix is approached by imbedding
the new molecules in polymer beads and cyclodextrins. By this approach we
develop understanding of the way Nature has engineered hydrogen processing
ability into base metal constructs of iron and nickel, whereas commercial fuel
cells must rely on expensive and resource-limited platinum.

Students at all levels (graduates and undergraduates) are excited by the
chemistry of fuel cells and interest in hydrogen as an energy carrier is high.
In the process of opening young minds to the needed research in alternative
energy sources and challenges, inspiration from nature leads into the literature
of biology, biochemistry, biophysics, as well as synthetic inorganic chemistry.
Our culturally diverse research group works as a team in projects to encourage
interest in science in grammar school children; undergraduates from historically
black colleges and universities and from South Texas, largely Hispanic colleges,
join the research group to help in the projects through summer research.

A home-run from this work would result in hydrogen processing catalysts feasible
enough to serve as a molecular fuel cell electrode, replacing platinum as a fuel
cell electrode, and to make energy-efficient fuel cell technology feasible for a
broader range of applications.