* 0910577
* Addressing Current Challenges in (U-Th)/He   Thermochronology and Running Summer Student Workshops
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Peter Reiners, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 08/31/2011
* USD 280,068.00

&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Expanded use of (U-Th)/He and 4He/3He thermochronology in tectonic and
geomorphic studies over the last decade have elucidated several first-order
challenges facing their practical application and interpretation. Quantitative
understanding of the phenomena behind these challenges is required to
confidently integrate He dating with other approaches, develop realistic
diffusion models, and robustly interpret thermal histories in general. This
proposal focuses on addressing two primary challenges in zircon and apatite He
dating. The first challenge is development of a robust kinetic model for He
diffusion in zircon that incorporates anisotropy and the effects of radiation
damage. Zircon He ages show two distinct types of correlations between age and
parent nuclide concentrations, depending on the specific thermal histories of
individual samples. This leads to a hypothesis whereby initially high and
anisotropic diffusivity becomes progressively lower and more isotropic with
increasing damage, followed by a rapid decrease in diffusivity after damage
exceeds a critical threshold. Evaluation of this behavior may provide
constraints on distinct parts of sample thermal histories. Kinetic calibration
will be done through a series of crystallographically controlled He diffusion
experiments and age analyses on zircons with varying degrees of radiation damage
and thermal histories. The second challenge is to understand the origin of
anomalous and highly dispersed apatite He ages in some samples. Detailed
examination of detrital and bedrock samples documents formation of secondary
phases in grain boundaries around at least some fraction of apatite crystals; in
many cases these phases have U-Th concentrations comparable to or higher than
the apatite. Such samples are likely to be affected by extracrystalline U-Th-
bearing secondary phases in distinct ways, depending on the timing of secondary
phase growth and whether some proportion of the phases are analyzed with the
apatite. The secondary-phase hypothesis will be tested through a series of
analyses to characterize in situ U-Th distributions in and around apatite in
detrital and Laramide basement bedrock samples through SEM, ion-imaging, and
induced-track imaging of thin sections. Methods to ameliorate or avoid the
problem will be tested using grain abrasion and measurement of elements
associated with the secondary phases on problematic samples. A final component
of this study involves funding for continued support of two-week summer student
workshops to be held each year for undergraduate and graduate students, allowing
them to learn analytical and interpretational aspects of low-temperature
thermochronology as applied to samples from their own research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will fund the research
of two promising students who are members of underrepresented groups: PhD
student Kendra Murray, and undergraduate Guleed Ali, and will provide partial
funding for establishing FT analytical facilities for Research Scientist Dr.
Stuart Thomson. The student workshops will provide direct training and research
experience to a broad spectrum of students in the tectonics and geomorphology
communities.