* 0910842
* TC: Large: Trustworthy Information Systems for Healthcare (TISH)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* M. Eric Johnson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,999,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology infrastructure in the
healthcare realm requires secure and effective systems to meet two of its most
significant challenges of the 21st century: improving the quality of care and
controlling costs. Yet developing, deploying and using information technology
that is both secure and genuinely effective in the complex clinical,
organizational and economic environment of healthcare is a significant
challenge. This project's multidisciplinary approach will develop and analyze
information-sharing technology that ensures security and privacy while meeting
the pragmatic needs of patients, clinical staff, and healthcare organizations to
deliver efficient, high-quality care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dartmouth's
Trustworthy Information Systems for Healthcare (TISH) Program addresses
fundamental challenges in current and emerging areas of information security in
healthcare: protecting the security of clinical information, while ensuring that
clinicians can access information they need, when and where they need it, and
securing the collection of sensor data through personal sensor devices
(including both physiological and activity data) to enable monitoring of patient
outcomes while giving patients usable control over their
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be effective, such technologies must consider
the economic, organizational and sociological dynamics that are critical to
creating and implementing IT that is secure as well as usable and effective.
Thus, the researchers will consider: usability, and its implications for secure
information sharing throughout the organizational environment of medical care;
privacy concerns, examining how key stakeholders (patients, clinicians, and
other providers) understand and evaluate the trade-offs between information
sharing, usability, security, and privacy: economic risks, identifying the
economically motivated threats to security and privacy in healthcare information
systems and the incentives for adopting security technology; and security
challenges related to collection, processing, and medical use of data from
sensors worn by outpatients&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result
scientific advances in several fields. The team will develop new secure and
efficient protocols that allow remote health monitoring through a mobile phone
and wearable wireless medical sensors; design new machine-learning methods,
especially active-learning and relational-learning techniques for analyzing and
summarizing sensor data in a user-friendly manner; seek a deeper understanding
of the economics of information security in healthcare; and explore how patients
and clinicians trade off usability, security, and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TISH, a collaborative project of the Institute for Security,
Technology, and Society at Dartmouth College, involves a team from Computer
Science, Sociology, the Dartmouth Medical School, and the Tuck School of
Business. Its researchers include computer scientists with expertise in computer
security and sensor networks, sociologists with expertise in healthcare
organizations and health policy, a clinician with medical informatics expertise,
and a business professor with expertise in the economics of information
security. The TISH team will work in collaboration with local hospitals and
health systems in the Upper Valley region of Vermont and New Hampshire.