* 0910367
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Aquatic effects of a terrestrial invasion: a riparian tree subsidizes carbon and nitrogen with differential consequences for stream ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Colden Baxter, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Dissertation Research: Aquatic effects of a terrestrial invasion: a riparian
tree subsidizes carbon and nitrogen with differential consequences for stream
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species can affect ecosystem
functions such as productivity or processing of nutrients. These effects can
beyond the habitat where the invasion occurs extend. The goal of this research
is to evaluate the effects of an invasive non-native tree species (Russian
olive, Elaeagnus angustifolia) on aquatic ecosystem processes. Unlike the native
riparian vegetation that it replaces, Russian olive is able to fix nitrogen (N)
transforming it into a form usable by itself and other plants. As a result,
Russian olive trees can supply N to streams, altering nutrient uptake and algal
growth. This altered processing of N in streams could result in greater export
of N from invaded watersheds to downstream systems which could result in
nutrient pollution problems. Research funded by this award will evaluate if this
effect of Russian olive is manifested at a regional scale by comparing
measurements of nitrogen input and biological demand for N in 10 invaded and 10
non-invaded streams in the Intermountain-West region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about how invasive species affect the
exchange of nutrients and food sources to adjacent ecosystems. If Russian olive
alters N processing in streams this could represent a major unforeseen effect of
riparian plant invasions. The results from this research will inform management
of Russian olive which is in its infancy, despite the invasion's extent and
potential impacts. The investigators will include undergraduate researchers and
will mentor a high school intern from the nearby Shoshone-Bannock reservation
where some of this work will be conducted. This study will address water quality
and human health concerns affecting rural communities in the West. Results of
this research will be communicated broadly to the scientific community, local
managers and the general public.