* 0910902
* FTIR Spectroscopy of CO3- and OH-bearing Apatites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Robert Tacker, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2013
* USD 194,274.00

Apatite group minerals are made primarily of calcium and phosphate and contain
smaller amounts of chlorine, fluorine, hydroxide, carbonate and sulfate. These
minor components can be linked through mathematical models to gases (for
example, water and carbon dioxide) that are important in many geological
processes that lead not only to formation of ore deposits but also to the causes
for explosive volcanism. Apatites are found in a wide variety of rocks.
Therefore this study will provide the analytical and intellectual basis for an
apatite-based mathematical model for carbon dioxide and water behavior in (solid
or molten) rocks from the Earth's mantle to surface. One potential application
is determining carbon dioxide contributions from volcanoes into the atmosphere
at geologic times associated with climate change. A broader impact of this
research lies in its presentation as an integral part of the North Carolina
Museum of Natural Sciences' Nature Research Center, an 80,000 square foot
facility designed to bring research directly to the general public through a
variety of forums and media. Further impact is expected in the understanding of
carbonate incorporated into tooth and bone apatite, and in the design of
biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses fundamental problems
with the apatite group minerals, using microanalytical techniques to enhance the
thermodynamic data used in mathematical models. The project will include the
development of microanalytical methods for apatites such as Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) for the measurement of OH (hydroxyl ion) and CO3
(carbonate group) in combination with Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS).
Diffusion of fluorine and chlorine in apatite during Electron Probe
Microanalysis (EPMA) will be further examined. Apatites will be synthesized in
molten salts at temperatures from 600-800Â°C, providing a simple system for
determining (mathematical) thermodynamic data for the pure end member apatites
and for the apatites containing mixtures of fluorine, chlorine and hydroxyl
ions, and mixtures of hydroxyl ions and carbonate.