* 0910883
* SHF: Large:Collaborative Research: PASS: Perpetually Available Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Emery Berger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2014
* USD 639,420.00

Despite heroic efforts in testing, static analysis, specification, and
verification, all real-world software -- desktop applications, servers, and
transportation systems---deploys with defects and missing functionality, costing
the US economy billions and threatening our well-being. This project proposes a
transformative paradigm shift to "perpetually available software systems" (PASS)
that will make software more available and robust by directly addressing errors
in deployed software. PASS innovations will (1) improve user experience by
keeping real-world software running longer; (2) ensure good performance; (3)
assist developers in fixing errors while allowing patches to be safely deployed
on running software, to avoid downtime. The project will mine error reports in
open source software repositories to derive error classes and test suites. It
will evaluate system effectiveness by comparing with bug reports and patches in
repositories. Innovations will include (1) detection and remediation elements
that target common errors, (2) semantic foundations for remediation and on-line
updating, and (3) integration of elements to exploit synergy among the
components. The project will explore and analyze novel safe, probabilistically-
safe, and extended-semantics remediations/updates. The project will develop both
C/C++ and Java runtimes, because they are the most widely used languages and
pose unique challenges. Methods will include combining dynamic, static, and
remediation/update analysis and results. The project will train graduate,
undergraduate, and post doctoral students, and participate in outreach to under-
represented groups. The tools will be made publicly available, adding to the
national research infrastructure.