* 0910985
* Collaborative Research: Geodynamic implications of imaged upper mantle heterogeneity beneath the Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Thorsten Becker, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2012
* USD 156,124.00

This project studies the causes and consequences of mantle flow beneath the
western United States (U.S.). Several, interacting spatio-temporal scales of
geologic activity need to be considered: (1) circulation related to North
America plate motion, (2) sinking of old Farallon plate in the lower mantle
beneath the eastern U.S., (3) sinking of younger, more recently subducted plate
in the upper mantle beneath the western U.S., and (4) small-scale convective
dripping of the lithosphere. Related deep structure has recently been mapped to
unprecedented detail thanks to EarthScope; the consequences of the resulting
mantle flow are geologically important for the forces applied to the
lithosphere, and for melting anomalies caused by mantle ascent and
decompression. Induced flow is also important because it results in observable
predictions that can be used as a constraint for physics-based models, such as
seismic anisotropy, and the uplift and deformation of the continental
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project analysis method involves mapping seismic
images of the mantle into density structure that can then be used to drive
computer models of mantle flow. Global seismic images and flow modeling are used
to account for the large-scale processes, and high-resolution seismic images and
regional flow modeling is used beneath the western U.S. EarthScope GPS data
provide a highly resolved crustal strain-rate field and EarthScope teleseismic
data provide detailed seismic images used to infer density, temperature, and
anisotropy structure. Those parameters that affect resolvable constraints are
explored in a search for the models that best account for the observations,
leading to an improved understanding of issues such as the strength and
mechanical behavior of plates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of particular interest are:
(1) the magnitude of coupling between the large-scale flow patterns and the
North American plate (with special emphasis on the effects of a cratonic root
that penetrates deeply into the asthenosphere); (2), the importance of the
sinking young slab beneath western U.S. on Yellowstone plume ascent and
regional-scale flow that may be concentrated beneath the active northern Basin
and Range province; (3), the lithospheric drips that are imaged adjacent to many
of the young western U.S. uplifts and volcanic fields, and, (4), the general
role such processes may play for the long-term tectonic and thermal evolution of
the Earth.