* 0910560
* Heterocyclic Chemistry of Bicyclo[1.1.0]butanes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Peter Wipf, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

This project will focus on the exploratory chemistry of a strained organic ring
system, the bicyclobutane group. Steric strain has always been one of the major
driving forces for C-C and C-heteroatom bond formations, but in contrast to
cyclopropanes, oxiranes, and aziridines, only minimal progress has been made in
the past in the application of the bicyclo[1.1.0]butane building block in
organic synthesis. Fundamentally, bicyclobutanes represent 4-carbon alkyne
surrogates. Studies to harness their intramolecular pericyclic processes will
take advantage of the attachment of suitable alkenes and alkynes to a nitrogen
tether and provide access to novel polycyclic pyrrolidines. Additionally,
hypothesis driven transition metal catalyzed transformations will be carried out
to identify new reactions and construct useful new heterocyclic
scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Peter Wipf of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh. Professor Wipf's
research efforts revolve around the total synthesis of natural products,
organometallic and heterocyclic processes, and combinatorial, medicinal and
computational chemistry. The study of chemical reactivity and the use of
synthesis to augment the chemical toolbox assists the development of new
therapeutic strategies. The discovery of fundamentally new reaction pathways in
his laboratory is stimulated by exploratory studies of transition metal
complexes. Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on
discovery and process chemistry in the pharmaceutical, agricultural and fine
chemical industries.