* 0910184
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Influence of environmental variables on gene flow, population structure and disease transmission in the gopher tortoise Gopherus polyphemus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Steven Johnson, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2010
* USD 11,000.00

Understanding how landscape features such as roads, rivers and soil influence
the movement of individuals is important for managing threatened and endangered
species. This study aims to use novel landscape genetic methods to identify
landscape features and habitat variables that may shape individual movement and
population biology in the federally threatened gopher tortoise (Gopherus
polyphemus). This will aid in our understanding of how natural and human-
influenced landscape features affect tortoise distribution. The results will
greatly assist in the designation of conservation management areas based on
landscape features that form natural boundaries to populations and the unique
genes they contain. At the individual level, genetic analyses will be combined
with detailed ecological data to test hypotheses about the relative importance
of particular aspects of the habitat in shaping local movements. The information
gained from this study will also be combined with data on the occurrence of an
emerging infectious disease to better understand how landscape and ecology may
affect disease transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the
potential to advance the field of landscape genetics by demonstrating its direct
applicability to population management issues for threatened and endangered
species. This work has already provided research opportunities for several
undergraduate minority students and with the current funding an additional
student will receive field and laboratory training. Results from this research
will be disseminated in a variety of educational settings including educational
outreach at local high schools, presentations at professional meetings, and
publication in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;