* 0910027
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Vegetation structure constraints on ANPP in arid ecosystems:   Assessing the meristem limitation hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Osvaldo Sala, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,804.00

Although annual precipitation is considered the major control of plant
production in arid and semiarid ecosystems it accounts for only 20-40% of the
interannual variability of plant production. This doctoral dissertation project
is based on the hypothesis that precipitation is indeed an important control but
that there are lags in the ecosystem response to changes in precipitation that
mask the precipitation-productivity relationship. The student will explore the
role of meristem (plant tissue capable of dividing and giving rise to new
organs) limitation in creating those lags with a manipulative experiment of
incoming precipitation using a combination of passive rainout shelters and
irrigation in the Chihuahuan Desert in New Mexico. The experimental design
creates sequences of dry and wet years and will elucidate whether there is
meristem limitation, whether the magnitude of the limitation is proportional to
the rainfall deviation and finally whether the effects of preceding dry years
are similar but of opposite sign of the effect of wet years.

Results from this project will contribute to the understanding of the effect of
climate variability on carbon sequestration, primary production, cattle
production and the process of shrub encroachment, issues important to everyone
from cattle ranchers to city governments concerned about water supplies. Such
stakeholders are interested in understanding the consequences of expected
climate change (increased temperature, decreased precipitation, and increased
interannual variability) on the ability of their land to provide ecosystem
services on which their well-being depends.