* 0910223
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Coevolution and co-divergence in a classical obligate mutualism between Joshua tree (Yucca brevifolia) and its pollinators (Tegeticula spp.)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* N. Olof Pellmyr, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Coevolution is a relationship of reciprocal natural selection and evolutionary
change between two species, such as predator and prey, host and parasite, or
plant and pollinator. Biologists have long believed that coevolution has helped
create much of the diversity of life on Earth, but the evidence for such a
connection is only indirect. This project will directly test the hypothesis that
coevolution between Joshua tree and its pollinator moths has caused these
tightly interacting species to diverge together. Joshua trees are pollinated by
two different species of yucca moths, each occurring in a separate part of the
host plant's range; and Joshua trees pollinated by different moth species
themselves differ in key floral traits. To determine whether these parallel
differences are due to coevolution, the investigators will make use of the only
population of Joshua trees in which both tree types and both pollinator species
are commingled. The investigators will use genetic markers to reconstruct family
relationships between Joshua trees at this site, an approach very similar to
paternity testing in humans. They will then use these reconstructed
relationships to estimate the degree to which Joshua tree traits are heritable,
that is, how much a tree resembles its parents. If Joshua tree traits involved
in the interaction with yucca moths show greater heritable differences between
the two tree types than traits unconnected to the interaction, then it is likely
that coevolution between Joshua tree and its pollinators is responsible for
those differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve four
undergraduate volunteer assistants, including underrepresented groups. Data will
be shared with scientific staff at Mojave National Preserve (MNP) and Joshua
Tree National Park (JTNP), which together contain the majority of protected
Joshua tree populations. Information concerning Joshua tree's interactions with
its pollinators and the genetic diversity and structure of Joshua tree
populations are critical for conservation of this flagship species, which is
under increasing threat from anthropogenic range fragmentation and global
climate change. Results will also be presented to the public as part of the JTNP
Association's Desert Research Institute lecture series.