* 0910200
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Causes of divergence in multiple sexually selected traits:   implications for speciation by sexual selection
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Trevor Price, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2011
* USD 13,740.00

Speciation has been difficult to study in wild populations, because most species
were formed long ago and the processes that originally led to their formation
are often obscured. The Greenish warbler provides a rare example of 'speciation
in action', providing the chance to observe the mechanisms underlying production
of geographic variation within a species and divergence between geographically
separated populations. In the last 10,000 years, the Greenish warbler has
expanded its range northwards through Central Asia and into Siberia. The
populations at the extremes of its range are recognized as two distinct species.
However, the split is not complete, since these two species are connected by a
chain of populations that continue to exchange genetic material. This project
will investigate the process leading to divergence and speciation in the
Greenish warbler, though examination of habitat, associated traits, including
song and plumage color, and genetic relatedness, in three populations across the
warbler's range. These data will be used to test alternative hypotheses of how
selective pressures vary geographically and cause divergence between
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to development of
international collaborations and provides valuable biodiversity data from and
conservation benefits to remote regions of Asia. In addition to providing
training to the graduate student CoPI, the project provides involvement in
scientific research to students within Russia and Kyrgyzstan and outreach to
biologists in those countries through workshops developed by the CoPI.
Additionally, biodiversity and genetic data will be provided to public data
bases.