* 0910784
* CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Multi-core Applications Modeling Infrastructure (MAMI)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kirk Cameron, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2014
* USD 750,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The burgeoning revolution in high-end
computer architecture has far reaching implications for the software
infrastructure of tools for performance measurement, modeling, and optimization,
which has been indispensable to improved productivity in computational science
over the past decade. The heart of the problem is that new multicore processors
are the foundation of next generation systems, ranging from workgroup clusters
to petascale supercomputers. The main motivation by chip manufacturers for the
movement to multicore processors is better performance per watt than the
traditional single core processor. Hence, multicore processors are not
equivalent to multiple CPUs that traditional tools addressed. While significant
work is underway on understanding performance tradeoffs with multicores, much of
this work is ad hoc and needs a unifying framework to which the community can
contribute in a systematic manner. Furthermore, little work has been done on
understanding performance-power tradeoffs in supercomputer systems for large-
scale applications. It is important to understand performance and performance-
power tradeoffs in the context of the significant resource sharing that occurs
in multicore systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused on
developing the Multicore Application Modeling Infrastructure (MAMI) that will
facilitate systematic measurement, modeling, and prediction of performance,
power consumption and performance-power tradeoffs in multicore systems. In
addition to developing MAMI, the proposed work will use MAMI to model, analyze
and optimize performance and power consumption of key benchmarks and
applications on multicore systems.