* 0910054
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Refining decomposition models using a model system:  Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2011
* Kathleen Treseder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This graduate student dissertation study is using genetic mutants of a small
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, to improve predictions of how quickly dead plant
material decomposes in ecosystems. Globally, dead plant material stores vast
quantities of carbon and other nutrients. As this material decomposes, the
carbon is converted to CO2, a greenhouse gas, and released to the atmosphere
where it contributes to global warming. Thus, decomposition is a critical
process with global consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with her
PhD advisor and other researchers, the student is also helping to refine the
?Guild-based Decomposition Model?. GDM is a theoretical model that predicts
decomposition rates based on the chemical composition of dead plant material. In
the past, it has been difficult to test the theory underlying this model (and
others), because it has been technologically challenging to directly alter
specific types of chemical compounds in plant material. However, the student has
found a solution by using genetic mutants that differ in the production of
lignin and cellulose, the two dominant chemical compounds in plants. She is
decomposing dead material from these mutants in an Alaskan boreal forest, and
she will compare her results to those predicted by the current version of GDM.
She will then refine the model accordingly to improve its predictive power. Her
work will advance predictions of climate change.