* 0910107
* Dissertation Research:  Neuroendocrine mechanisms regulating sexual behavior in female túngara frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Mukta Chakraborty, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,397.00

The decision to reproduce is one of the most important decision an animal makes.
Females invest a large proportion of energy in reproduction and the timing of
reproduction is therefore highly regulated. The timing of reproductive behavior
is regulated through neural modulation by reproductive hormones, such as
estradiol. The primary goal of the proposed research is to better understand how
estradiol modulates neural systems to regulate the expression of reproductive
behavior. An important component of reproductive behavior includes those
behaviors that mediate a female's choice of a mate. Using túngara frogs, the
researchers will investigate the effects of estradiol on the sensory systems
that females use to respond to male mating signals. Female frogs choose mates
based on their vocalizations, and they respond preferentially to vocalizations
of their own species when their estradiol levels are high compared to when their
estradiol levels are low. This research will test if estradiol influences
activity in the auditory system through changes in neurochemicals in the brain.
To measure neural activity, the researchers will assess changes in gene
expression that are correlated with neural activity. They predict that estradiol
causes females to respond selectively to male vocalizations because of its
effects on catecholamines, a class of neurochemicals, in the auditory system.
The results of this research will broaden our understanding of how brain
function is modulated by hormones during critical behavioral decisions such as
mate choice. The project will also provide training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students.