* 0910735
* Keeneland: National Institute for Experimental Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Karsten Schwan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,000,000.00

Many-core processor architectures are rapidly emerging in many computing
environments. One of their attractions is the ability to speed up significantly
computation for certain classes of algorithm. In addition, they typically offer
lower energy consumption per unit of computation. Several recent studies have
identified the development of effective methods for efficiently programming
many-core architectures as a major challenge. This project will make available,
as experimental platforms, two systems in which one form of many-core processor
with very high memory bandwidth, a graphics processing unit, is deployed at
scale for use as an accelerator for high-performance parallel computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) and its
partners, the University of Tennessee at Knoxville and the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory will initially acquire and deploy a small, experimental, high-
performance computing system consisting of an HP system with NVIDIA Tesla
accelerators attached. This will be integrated into the TeraGrid. The project
team will use this system to develop scientific libraries and programming tools
to facilitate the development of science and engineering research applications.
The project team will also provide consulting support to researchers who wish to
develop applications for the system using OpenCL or to port applications to the
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2012, the project will upgrade the
heterogeneous system to a larger and more powerful system based on a next-
generation platform and NVIDIA accelerators. It is anticipated that the final
system will have a peak performance of roughly 2 petaflops/s. The project will
operate the upgraded system as a TeraGrid resource for a further two
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final system has the potential to support many
different science areas. Possible areas of impact include some of the scientific
domains in which GPU-based acceleration has already been demonstrated to have an
impact at smaller scale; for example, chemistry and biochemistry, materials
science, atmospheric science and combustion science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to providing infrastructure for science and engineering research and
education, the project partners will educate and train the next-generation of
computational scientists on cutting-edge computing architectures and emerging
programming environments, using the experimental computing resource as one
example.&lt;br/&gt;