* 0910644
* The Dynamics of Mantle-melt Extraction Systems: A Field and Theoretical Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 399,546.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-supported by the
Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and Tectonics programs of the Division of Earth
Sciences, and sponsored also by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (Africa, Near East, And South Asia Program). This research
initiative is designed to study the role of focused melt percolation in the
origin of a spectacular ultramafic massif in Morocco, the Beni Boussera
ultramafite, that records a depth of origin in excess of 150 km. Intrusions of
ultramafic bodies into the lower density continental crust have been documented
for a large variety of tectonic settings spanning continental shields, rift
systems, collisional orogens, and magmatic arcs. These bodies are intriguing and
geodynamically significant because they are denser by 300-500 kg/m3 than their
host rocks. Understanding their emplacement mechanism is key to their origin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed field observations and geochemical data of the
Beni Boussera ultramafic massif have been used to infer that some of these
bodies are composed of km-scale melt percolation features that will be the focus
of this project. A new emplacement mechanism has been recently proposed whereby
focused flow in the upper mantle produces gravitational instabilities resulting
in the emplacement of high-density mantle rocks into low-density crustal
sequences. This model predicts that a) many lower crustal ultramafic bodies are
km-scale melt channels that reach into the upper mantle and b) confined melt
percolation within the upper mantle triggers significant vertical movement of
the entire melt extraction systems, influencing local mantle convection
patterns. The research plan will combine extensive field mapping with detailed
structural and fabric analyses, petrology, geochemistry as well as isotopic
fingerprinting. It will also be combined with geologically constrained mass
transfer modeling to provide insights on the dynamics of melt percolation
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;