* 0910696
* Estimating Eruption Model Input Parameters From Direct Observations of Deeply Eroded Basalt Conduits, San Rafael, UT
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Charles Connor, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2012
* USD 178,775.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanoes create hazards for millions
of people worldwide, including many living in parts of the USA. Scientists can
now forecast the timing of many eruptions at well-monitored volcanoes.
Unfortunately, it is currently not possible to accurately forecast how explosive
an eruption might be, because this depends on a large number of factors, such as
the shape of volcano conduits and the composition of magma, most of which depend
on processes operating in the deep subsurface and so are not directly observable
prior to eruptions. Better forecasts depend upon improving our understanding of
the conditions that govern magma flow within volcanic conduits in the
subsurface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide crucial data to
improve this understanding through investigation of the geology of deeply eroded
ancient volcanoes in the San Rafael desert of southern Utah. This unique
geologic environment, where volcanoes have not erupted in millions of years,
provides essential insight about processes operating in the subsurface during
volcanic eruptions. We cannot observe these processes directly at currently
erupting volcanoes, but we can interpret them from the features preserved in the
geologic record. Connor, Wetmore and colleagues will combine geologic mapping
with 3D terrestrial LiDAR imaging, geochemistry and petrological modeling, and
analysis of the elastic properties of host rocks to develop a detailed
understanding of the erosion and mixing processes that controlled formation of
volcanic conduits of the San Rafael desert. The basic goal of making these
observations is to place geological and geochemical constraints on a set of
input parameters common to models of conduit flow and volcanic eruptions. This
will be accomplished by: (1) generating 3D models of individual volcano conduits
through geologic mapping utilizing terrestrial LiDAR. This will essentially
bring conduits into the computer and allow the project team to measure cross-
sectional areas, shapes, and change in radius with height, direct measures of
conduit geometry needed in numerical models of conduit flow and development.
This approach will allow study of the detailed 3D relationships between dikes
and conduits, and breccia (host rock - magma) mixing zones, among other features
in sufficient detail to be useful in conduit models. (2) Detailed textural and
geochemical analyses of samples systematically collected from these conduits
will yield insights into variations in mineralogy and chemistry of magmas across
and along conduits. These data will constrain eruption parameters used in
models, such as magma temperature, initial volatile content (obtained from melt
inclusions in primary mafic minerals), viscosity, depth of crystallization, and
across conduit gradients in these parameters. (3) The properties of the wall
rock that hosts conduits will be carefully described. This description will
include microstructural studies aimed at quantifying deformation mechanisms,
strain type and intensity in the wall rocks, as a function of distance from the
conduits.