* 0910121
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Selection, drift, and constraint in the evolution of a developmental regulatory gene network
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,02/29/2012
* David Garfield, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/29/2012
* USD 14,337.00

Changes in genes affecting the development of embyros play an important role in
the evolution of differences between species. However, because genes interact in
complex networks during development, the relationship between specific genetic
changes affecting development and organismal changes is not straightforward.
This study uses two closely related species of sea urchins, Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus and S. droebachiensis, to understand how genetic interactions during
development evolve. By examining patterns of gene expression within the well-
characterized network of genes underlying the development of the larval skeleton
in these two species, and in the hybrid offspring between these species, the
investigators will identify specific genetic interactions within the network
that have evolved between the species. These results will inform where in the
network changes accumulate and how specific interactions have evolved between
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex genetic networks are a common feature of
biological systems, including pathways and processes involved in human disease.
Insight into the ways networks respond to genetic variation are important for
understanding human disease as well as engineering biological systems. This sea
urchin network is also known to be affected by changes in CO2 levels associated
with global warming. This project will provide an important resource to many
laboratories working to understand the ways in which global change affect the
health of marine organisms. The project places high priority on involvement of
undergraduate students and dissemination to the broader scientific community of
the computational and analytical tools that will be developed during this study.