* 0910278
* Simplifying complexity:  Analyzing students' models of biological systems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Tammy Long, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2015
* USD 552,584.00

This research project responds to the changing nature of biological science,
which has become less fragmented and more focused on models of complex
interacting systems. The investigators will study a framework that they
hypothesize is well-suited to facilitating students thinking about complex
systems across the biological span from sub-cellular genetic processes to
evolution and ecology.

The selected framework is Structure-Behavior-Function Theory (SBF), in which a
system is represented by the component elements of its structure, the processes
that these components perform, and the overall function or purpose of the
system. The framework originated in the Artificial Intelligence literature, as
an effective strategy for reasoning about designed systems such as electrical
circuits. In this research, it will be applied to reasoning about topics such as
genes, evolution, and ecology. The investigators will use SBF theory as a
pedagogy as a well as an assessment system, in the context of several courses in
introductory biology at Michigan State University for both life science majors
and non-majors. Students will create, refine, and reason with diagrammatic
representations of their own models of the topics they study, and investigators
will build software to automate the coding of such representations and the ways
they change over the course. The work of approximately 800 students will be
analyzed to look for shifts in student reasoning at key points in the
instruction, tracking learning trajectories over time. The assessment method
will be validated by correlating the scores with those on other forms of
parallel assessment, such as multiple-choice, short-answer, and diagrammatic
questions.

Overall, the investigators will develop and evaluate a framework for analyzing
student understanding, propose strategies for promoting systems thinking and
metacognition, and advance research on learning about complex systems. The
project is innovative in its application of SBF theory to the pedagogy,
assessment, and analysis of introductory biology college courses, and also in
its adaptation of software tools to automate the analysis of students models and
associated reasoning.