* 0910476
* Information Security and Assurance for Healthcare Applications
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Gerald Masson, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,795,068.00

Information Science and Systems (33)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Information Security and Assurance for Healthcare Applications project extends a
previous project which provided exposure to the increasingly critical field of
healthcare security to a new generation of computer security and information
assurance (IS&amp;A) professionals. As a result of the previous project, 29
students were successfully placed in jobs in federal agencies or labs, including
those with healthcare security interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relevance of
this goal has since been repeatedly underscored at the highest levels of the
federal and state health infrastructures by mandates to broaden utilization of
information technology in the delivery of healthcare while protecting the
security and privacy of health information exchanges and on-line databases. It
is now widely recognized that establishment of trusted national healthcare
information networks and databases to unify health and medical computing
infrastructures, streamline healthcare monitoring and delivery, and accelerate
research and dissemination of health and medical data while assuring that
privacy is systemically protected have collectively achieved the scope of a
critical national challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides its
graduate students: (a) Rigorous and broad educational foundations addressing the
theory, design, and applications of IS&amp;A technologies; (b) Healthcare
policy, management, and privacy issues; and (c) Potential vulnerabilities
associated with computer-based medical devices, which increasingly have
networking and wireless capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: The
goal of this proposal is to provide the option to 15 new students to complete
either the Master of Science in Security Informatics (MSSI) degree program or a
dual MSSI/Master of Health Sciences (MHS) program, which was developed by means
of a previous SFS capacity building grant. Focused outreach to assure diversity
for this healthcare security opportunity takes advantage of existing
partnerships with HBCUs and MSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
dual masters program made available to the new SFS scholars is based on an
integration of courses, labs, research projects, and internships stemming from
the two different academic cultures represented by the public health and
computing schools. The intellectual merit of this partnership is represented by
the development and implementation of a unique interdisciplinary framework
supporting educational cross-training regarding IS&amp;A technologies relative
to healthcare security applications. Selected healthcare security courses to
support the dual MSSI/MHS degree are made accessible in an on-line format.