* 0910737
* Modeling and Analysis of the Landfalling Hurricane Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Karen Kosiba, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2013
* USD 512,826.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior analysis of high-resolution
mobile Doppler radar observations collected during Hurricane Fran (1996) has
revealed evidence of highly organized sub-kilometer scale circulations termed
boundary-layer "rolls," which embody organized rotation about a horizontal axis
and develop within strongly sheared winds beneath some storms. Along with the
more widely recognized presence of mesovortices (identified by locally-intense
spin about a vertical axis), these organized features superposed on the intense,
broadly cyclonic low-level airflow within hurricanes are thought to have
potential to significantly influence overall storm intensity (via vertical
transports of heat, moisture and momentum) and, more locally, to influence the
duration and peak intensity of strong surface winds responsible for extreme
property damage and loss of life. This new research effort will allow detailed
examination of an extensive archive of existing data from the NSF-supported
"Doppler on Wheels" (DOW) mobile radar facility for a number of more recent
hurricane landfalls. In conjunction with large-eddy simulations aimed at the
computer-based numerical representation of organized features within low-level
wind fields, these analyses will allow quantification of turbulence structure,
intensity and resultant fluxes beneath landfalling hurricanes. Where available,
ancillary observations of surface wind speeds (as from surviving anemometers)
and time-tagged damage to trees and engineered structures will also be
considered to better relate these novel radar observations to conditions at the
earth's surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this study
rests on improved documentation and dynamical understanding of the low-level
("boundary layer") atmospheric processes involved in hurricane intensity changes
at far finer spatial scales than have previously been observed, and in relating
these quantities both to storm intensity/structure and characteristics of the
underlying surface (e.g., land-sea contrasts, type of vegetation, concentration
of built structures etc.). Broader impacts will be derived through increased
understanding of turbulent low-level airflows within landfalling tropical
cyclones that can be implied to forecast model improvement and more accurately
tuned building codes, as well as through support for an early-career scientist
drawn from an underrepresented group.