* 0910297
* MSB:   Dissertation Research:   Methanotroph dynamics in response to lake mixing
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Ashley Shade, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2010
* USD 7,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Lakes and wetlands are believed to contribute substantially to global
carbon cycling, and may play an especially important role in production of
methane gas. However, the biological and physical mechanisms that control rates
of methane emission from lakes are poorly understood. This project will study
the diversity of bacteria that consume methane in lakes (methanotrophs) and
examine how they respond to changes in lake mixing caused by seasonal changes in
temperature and by disruptive events. Methane consumed by methanotrophs in lakes
would otherwise be released into the atmosphere. Since methane is created and
accumulates largely near the bottom of lakes, mixing of the lake water column
should disrupt the activities of methanotrophs and accelerate methane emission.
This project will employ a novel, whole lake mixing manipulation to study how
methanotrophs respond to turbulent mixing, and compare that response to the more
gradual mixing that occurs seasonal in most lakes. &lt;br/&gt;Methane is a
potent greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming by increasing
absorption of solar energy in Earth's atmosphere. By studying how lake mixing
impacts the methanotroph assemblage and methane emission, this project addresses
an important feedback linking lake ecosystems and global climate warming. This
project supports the thesis research of a doctoral student, and also contributes
to a larger outreach effort that engages K-12 teachers in lake ecology and
climate change.