* 0910521
* ETBC:  A new tool for assessing nitrogen saturation status in forests-  Mass-independent D17O of nitrate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Emily Elliott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 515,032.00

ETBC: A new tool for assessing nitrogen saturation status in forests?
&lt;br/&gt;Mass-independent oxygen isotopes of nitrate&lt;br/&gt;Emily M.
Elliott, Principal Investigator&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As U.S. forests
continue to age, nitrate leaching from forests could become an increasingly
important contributor to surface water quality impairment. This project
establishes the use of a mass-independent oxygen isotope tracer of atmospheric
nitrate as an empirical tool for quantifying export of atmospheric nitrate from
forested watersheds and for assessing the nitrogen saturation status of
watersheds lacking long-term water quality data. The objectives of research
include the following: 1) development of a new empirical tool for accurately
quantifying atmospheric nitrate export from watersheds and associated N
saturation status; 2) an intra-watershed assessment of spatial heterogeneity of
nitrate sources in soil water leachate in a N saturated system; and 3) a
characterization of high resolution temporal dynamics of nitrate sources to
streamwater during episodic acidification stormflows. This research is expected
to provide an unparalleled ability to assess the impacts of chronic N deposition
at a much higher spatial resolution than previously possible, transforming our
understanding of the interactions between atmospheric deposition, ecosystem
health and water quality. Additionally, the project will generate new insight
into how forest management strategies can influence atmospheric N export with
important implications for managing water quality in sensitive systems and
improve our process-level understanding of spatial and temporal variations in
atmospheric N export with important implications for the ecological and
hydrological modeling communities. &lt;br/&gt;