* 0910935
* RUI: High Resolution Spectroscopy of Stable Molecular Species and Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Jackson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2013
* USD 180,426.00

This award in the Experimental Physical Chemistry program supports the
collaborative effort between Physics Departments at two undergraduate
institutions, Central Washington University and the University of Wisconsin-La
Crosse. Both Universities are public, four-year comprehensive institutions and
the principal investigators mentor undergraduate students studying physics,
engineering, and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;The research component of this program
will be to enhance our understanding of atmospheric and interstellar free
radicals. A free radical is a substance with an unpaired electron; typically
unstable, they are important intermediates in a number of chemical reactions
occurring in the Earth's atmosphere and in space. Using a variety of high-
resolution experiments, several free radicals such as ND, FeD, and CH3O will be
investigated in the far-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum (the
area between the infrared and microwave regions). To enhance these
investigations, continued work on the discovery of far-infrared laser lines will
be performed. Once detected, the frequencies of these laser lines will be
measured to fractional uncertainties of a few parts in ten million. Other
spectroscopic studies investigating "forbidden" transitions in stable symmetric-
and asymmetric-top molecules are also planned. This research is performed in
collaboration with a number of visiting scholars, including faculty and students
at the University of Oxford, England. Since 1999, twenty-three undergraduates
and four visiting graduate students have co-authored nineteen publications from
this research laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;While sustaining a rigorous research
program, the principal investigators will focus their educational efforts on
mentoring undergraduate students. Students, from their freshmen through senior
years, comprise the bulk of the research team. This experience will provide
students with a deeper and broader educational experience, exposing them to
research early in their academic careers and serving as excellent preparation
for future professional endeavors and graduate school. Beyond the laboratory
experience, the principal investigators and undergraduates involved in this
research will connect with elementary and middle school students and teachers in
a variety of outreach programs through the Center for Excellence in Science and
Mathematics Education (CESME).