* 0910472
* Transition Metal Clusters as Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 522,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor George Christou at the University of Florida
on the synthesis and study of molecules capable of functioning as nanoscale
magnetic particles (single-molecule magnets). Magnets are important to numerous
areas of a modern society, and the continuing push towards device
miniaturization by industry is driving the search for new sources of smaller and
smaller magnets. Synthetic procedures to afford new examples of such molecules
are being explored. Also, targeted modifications of known examples of such
molecules to introduce or optimize desirable properties are being investigated.
Methods to switch interactions on and off between two or more such molecules are
being developed, because these properties are important to potential employment
of these molecules in new technologies such as spintronics and quantum
computing. For the latter, the physics (quantum) properties of the molecules are
also important and therefore these are being studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary nature of the research is providing a range of students, from
high-school summer researchers to postdoctoral fellows, a broad exposure to and
training in many areas of chemistry, and even some physics, both at the
University of Florida and (during occasional short trips) at laboratories of
collaborators. An annual student chemistry symposium for ten Florida
universities, undergraduate colleges and community colleges is organized by the
program. The symposium provides students additional education in scientific
communication and presentations and exposes students to the wide range of
scientific activity available for their future studies and careers. Development
of both new magnetic nanomaterials and of scientific manpower trained in their
use provides the foundation for many future magnetism-based industrial
applications such as high-density information storage, new computer
technologies, medical imaging devices, solar energy conversion, and spintronics
and other electronics technologies.