* 0910516
* Low-dimensional geometry and topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* William Thurston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2013
* USD 574,943.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Thurston will investigate several areas of low-dimensional geometry and topology
and their interconnections with other areas of mathematics and science. He will
continue a collaboration with Allen Hatcher to analyze the topology of the space
of branched polymers, extending the result that for configurations of more than
or equal to 8 equal-size atoms the fifth homotopy group has high rank. Thurston
will extend joint work with Hass and Thompson to investigate the global geometry
of Heegaard splittings, bridge number of knots, generating sets for groups, as
well as a continuous generalization, bridge measure for geodesic flows. Thurston
will also investigate the geometry of the space of approximately finite
k-generated groups: groups whose Cayley graphs are limits of Cayley graphs of
finite groups. The space of approximately finite k-generated groups is compact,
and important closed subsets are countable. This space gives insight into finite
quotients of finitely-generated groups, and the dual property of residual
finiteness.

Mathematician's understanding of 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional spatial
phenomena has undergone a dramatic revolution culminating in Perelman's solution
to Thurston's geometrization conjecture (which includes the famous Poincare
conjecture), giving beautiful geometric answers to questions far beyond the
wildest dreams of 40 years ago. These geometric insights and tools developed
during this revolutionary change are understood mainly within a specialized
community, but Thurston is interested in the strong potential for extending
their explanatory power beyond three-dimensional topology into other domains,
both inside and outside mathematics proper. One initiative is to analyze the
space of branched polymers, an idealized theory that exhibits some interesting
and unexpected topological phenomena. We hope the idealized topological theory
will ultimately contribute to understanding real molecules. Another initiatives
in this project involve the geometry of the space of all possible finite groups.
Finite groups are pervasive throughout mathematics and science as descriptors of
the symmetries both visible and hidden that shape our world. The predominant
(and powerful) approach to finite groups is through tools of algebra and
representation theory. We will investigate the geometry of finite groups to
elucidate phenomena that are not readily seen from the algebraic point of view.