* 0910250
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Predicting community response to N-enrichment using plant traits
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Katharine Suding, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,950.00

Human activities, including the use of fossil fuels, have increased the amount
of available nitrogen globally. This increased nitrogen availability can alter
plant communities and lead to decreased plant species diversity. One challenge
to understanding the impacts of nitrogen enrichment is that communities exhibit
a wide range of responses. Why do some communities respond strongly while others
do not, and can we identify factors that indicate which communities are most
vulnerable? This project will test whether plant traits associated with nitrogen
use (e.g., specific leaf area, leaf carbon to nitrogen ratios, and leaf nitrogen
to phosphorus ratios) can help to understand ecological responses to nitrogen
enrichment. It will address two questions: 1) does nitrogen enrichment cause a
shift toward species with certain traits, and 2) are there stronger diversity
declines in communities composed of species with certain traits and/or with a
narrower range of traits prior to enrichment? Encompassing 260 species in 35
nitrogen fertilization experiments in 10 habitats across the United States, the
research will quantify relationships among leaf traits and changes in species
composition due to nitrogen enrichment. This research will be the first to use
large-scale, multisystem variation in plant traits to predict the impacts of
nitrogen enrichment. &lt;br/&gt;This project will support the research of a
doctoral student. Data will be made publicly available for further studies and
educational opportunities, and an interactive website will be created to help
high school students visualize nitrogen enrichment threats in different
communities.