* 0910670
* TC:Large:Collaborative Research:Combininig Foundational and Lightweight Formal Methods to Build Certifiably Dependable Software
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 580,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
combining foundational and lightweight formal&lt;br/&gt;methods to verify the
safety, security, and dependability of&lt;br/&gt;large-scale software systems.
Foundational approaches (to formal&lt;br/&gt;methods) emphasize expressiveness
and generality, but they have not&lt;br/&gt;been successfully scaled to large-
scale systems. Lightweight&lt;br/&gt;approaches emphasize automation and
scalability, but they are less&lt;br/&gt;effective on low-level programs and on
providing explicit proof&lt;br/&gt;witness. The PIs are developing new high-
level and low-level&lt;br/&gt;lightweight methods and adapting them into various
foundational&lt;br/&gt;verification systems. More specifically, at the high
level, the PIs&lt;br/&gt;are developing lightweight dependent-type systems
and&lt;br/&gt;separation-logic shape analysis, and connecting current methods
such as&lt;br/&gt;conventional type systems, slicing analysis, and flow
analysis; at the&lt;br/&gt;low level, the PIs are designing specialized provers
and decision&lt;br/&gt;procedures to verify low-level programs and to support
certified&lt;br/&gt;linking of heterogeneous components. If successful, this
research will&lt;br/&gt;dramatically improve the scalability of foundational
verification&lt;br/&gt;systems and provide new powerful technologies for
building trustworthy&lt;br/&gt;software systems. Combining lightweight and
foundational approaches&lt;br/&gt;also provides a common thread that will pull
different verification&lt;br/&gt;communities together and unify them into a
single framework