* 0910640
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research: Widescale Computer-Mediated Communication in Crisis Response: Roles, Trust &amp; Accuracy in the Social Distribution of Information
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Gloria Mark, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 479,270.00

Information and communication technology (ICT) promises to help reduce impacts
of large-scale disruptions from natural hazards, pandemics, and terrorist
threat. This research focuses on a critical aspect of large-scale emergency
response -- the needs and roles of members of the public. By viewing the
citizenry as a powerful, self-organizing, and collectively intelligent force,
ICT can play a transformational role in crisis situations. This view of a civil
society augmented by ICT is based on socio-behavioral knowledge about how people
behave in crisis, rather than on simplified and mythical portrayals. With a
critical reframing of emergency response as a socially-distributed information
system, the project aims to leverage the knowledge of members of the public
through reuse of publicly available computer mediated communications (CMCs)
(e.g., community, mapping, and social networking sites; blogs; Twitter). The
project will study and integrate that heterogeneous information and -- with
techniques of information extraction through natural language processing as well
as trust and reputation modeling -- add meta-information to help users assess
context, validity, source, credibility, and timeliness to make the best
decisions for their highly localized, changing conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research addresses matters
of policy, practice and technological innovation, responding directly to needs
identified in national policy statements, including Grand Challenge #1 of the
National Science and Technology Council's Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction,
which calls for the provision of "hazard and disaster information where and when
it is needed" (SDR, 2005). At-risk populations are disproportionately affected
by crises; the results of this research could mitigate the impacts on these
communities. The research is also inclusive of people across different
cultures/ethnic groups within the U.S. and from different countries. The project
broadens the future STEM workforce, since socio-technical and practical
orientations to computational research attract women to study STEM disciplines.
The research contributions include cyberinfrastructure-aware applications,
techniques, and services built from empirical knowledge of the social structures
that produce crisis data.