* 0910026
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biological Responses to Climate Change: Physiological and Community-level Responses to the Miocene Climate Optimum (Early Miocene Astoria Formation, Oregon)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Susan Kidwell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 13,995.00

The processes and drivers of biotic responses to climate changes are poorly
understood, especially in coastal oceans, even though it is well documented that
organisms respond to environmental change. Identifying how organisms respond,
why they respond, and to which environmental stressor(s) they are responding is
integral to understanding the effects of future global warming on the modern
biota, informing conservation efforts, and sustaining economically important
fisheries. This study examines the role of temperature, productivity, and other
environmental factors in the distribution, abundance, and physiological health
of marine benthic organisms, and will directly test the role of physiological
limits in determining community composition. This study will use a fossil record
from the Early Miocene (~20-18 million-years-ago) to evaluate biotic responses
to a well-documented global warming of ~4 degrees C. Benthic community change
will be evaluated by tracking the relative abundance of species and changes in
bivalve health will be tracked via changes in shell growth rates. Geochemical
proxies, derived from molluscan and foraminiferal shells, will be used to
reconstruct regional environmental changes and will allow determination of which
components of climate are most responsible for the biological changes. Because
this study utilizes a fossil record, the effects of climate change can be
assessed over longer time scales than within modern ecology and without
confounding anthropogenic factors such as pollution, eutrophication, or fishing.
Undergraduate students will participate in field and laboratory components, with
the option of independent research. A field trip guide with a "virtual"
component will be generated to expose middle school through college students to
paleobiological approaches to climate sciences. The University of Chicago
biosciences outreach program provides a further avenue to disseminate scientific
research to low-income, minority-dominated schools.