* 0910666
* Collaborative Research: Biotic alteration of soil hydrologic properties and feedback with vegetation dynamics in water limited ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Troch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 139,417.00

Collaborative research: Biotic alteration of soil hydrologic properties and
feedback with vegetation dynamics in water limited ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;Murugesu
Sivapalan, Praveen Kumar, Kathleen Lohse, Peter Troch, Enrique Vivoni and Suresh
Rao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneity of soil
properties and associated structure exert major controls on the storage and
&amp;#64258;uxes of water through the surface soils and provide habitat and
resources for life in the critical zone - that part of the terrestrial biosphere
extending from the bottom of the root zone to the top of the canopy. Also, soil
structure and properties are not &amp;#64257;xed, but are altered dynamically,
in part by the organisms that inhabit it. The importance of soil properties in
controlling resource availability and primary production formed the basis of the
ecological optimality hypothesis (Eagleson, 1978) that biological processes
alter soil properties over time in such a way that increases ecosystem
productivity, e.g., by increasing the permeability of &amp;#64257;ne soils,
and/or increasing the retention capacity of sandy soils. This project aims to
understand the role of biologic alterations of soil hydrologic properties on
soil moisture &amp;#64258;uxes and the feedback with associated vegetation
dynamics in water limited ecosystems. The objective is to test the overarching
hypothesis that alteration of the soil environment by inputs of soil organic
matter and the development of macropores increases the access of plants to water
and nutrients and thus reduces the need for plants to expend carbon to access
those resources. &lt;br/&gt;We will critically examine this hypothesis using a
holistic ecohydrologic modeling framework, and will test model predictions of
soil properties with observed &amp;#64257;eld measurements in New Mexico and
Arizona. The collection of chosen &amp;#64257;eld sites, especially in Arizona,
pairs granitic and schist-underlain catchments at three elevations representing
desert shrub, oak woodland and ponderosa pine forest. Speci&amp;#64257;cally, we
will 1) develop understanding of biologically mediated alteration of soil
properties in a small New Mexico watershed to establish a foundation for the
interaction of ecohydrologic processes, 2) then incorporate biotic effects of
soil properties into the CRS canopy-root-system model being developed as part of
another NSF project (ATM 06-28687, PI Praveen Kumar), which has been validated
in a number of humid sites, and which we now will validate using data from arid
sites, including the New Mexico site, 3) generate predictions of hydrologic
fluxes, vegetation dynamics and soil properties based on appropriate climate
forcing and the new understanding gained, 4) validate these predictions using
soil structure data and hydrologic data taken from sites located along several
climo-topo-sequences, including one in the Catalina Mountains in Arizona, and 5)
develop an interpretive framework using the concept of hydrologic regimes and
available global data sets. The work will be conducted in partnership with the
new NSF-funded Critical Zone Observatory at the University of Arizona
(especially arid-land ecology specialists Travis Huxman, Scott Saleska and David
Breshears). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;Responses to Comments of Reviewer and Panel Summaries&lt;br/&gt;1.
Sampling strategy: We appreciate the comments of the reviewers about the lack of
details on the field sampling. The co-PIs Peter Troch and Kathleen Lohse have a
history of collaborating with pedologist Dr Craig Rassmussen of the University
of Arizona, who has considerable experience in soil sampling and analysis in
these arid systems. We will collaborate with Dr Rasmussen to design a
comprehensive field sampling program as one of the first steps in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;2. Adequacy of the 1-D CRS model: We accept that
3-dimensional spatial patterns are very prominent and very important in arid
soil and ecosystems. Hydrologically, lateral redistribution in these
environments occurs mainly on the surface, driven by spatially variable soil
properties and topography. However, once the soil is wetted, unsaturated zone
fluxes are generally vertical, with little lateral redistribution, except
through lateral roots. By separately modeling under-canopy and between-canopy
patches on the landscape, while accounting for the surface redistribution
effects on infiltration, we believe it will be possible to accurately capture
the relevant hydrologic fluxes using the 1-D model.&lt;br/&gt;3. Overlap with
funded project ATM 06-28687 (PI Praveen Kumar): There is indeed an overlap with
this ongoing project. The only overlap is however the use of the 1-D CRS model
that has been developed as part of that project. However, due to the crucial
role of this comprehensive 1-D coupled model of water, energy, carbon and
nutrients, this overlap is inevitable and highly useful. As part of the
previously funded project the model has been validated using flux data from
Illinois, Duke Forest, and the Amazon. What remains is to implement and validate
this model, and any needed refinements, using data from arid sites, including in
New Mexico and Arizona. This will be done as part of the new
project.&lt;br/&gt;4. On separating the effects of differing microclimates on
the north and south-facing hillslopes at the New Mexico site from species
effects: Our aim is not to consider these hillslopes as different 'treatments'
whose interaction with the soils can be compared. If we were, then clearly the
different radiation inputs would be a confounding factor. However, we see an
opportunity here: we consider that the vegetation and soils on the two
hillslopes are different as a result of the different microclimates. In this
broader perspective, we can therefore compare how their microclimates may have
led to the dominance of contrasting vegetation types and strategies and their
combined effect on consequent soil development.&lt;br/&gt;5. Vivoni letter of
support: we could not obtain this letter of support at the time of application
because Dr Vivoni was in the middle of a move from New Mexico Tech to Arizona
State University. We will endeavor to obtain this letter from him, which we will
be forwarding to you in the next few
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;