* 0910168
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Nonlinear effects of nutrient loading on stream nutrient processing:   Are they driven by shifts in biofilm community dynamics?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Colden Baxter, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* timothy kratz
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,736.00

Nutrient loading to streams from adjacent land surfaces can either be retained
by the stream organisms or exported downstream. This research will investigate
how land use influences nutrient removal by the thin mats of algae and microbes
that cover most substrates in streams (biofilms). Understanding how changes in
biofilm composition can affect nutrient removal is essential as land use change
continues to increase worldwide. Studies have often focused on the consequences
of altering availability of a single resource such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus
(P), or carbon. Many changes in land use result in changes in the availability
of more than one resource, thus, there is a need to better understand the
potential interactions of simultaneously varying multiple resources on biofilm
community composition. Experiments supported by this award will quantify the
changes that occur in the composition and function of stream biofilm in response
to varied resource gradients by manipulating N+P and carbon concentrations in
experimental chambers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As landscapes are increasingly
impacted by agriculture, urbanization, and industrialization, understanding the
response of stream ecosystems to nutrient loading will help predict nutrient
retention and export capacity of surface waters. This research will identify how
biofilm community interactions alter nutrient cycling and inform land managers
of potential consequences of changes in land use. &lt;br/&gt;