* 0910657
* Filament Dynamics in Three-Dimensional Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Oliver Steinbock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2013
* USD 368,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Oliver Steinbock of Florida State University
(FSU), together with his student researchers, will investigate the dynamics of
three-dimensional wave patterns in reacting chemical systems. These complex
patterns arise solely from the interplay of local reactions and diffusion but do
not involve fluid motion. The particular focus is on scroll waves which are
rotating three-dimensional spirals. These structures exist in a variety of
excitable systems, such as autocatalytic chemical reactions, aggregating slime
mold colonies, neuronal tissue and the human heart. In the latter system, they
possibly cause dangerous cardiac arrhythmias and fibrillation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; Many aspects of scroll wave dynamics can be explained in terms of
the motion of the one-dimensional space curves (or "filaments") around which
they rotate. This motion depends strongly on the local filament curvature and
gradients in rotation phase. While today most of these factors are understood,
little is known regarding the interaction of filaments with other filaments,
high-frequency wave patterns, and unexcitable obstacles. The development of a
comprehensive understanding of these types of interactions defines the primary
intellectual merit of the proposed research. Experiments will employ the
Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction and use detection techniques such as optical
tomography. Experimental results will be compared to numerical simulations of
semi-quantitative and general kinematic models.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; In
particular, scroll wave pinning to and unpinning from unexcitable obstacles has
a profound broader impact because dangerous reentrant waves in the human heart
potentially attach to anatomical and pathological defects. In this context, the
project will yield fundamental insights into the occurrence of "sudden cardiac
death" which kills more than 300,000 people per year in the US alone. Moreover,
our project will further the education of several undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students. Professor Steinbock will also continue his commitment to
involve underrepresented groups and participate in programs that aim to increase
their leadership roles in research and academia. In addition, his team will
develop and implement novel outreach activities to communicate key results to
the public FSU's Global Educational Outreach Program, PodCasts, popular websites
such as YouTube, and local activities such as FSU's Honors Program and the
"Saturday Morning Physics" series.