* 0910778
* RI: Large: Collaborative Research: Richer Representations for Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Kathleen McKeown, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2014
* USD 559,999.00

Research in machine translation of human languages has made substantial progress
recently, and surface patterns gleaned automatically from online bilingual texts
work remarkably well for some language pairs. However, for many language pairs,
the output of even the best systems is garbled, ungrammatical, and difficult to
interpret. Chinese-to-English systems need particular improvement, despite the
importance of this language pair, while English-to-Chinese translation, equally
important for communication between individuals, is rarely studied. This project
develops methods for automatically learning correspondences between Chinese and
English at a semantic rather than surface level, allowing machine translation to
benefit from recent work in semantic analysis of text and natural language
&lt;br/&gt;generation. One part of this work determines what types of semantic
&lt;br/&gt;analysis of source language sentences can best inform a translation
system, focusing on analyzing dropped arguments, co-reference links, and
discourse relations between clauses. These linguistic phenomena must generally
be made more explicit when translating from Chinese to English. A second part of
the work integrates natural language generation into statistical machine
translation, leveraging generation technology to determine sentence boundaries,
ordering of constituents, and production of function words that translation
systems tend to get wrong. A third part develops and compares algorithms for
training and decoding machine translation models defined on semantic
representations. All of this research exploits newly-developed linguistic
resources for semantic analysis of both Chinese and English.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate benefits of improved machine translation
technology are easier access to information and easier communication between
individuals. This in turn leads to increased opportunities for trade, as well as
better understanding between cultures. This project's systems for both Chinese-
to-English and English-to-Chinese are developed with the expectation that the
approaches will be applied to other language pairs in the future.