* 0910310
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Functional Genetics and Parasite Community Ecology in a Keystone Species
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2014
* Michael Antolin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,976.00

Wildlife face ever-increasing threats from emerging pathogens, many of which
also cause disease in humans. Genetic diversity plays a central role in
buffering populations against the effects of parasites and pathogens. The
ability to isolate genes related directly to disease susceptibility and
understanding how those genes evolve is important for designing successful and
cost-effective conservation programs. The vast majority of such studies in
wildlife have focused on the relationship between a single pathogen and one or
two well-studied immune system genes. This project goes beyond the single-
pathogen single-gene approach by investigating the relationship between
diversity in six immune system genes and the entire parasite community of black-
tailed prairie dogs. This research will also provide the first comprehensive
survey of black-tailed prairie dog parasites on the Shortgrass Steppe Long Term
Ecological Research site, and will determine if black-tailed prairie dogs are a
host for West Nile virus.

Prairie dogs are an important component of North American grasslands, but have
declined throughout their range, primarily because of the introduced pathogen
Yersinia pestis, which causes plague. Given the social behavior of prairie dogs,
they are an excellent model for studying transmission and evolution of
resistance for disease like plague. In addition to advancing the understanding
of disease resistance, this project will generate important information for
researchers and managers, and provide one graduate student and over 50
undergraduate students with training in laboratory and field research methods.