* 0910012
* Dissertation Research:   Conservative nitrogen cycling in wet tropical forests?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Alan Townsend, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2011
* USD 14,990.00

Nitrogen is one of life's critical building blocks; all life depends on it. In
many ecosystems, nitrogen limits plant growth, but in a large number of tropical
forests, it appears to be present in relative excess of what life demands. This
excess can cause large losses of nitrogen from tropical forests in forms that
affect climate, atmospheric chemistry, and the health and function of aquatic
ecosystems downstream. We are beginning to learn that, contrary to our initial
expectations, the wettest of tropical forests may function somewhat differently;
despite their high rainfall, which can promote high nitrogen losses, some wet
tropical forests seem to show nitrogen losses far lower than their drier
counterparts. In the Costa Rican forests that will be studied in this project,
multiple measures of the nitrogen cycle suggest that nitrogen losses are low;
despite abundant evidence from previous work showing that phosphorus is the most
important nutrient control here (and thus that nitrogen ought to exist in
relative excess). To address this paradox, this project will apply an isotopic
nitrogen label (15N) to measure gross rates of nitrogen transformations; this
technique provides a useful window into how much nitrogen cycles in an
ecosystem, how fast, and if nitrogen losses are truly likely to be low here
throughout the year. Additionally, measuring stable isotopic ratios of nitrogen
will be used to measure two microbial processes that are likely important in
controlling the ultimate fate of nitrogen in this forest; denitrification and
dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA). The former can be a key
mechanism for losing nitrogen from an ecosystem, as well as for producing the
powerful greenhouse gas nitrous oxide; the latter can be a way to help keep
highly mobile nitrate ions from leaving an ecosystem and ending up in downstream
aquatic environments.

This proposal addresses a fundamental question regarding nitrogen cycling and
nutrient limitation in tropical forests. The work is important for several
reasons. First, tropical forests appear to be a major source of the greenhouse
gas nitrous oxide; this work will directly address links between a key climate
variable (rainfall) and the potential for wet tropical forests to produce this
gas. In addition, beyond the threats of climate change, tropical forests are
threatened by high rates of land conversion and rapid increases in nitrogen
deposition. Given that tropical forests are both a cradle for much of earth's
biodiversity and a provider of multiple ecosystem services, this work has direct
societal relevance. Scientists? ability to predict how ecosystems may respond to
these perturbations depends on their understanding of processes controlling
ecosystem function in relatively undisturbed forests. Finally, the wettest of
tropical forests are both understudied and yet some of our best hopes for larger
scale conservation efforts. This project will enhance our understanding of how
these forests function at a basic nutritional level, a key component of our
ability to protect and manage them most effectively in a rapidly changing world.