* 0910355
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Effects of Atmospheric Pollution on High Elevation Communities in the Southern Appalachians
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Theodore Simons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2010
* USD 14,940.00

Air pollution remains high in eastern U.S. forests and is considered a critical
environmental stress. The goal of this project is to examine the effects of two
atmospheric pollutants, acid precipitation and mercury, on wildlife communities
in the Southern Appalachians. Acid precipitation, in the form of sulfur and
nitrogen deposition, pollutes both aquatic and terrestrial habitats and depletes
calcium from these systems, posing a serious risk to egg production in birds and
shell formation in snails. Great Smoky Mountains National Park receives the
highest acid deposition of any monitored national park in the U.S., and recently
mercury has been identified as an additional serious pollutant to the area. This
project is focused on understanding the effects of acid deposition and
subsequent calcium loss on both songbird and snail populations and determining
the avian species and habitats most at risk of mercury contamination. Chemical
analyses will be performed on feathers from multiple species to determine if
mercury contamination in birds is directly related to their source of food, thus
helping to determine the mechanisms of contamination. Numerous organizations are
involved in this work as collaborators, public outreach is planned through talks
and demonstrations, and high school, undergraduate, and international biologists
will be trained in ecological research methods. This research addresses two
critical environmental problems with results applicable across a broad
geographic range, and has significantly increased interest in pollution-related
research in the Southern Appalachians.