* 0910432
* Shrine Worship among the Incas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Brian Bauer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 95,626.00

Soon after the Spanish invasion of Peru (AD 1531) the ruling Inca, Manco Inca,
fled into a mountainous region called Vilcabamba, some 120 miles to the
northwest of Cuzco. He first established a government-in-exile in the town of
Vitcos and enlarged the local shrine called Yurak Rumi. From there he built a
new capital city called Vilcabamba, in an even more inaccessible and
inhospitable area, with many temples and shrines. From this remote political and
religious stronghold, the Manco Inca and his sons waged a 40 year war of
resistance against the growing power and influence of Spaniards. During this
prolonged period of cultural contact and conflict, the Incas continued to
worship their deities yet they also allowed Christian missionaries into the
Vilcabamba region as part of peace negotiations with the King of Spain.
Indigenous resistance to the Spanish Crown ended in 1572, after a massive
Spanish raid into region, the burning of Vilcabamba and its shrine complexes,
and the capture and execution of the last royal Inca.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
last frontier of Inca rule, the Vilcabamba region is critically important in
understanding the religious and political institutions of the Inca and how they
were affected by European contact. Nevertheless, there have been few
archaeological projects to focus on its major cities (Vitcos and Vilcabamba) and
its regional shrine complex (Yurak Rumi and the Vilcabamba shrines). Current
knowledge of the religious and political activities that occurred in the region
is based almost exclusively on the 16th century writings of Early Colonial
priests and soldiers, many of whom were personally involved in fighting against
the indigenous peoples and religions. Since these individuals were more intent
on destroying than on recording, their accounts record only limited information
about how the cities were organized and the shrines
functioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, conducted under the direction of
Brian S. Bauer and supported by the National Science Foundation, represents the
first large scale, US supported project in the Vilcabamba region. The research
team will be composed of American and Peruvian archaeologists as well as post-
graduate students. The research will include two field seasons of archaeological
work in the Vilcabamba region and extensive historic research with documents
collected from Peru and Spain. The archaeological field work (2010 and 2011)
will include the mapping of important sites and shrines as well as excavations
within structures, selected open spaces, and trash middens. It will also include
architectural studies of the standing ruins and laboratory analysis of the
artifacts recovered. The project will yield insights into the political and
religious activities that occurred in the region during the final years of the
Inca empire. Furthermore, since the region was occupied well into the Early
Colonial Period the project will also provide information on the nature of
European-American relations during this time of cultural transformation.