* 0910483
* TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Trustworthy Virtual Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Reiter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2013
* USD 574,477.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal#: 0910767
&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Proposal #s: 0909980, 0910483, 0910653
&lt;br/&gt;Title: TC: Large: Collaborative Research: Trustworthy Virtual
&lt;br/&gt;Cloud Computing &lt;br/&gt;PIs: Peng Ning, Xuxian Jiang, and Mladen
Vouk &lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual cloud computing is
emerging as a promising solution to IT &lt;br/&gt;management to both ease the
provisioning and administration of complex &lt;br/&gt;hardware and software
systems and reduce the operational costs. With the industry?s continuous
investment (e.g., Amazon Elastic Cloud Computing, IBM Blue Cloud), virtual cloud
computing is likely to be a major component of the future IT solution, which
will have significant impact on almost all sectors of society. The
trustworthiness of virtual cloud computing is thus critical to the well-being of
all organizations or individuals that will rely on virtual cloud computing for
their IT solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions trustworthy
virtual cloud computing and investigates fundamental research issues leading to
this vision. Central to this vision is a new security architecture, which
harnesses new opportunities and capabilities such as built-in out-of-band system
&lt;br/&gt;access, processor and hardware support for trusted computing, and
out-of-box examination by hypervisors. This project focuses on key research
issues following this security architecture, including new security services
that enhance the trustworthiness of virtual cloud computing, protection of
management infrastructure against malicious workloads, and protection of hosted
workloads from potentially malicious management infrastructure. The research
will enable the adoption of virtual cloud computing for critical IT management
in industry and government organizations. This project will involve both
graduate and undergraduate students, and will produce open source software and
tools, which will be made available to the public.