* 0910708
* Modeling recent behavior of Mt. St. Helens: extrusion dynamics, deformation, and seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2011
* USD 144,573.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Explanation: It is
generally believed that with adequate monitoring it is possible to detect
premonitory signals prior to volcanic eruptions. Eruptions are often preceded by
swarms of earthquakes and bulging of the volcano as magma rises from the earth?s
mantle into the crust. However, the length of the period of` ?unrest? can vary
greatly, and eruptions can be either explosive or passive (effusive). Major
goals of volcano science are to provide more accurate forecasts of future
behavior based on physical and chemical models of the eruptive process combined
with seismic and geodetic monitoring. The 2004-08 eruption of Mount St. Helens
provides a unique opportunity to develop such methods. This episode erupted
magma with essentially the same chemical composition as the devastating 1980
eruption; however this eruption was very gas poor and thus non-explosive. The
2004 onset was preceded by only a few days of seismic activity and no detectable
ground deformation. We will develop rigorous physical and chemical based models
of the eruption and test these against observed seismic and Global Positioning
System (GPS) measurements of ground deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: We will develop physically-based models of magma chambers and
conduits that are coupled to the elastic surroundings. As magma ascends the
decrease in pressure results in volatile exsolution. This decreases magma
density, but increases viscosity and compressibility. Exsolution also promotes
microlite crystallization; at roughly 1 km depth at MSH the magma becomes
essentially a solid plug, the upward motion of which is resisted by frictional
sliding on its margins. Changes in chamber pressure as well as shear and normal
tractions on the conduit walls are used to predict surface deformation, which
can be compared to GPS data. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) inversions will be
used to determine posterior probability distributions for magma chamber depth,
shape, volume, initial overpressure, and recharge, given the GPS data and
estimates of extrusion volume. We will model the cessation of the eruption in
January of 2008, and surface deformation data since that time, to better
constrain the rate of recharge into the crustal magma chamber. We will determine
whether rate and state dependent friction effects on the boundary of the shallow
magma plug can explain both the onset of the eruption ? increasing pressure
overcomes frictional resistance which then weakens with sliding ? and also the
rapid early deflation observed at the one continuous GPS site operating at the
eruption onset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will also test possible explanations of
cyclic ground tilt observed in the crater of Mount St. Helens. Preliminary
analysis suggests that the tilts may be due to shear on the margin of the plug
near the bend in the conduit, where ascending magma is redirected to the south
beneath the 1980?s lava dome before extruding onto the surface. We suggest that
careful analysis of accurately located earthquakes associated with the tilts
will provide important clues to the processes controlling both seismogenesis and
extrusion. For example, variations in the depths of shallow earthquakes during
tilt events might point toward migrating slip on the margin of the plug.