* 0910165
* DC: Large: Collaborative Research:  Mining a Million Scanned Books: Linguistic and Structure Analysis,  Fast Expanded Search, and Improved OCR
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gregory Crane, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 297,344.00

The Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval at UMass Amherst, the Perseus
Digital Library Project at Tufts, and the Internet Archive are investigating
large-scale information extraction and retrieval technologies for digitized book
collections. To provide effective analysis and search for scholars and the
general public, and to handle the diversity and scale of these collections, this
project focuses on improvements in seven interlocking technologies: improved OCR
accuracy through word spotting, creating probabilistic models using joint
distributions of features, and building topic-specific language models across
documents; structural metadata extraction, to mine headers, chapters, tables of
contents, and indices; linguistic analysis and information extraction, to
perform syntactic analysis and entity extraction on noisy OCR output; inferred
document relational structure, to mine citations, quotations, translations, and
paraphrases; latent topic modeling through time, to improve language modeling
for OCR and retrieval, and to track the spread of ideas across periods and
genres; query expansion for relevance models, to improve relevance in
information retrieval by offline pre-processing of document comparisons; and
interfaces for exploratory data analysis, to provide users of the document
collection with efficient tools to update complex models of important entities,
events, topics, and linguistic features. When applied across large corpora,
these technologies reinforce each other: improved topic modeling enables more
targeted language models for OCR; extracting structural metadata improves
citation analysis; and entity extraction improves topic modeling and query
expansion.The testbed for this project is the growing corpus of over one million
open-access books from the Internet Archive.