* 0910617
* RUI: Hydroperoxide photochemistry under solar wavelengths at dawn and dusk
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Shizuka Hsieh, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 06/30/2013
* USD 198,765.00

This award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, supports a project by Dr. Shizuka Hsieh and her students
at Smith College, an undergraduate liberal arts college for women. The aim is to
quantify the photochemistry of organic hydroperoxides, atmospheric molecules
that are potential sources and sinks of radicals, at solar wavelengths available
at dawn and at dusk. For the near-IR and visible wavelengths that excite high
vibrational states, existing laser-based and computational tools enable
characterization of the initial absorption process, the nature of the
vibrational states, and any subsequent radical formation. New equipment will
extend capabilities to quantifying radical production at near-UV wavelengths.
Target molecules are atmospheric hydroperoxides for which little is currently
known: ethyl, propyl, and fluorinated methyl hydroperoxides. Two to four
undergraduates at a time will be co-workers on this project, and a priority will
be recruiting students from under-represented groups through the AEMES
(Achieving Excellence in Math, Engineering, and Science) and Early Mentoring
programs at Smith.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the photochemistry of these
organic hydroperoxides will contribute to the larger body of data relevant for
atmospheric studies, in particular predictions of how these molecules contribute
to hydroxyl radical formation. The project is designed so undergraduate women
gain experience with laser-based experiments and an appreciation of how
fundamental photochemistry, spectroscopy, and quantum mechanics are essential to
modeling and understanding atmospheric processes.