* 0910188
* Empirical Research: Emerging Research: Robust and Efficient Learning: Modeling and Remediating Students' Domain Knowledge
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ryan Baker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,066,102.00

This project employs an intelligent learning environment called the Genetics
Cognitive Tutor to explore student learning via abductive problem solving in
undergraduate genetics courses. Problem solving is an essential learning
activity across STEM domains, but there is a well-documented risk that students
can develop superficial knowledge based on surface features of the problem
situation, instead of a deeper conceptual understanding. The key hypotheses of
this project are that shallow reasoning emerges because students lack the
conceptual grounding to engage in deep reasoning, and that this shallow
reasoning can be detected during problem solving and remediated as soon as it
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;This empirical research project has two chief goals to promote
deeper reasoning in genetics problem solving. First, the project is developing
new on-line Conceptually Grounded Learning Activities to better prepare students
for deeper learning in subsequent problem solving. Second, the project employs
cognitive modeling and machine learning techniques to develop a model for
tracing student knowledge that distinguishes between superficial and deep
reasoning in real time during problem solving. This permits the Cognitive Tutor
to intervene appropriately as superficial reasoning occurs, by engaging students
in reasoning directly about underlying domain concepts. The new learning
activities and knowledge tracing technique are being evaluated and refined in
laboratory studies in universities where genetics is taught, and expanded to
authentic classroom-based settings at four diverse universities that vary by
institutional types across four dimensions: public vs. private; national vs.
regional; student academic proficiency; and ethnic diversity. The dependent
measures of deep vs. superficial reasoning include response time, accuracy and
response history in the tutor, and post-test measures of retention, transfer,
and preparation for future learning.&lt;br/&gt;This research targets a critical
need in undergraduate biology education. Genetics is a linchpin of biology
instruction, both because it is a fundamental, unifying theme of biology, and
because it is viewed by students and instructors as one of the most challenging
topics in biology. The research will directly inform improvements in intelligent
learning environments, such as the Genetics Cognitive Tutor, to promote deeper
reasoning in genetics problem solving. But shallow reasoning is a challenge
across STEM domains and across other types of learning activities. The knowledge
developed in this project should lead directly to design guidelines for
intelligent problem-solving environments that support conceptually-grounded
reasoning in other STEM domains. The lessons learned can also guide researchers
in creating shallow-reasoning detectors in a broad range of on-line learning
environments, and can provide guidelines for sequencing different types of
learning activities in non-computerized learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;