* 0910326
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Effects of Genetic Diversity on Invasive Population Success
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,988.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recent research suggests that genetic variation among individuals of
the same species is an important form of biodiversity that can provide
ecological services such as increasing plant biomass production and regulating
nutrient cycles. However, the mechanisms responsible for these effects have been
largely unexplored. This research project focuses on two mechanisms by which
genetic diversity can affect ecological functions. First, it will test the
complementarity hypothesis, which predicts that trait differences among
individual genotypes will decrease competition and increase resource
partitioning. Second, it will test the sampling effects hypothesis, which
predicts that increased genetic diversity increases the chance a system contains
a highly functioning or productive genotype. To assess the relative importance
of these mechanisms, the genetic diversity of populations of the invasive grass,
Avena barbata, will be directly manipulated and grown in differing resource
environments. Single genotype populations will be compared to genetic mixtures
to assess which mechanisms drive positive diversity effects. The experiment will
be conducted for multiple generations to assess how these ecological mechanisms
interact with evolutionary selection over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to a broader literature on mechanisms by which genetic
diversity can contribute to population performance and function over both
ecological and evolutionary timescales. It will also elucidate processes driving
and maintaining species invasions, enhancing the development of methods to
prevent potential species invasions and manage existing invasive populations.
Furthermore, this research will have educational impacts through public talks
and weekly high school classroom involvement in a NSF GK-12 Communicating
Science Fellowship. Undergraduate researchers will be actively mentored in
associated independent research projects. This project will enhance the research
training of a doctoral student.