* 0910394
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological diversification in the Eriogonum clade (Polygonaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* J. Travis Columbus, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 12,614.00

The buckwheats and relatives (Family Polygonaceae) are a group of more than 300
flowering plant species distributed mainly in western North America. Species can
be vines, shrubs, or small trees, and grow in diverse habitats, from beaches to
alpine woodlands. Evolutionary relationships of buckwheats are poorly known,
leading to confusing classification of these plants. This confusion hinders
understanding of how traits have evolved. The researchers will use DNA sequence
data to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships in the buckwheats, improve
the classification, and better understand how the group evolved. This last goal
involves linking the diverse morphologies to the evolutionary history and
habitats of various species of buckwheats. Computer-based geographic information
systems help correlate precise habitat conditions and species distributions with
vegetative traits in order to identify morphological traits of the plants that
may have evolved in response to particular
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include additional
training for the co-PI (a female graduate student), national and international
scientific collaborations, training opportunities for undergraduate students and
the general public, and dissemination of the scientific findings. The co-PI is
being trained in plant systematics (the study of plant diversity), including
field and laboratory techniques and analytical methods, and collaborates with
other scientists in California for advice and plant samples. Training will
include undergraduates as field assistants and will involve the general public
through a hands-on workshop on the identification of buckwheats. Data collected
in the study will be deposited in online databases for access by other
researchers. Findings of the study will be published in peer-reviewed journals,
presented at scientific meetings, and made available online at web sites such as
the Tree of Life (www.tolweb.org). In addition, this research will be important
to scientists who are studying the evolution of morphologically diverse groups
of organisms occupying a wide range of habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;