* 0910825
* X-ray Scattering Studies of Interfaces Between Two Immiscible Electrolyte Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Petr Vanysek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2012
* USD 560,480.00

Professor Mark L. Schlossman of the University of Illinois at Chicago and
Professor Petr Vanysek of Northern Illinois University are supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct
X-ray scattering studies on interfaces between immiscible electrolyte solutions.
The goals of the proposed research is to systematically characterize the
distribution of ions across interfaces between two immiscible electrolyte
solutions, and to explore the structural dependence of protein-lipid binding at
lipid monolayers adsorbed to liquid-liquid interfaces. The PIs will combine
X-ray surface scattering with in situ electrochemical measurements to achieve
these goals. The proposed work will advance our understanding of interfacial
structure of liquid/liquid systems, and test fundamental assumptions underlying
analytical and computational studies of the liquid/liquid interface. This
research is also expected to advance our understanding of the structure-function
relationship of membrane proteins that play a fundamental role in cell signaling
and trafficking. Graduate and undergraduate students as well as post-doctoral
associates will be trained in the use of X-ray scattering methods to solve
electrochemical problems at the liquid/liquid interface, and will be exposed to
a broad range of research disciplines.