* 0910086
* Dissertation Research:   How does biodiversity influence resource subsidy flux?  A test with freshwater mussels and aquatic-terrestrial linkages
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Daniel Allen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 06/30/2012
* USD 14,996.00

Species loss, habitat alteration, and climate change are causing dramatic
changes &lt;br/&gt;in the diversity and function of ecosystems. This project
asks how the number of species present influences the transfer of nutrients and
energy among organisms. Previous experiments suggest that mussels provide
nitrogen to streams during summer low-flow seasons. Increased nitrogen
availability can trigger increases in the abundance of algae and, subsequently,
of grazing aquatic insects. Importantly, when more species of mussels are
present this transfer of nitrogen is enhanced, suggesting that the diversity of
mussel assemblages increases the quantity of nutrient subsidies. Effects of
nitrogen subsidies may extend beyond the stream itself, as adult aquatic insects
are an important food source for terrestrial predators in riparian forests.
Experiments will be conducted using freshwater mussels to investigate how the
diversity of freshwater mussel assemblages influences the rate at which the
mussel community makes nutrients available to the stream ecosystem and to
terrestrial predators. Field and laboratory experiments will be used to see if
the emergence rates of adult aquatic insects and the abundance of riparian
spiders increase when more mussel species are present. Stable nitrogen isotopes
will be used to quantify nutrient subsidies and determine how mussel-derived
nutrient subsidies move through stream and riparian food webs. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to our understanding of the relationship between
biodiversity and ecosystem function, which will ultimately help scientists
predict the consequences of extinctions and climate change on ecosystem
processes. It also will enhance our understanding of the ecological importance
of freshwater mussels, a globally threatened fauna.