* 0910115
* Empirical Research, Emerging Research Strand: A Unified, Cross-domain Approach to Studying Learner Understanding of Emergence
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Sarah Brem, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Heit
* 07/31/2014
* USD 674,180.00

&lt;br/&gt;Brem and team propose to investigate general properties that students
must understand in learning about a specific cross-disciplinary phenomenon ---
emergent systems (vis a vis complex adaptive systems). The proposers argue that
these common properties can be learned, primarily through addressing
misconceptions and areas of learning difficulty, and such knowledge can then be
applied to investigating specific systems that bear these characteristics.
Several of these properties are counterintuitive given that emergent systems are
complex in hierarchy, are irreducible as systems, and novel and unpredictable
(among other things). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the investigator will
use visualizations and face-to-face interviews in iteratively developing,
refining, and validating something of a concept inventory (assessment
instrument) that will define and measure student learning in this area. The
focus will primarily be on undergraduate learning. The team has chosen examples
from geology (erosion), chemistry (the relationship of temperature and pressure
in gases), natural selection (the evolution of mimetic abilities), and
psychology (detecting and avoiding outsiders) as contexts to conduct their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work lie in its
ability to ultimately assist students in overcoming some common and consistent
learning obstacles in their study of disciplinary and interdisciplinary science.
&lt;br/&gt;