* 0910826
* High Energy Routes to Strained Molecules and Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Richard Johnson, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 518,455.00

Professor Johnson and his students will investigate microwave flash pyrolysis
(MFP), a method developed at UNH. The MFP method greatly extends the range of
microwave synthetic chemistry into high temperature regimes; this research will
lead to the discovery of new high-energy chemical reactions and a greater
understanding of microwave-induced chemical reactions on solid surfaces.
Chemical functionalization of graphite, carbon nanotubes and other materials by
MFP methods will also be explored. Diverse aspects of pericyclic reactions will
be studied, using theory to guide experimental studies. Pericyclic reactions
have been commonly applied to make or break molecular rings. In this project,
the novel concept of dehydro pericyclic reactions, which involve unusually
strained and reactive rings, will serve as a basis for the discovery of new
chemical processes. In one additional component of this project, the reactions
of ozone with carbonyl compounds will be investigated. Ozone is a highly
reactive and short-lived substance. Planned research will lead to new
understanding of atmospheric ozone chemistry, and may have applications in
organic synthesis. In a collaborative project with Professor William Bailey at
the University of Connecticut, the PI and his students will create computational
models for carbenoid reactions, probing critical aspects of mechanism and
stereochemistry. New reactions, methods and materials discovered in this work
will have broad applications in organic synthesis and materials science. Planned
research will serve as professional training for graduate and undergraduate
students. In addition to this research, Professor Johnson will develop an
outreach program to help high school teachers enhance their chemistry curriculum
with computer molecular modeling.