* 0910707
* Rotational and translational diffusion near the colloidal glass transition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2013
* USD 248,743.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Weeks and his students from Emory University will
study diffusion near the colloidal glass transition. In regular liquids,
particles and molecules undergo Brownian motion, causing them to both translate
and rotate. For a given particle (or molecule) size and shape, the rates of
these motions have a constant ratio. For example, doubling the viscosity of the
liquid will slow both types of motion by the same factor. However, in
supercooled molecular liquids close to the glass transition, this is not the
case. Indirect measurements suggest that molecules translate faster than they
rotate in these samples. This then suggests that supercooled liquids are not
merely simple liquids with large viscosities, but that diffusion takes place by
fundamentally changed mechanisms.

Professor Weeks will use a laser-scanning confocal microscope to simultaneously
and directly observe the rotational and translational dynamics of rod-like
particles in a colloidal "supercooled fluid". Colloidal suspensions are composed
of micron-sized solid particles in a liquid, and manifest a glass transition as
the particle concentration is increased beyond a critical value. Because they
can be viewed directly, these are ideal systems for studying the mechanisms of
this transition. Confocal microscopy will be used to observe the motion of both
the rod-like particles and the surrounding colloidal particles. Thus, both
translational and rotational motion can be measured simultaneously and directly,
leading to an understanding of how they are related.

The scientific results may help in the design new types of glassy materials,
which could impact technologies such as fiber optics. Professor Weeks will
conduct at least one field trip each year to his laboratory for groups of
primary school students. These students will investigate the properties of
"squishy" materials such as the colloidal pastes used in this project.