* 0910212
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Ecological and Evolutionary Determinants of Disease Distribution in a Natural Host-Pathogen System
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Janis Antonovics, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,972.00

Two keys to developing control and prevention strategies for many of the most
damaging infectious diseases threatening human health, agriculture, and wildlife
conservation are determining and predicting the distribution of pathogens.
Predicting the way infectious diseases will affect populations is greatly helped
by understanding the contributions of both genetic and environmental factors to
disease distribution. The investigators will test the relative importance of
these factors in nature by using the anther-smut disease of alpine plants as a
natural model system. This pathogen is found only at high altitudes across
Europe, despite the abundance of hosts at lower elevations. Field transplants
combined with experimental introduction of the disease will be used to test
differences in its spread at low and high elevations, and to understand the
factors responsible for its restriction to high elevations. The researchers will
be able to test theories of disease spread and distribution with virtually no
risk to commerce, agriculture, or human health. The results will yield key
insights into how host-pathogen interactions affect natural populations, and
will help to inform predictions concerning the spread of existing and emerging
infectious diseases. Furthermore, the study will influence interpretations of
changes in elevational distribution of alpine species, which are very sensitive
indicators of global climate change.

This project provides opportunities for undergraduate students to gain research
experience and academic training. The research will allow expansion of several
ongoing collaborations, particularly with scientists abroad. In addition,
because these experiments are located within a highly-visited public botanic
garden they will continue to contribute to raising public awareness about
disease biology.