* 0910074
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Comparison of direct, indirect and ecosystem engineering effects using earthworms as model ecosystem engineers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Tami Ransom, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard S. Inouye
* 07/31/2011
* USD 13,902.00

Organisms that modify or create habitat are considered ecosystem engineers if
their activity substantially alters the availability of resources to a large
number of other species. For example, dam building by beavers can raise the
local water table and create habitat suitable for wetland, riparian, and aquatic
plants. In addition to modifying habitat, ecosystem engineers are also likely to
be competitors, prey, and/or predators. Experimental manipulations of
earthworms, considered ecosystem engineers in the habitat where the experiments
will be conducted, and salamanders, another common species in the same habitat,
will be used to simultaneously examine the effect on salamanders of habitat
modification by earthworms, the role of earthworms as a food source for
salamanders, and the effect of earthworms as indirect competitors of
salamanders. Consequences of replacing a native species with an invasive species
will be examined by testing both native and non-native earthworm species. The
novelty of this project is that it simultaneously incorporates ecosystem
engineering, direct predatory, and indirect competitive effects within a single
experimental design in a way that the magnitude of the individual effects can be
compared. In addition, the research will further scientific understanding of the
role of ecologically similar native and non-native ecosystem engineers in
ecological communities. This project will provide funding for a PhD student and
facilitate the teaching and training of undergraduate students. The project will
include outreach to high school students and undergraduate students,
demonstrating earthworm extraction methods and using this as a springboard to
explain the history and ubiquity of non-native species in North America.