* 0910493
* BPC-A: Collaborative Research: Alliance between Historically Black Universities and Research Universities for Collaborative Education and Research in Computing Disciplines
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,07/31/2010
* Maureen Biggers, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 07/31/2010
* USD 78,519.00

North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University (NCAT) proposes a
novel, 2-way collaboration between HBCUs and research universities in order to
increase the number of African Americans who obtain graduate degrees and enter
faculty and research careers in computing. Alliance participants include HBCU's
- NCAT, Bennett College, Dillard University, Jackson State University, and
Norfolk State University - and majority, research universities - the University
of Colorado, Georgia Institute of Technology, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University. North Carolina State and the United Negro College Fund
Special Programs will provide consulting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will
have three components. Firstly, it will strengthen undergraduate computing
programs at the HBCUs by changing curriculum and pedagogy to include
collaborative learning environments, discovery-based and hands-on learning. The
Alliance will create research and educational experiences for undergraduates and
graduate students providing authentic learning in the form of design, research,
industry and workshop experiences. The students will be given social, academic,
and career support through peer-, step- and faculty-student mentoring. Secondly,
Alliance activities will institutionalize two-way research opportunities and
teaching partnerships for students and faculty. This will be done with the
development of joint research and teaching, both remotely and through student
and faculty visits and exchanges. Faculty will partner on research teams and
graduate student supervision. Thirdly, the Alliance will support ongoing
research partnerships among faculty members and will provide pathways for HBCU
students to pursue faculty careers after graduation. All of these activities are
based on a unique, dual feeder model that allows some HBCU undergraduates to
pursue Master's study at a research intensive HBCU (NCAT) before going on to
Ph.D. study at a research university. The collaborations developed under this
Alliance will be meaningful, two-way relationships that will be built from the
PIs' experience in facilitating collaborations between research universities and
HBCUs.