* 0910876
* Dynamics of Gas Phase Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Charles Doubleday, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 336,495.00

This work seeks a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of chemical reactions
by computing classical trajectories (the detailed sequence of atomic motions
that occurs as starting materials are transformed into products) using a
combination of quantum mechanics and classical mechanics. Dr. Doubleday will
examine several reaction types: reactions of oxygen atoms with radicals
(unstable odd-electron molecules); reactions of negatively charged ions with
molecules containing the carbonyl group, including ester hydrolysis; studies of
specific vibrational energy requirements in cycloadditions; reactions involving
carbenes (unstable molecules with a divalent carbon atom); and hydrocarbon
rearrangements that involve short-lived biradical intermediates. Atomic oxygen
reactions are important in the upper atmosphere, polymer incineration, and
combustion generally. Carbonyl reactions with negative ions are common in
organic and biological chemistry. The three other projects have wide relevance
to organic reactivity, and seek to improve our understanding of the flow of
energy from reactants to products. An important component of this project is the
training of undergraduate students in scientific research. Students typically
join Dr. Doubleday's research group in the summer after completing Organic
Chemistry in the spring, are paid a summer research stipend, then continue
research in the academic year and present their work the following spring at the
National Meeting of the American Chemical Society. Since research is
collaborative and students learn from each other, the work fosters group skills
as well as individual achievement. As part of his dissemination effort, Dr.
Doubleday's trajectory program is available and is currently being used in
research groups at other academic institutions. Benefits to society at large
will emerge from a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of chemical reactions
sought in Dr. Doubleday's research. Since kinetic models of combustion,
atmospheric, and environmental chemistry can ultimately affect governmental
policy on air and water quality and climate change, the broadest impact of this
project will be progress in chemical understanding that contributes to
improvements in environmental quality and human health generally.