* 0910045
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Response of Decomposer Fungi to Simultaneous Warming and Nitrogen Additions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Serita Frey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,115.00

Decomposer fungi are the primary decay agents in temperate forest ecosystems. In
this sense they play a crucial role in ecosystem function since their activities
help to regulate soil carbon and nutrient cycles. This doctoral dissertation
study examines whether there is relationship between the diversity of decomposer
fungi and wood decay. It also asks if major environmental disturbances such as
climate change and nitrogen deposition can disrupt this relationship. To address
interactions among the fungal decomposer community, environmental change, and
soil nutrient cycles, red maple wood was buried in soil at the Harvard Forest
long-term Soil Warming × Nitrogen Addition Study. This experiment mimics the
increased temperatures and nitrogen inputs that occur as the result of global
warming and acid rain. The red maple acts as a food source that soil fungi
colonize and decompose. After 12, 18, and 24 months, the red maple will be
removed from the soil and assessed for its state of decay. At the same time, the
fungi that colonized both the outside and the inside of the wood bait will be
identified using a method that extracts, clones, and sequences fungal DNA. This
approach will allow the quantitative assessment of how fungi respond to
environmental stress, and in turn, how this response might adversely impact
ecosystem function. A broader implication is that it will provide information on
how soil fungi contribute to large scale processes, and how they should be
considered when devising land conservation and restoration plans. Training for
an undergraduate assistant will be an added benefit of the doctoral student's
activities.