* 0910374
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Phylogenetic approaches to functional diversity of mycorrhizal fungi: linking environmental change to ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Brendan Bohannan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,996.00

Human activities have resulted in reduced biodiversity, which can lead to
altered ecosystem functions. These changes in ecosystem function are likely
mediated by changes in functional diversity, the number of functionally
different types of organisms. Because microbes control most biochemical cycles
and largely determine ecosystem responses to environmental changes, quantifying
microbial functional diversity is critical to predicting the responses of
ecosystems to global change. This study will test the general hypothesis that
global change results in altered ecosystem function and reduced biodiversity.
Specifically, the relationships among nitrogen deposition (a component of global
change), soil carbon storage (an ecosystem function) and the functional
diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (symbiotic fungi associated with the
roots of numerous plant species) will be examined using novel phylogenetic and
molecular approaches.

This study will provide insights into how changes in nutrient inputs and
biodiversity will affect ecosystem function, and it will generate novel
information that has applications within the fields of agriculture, conservation
biology and restoration ecology. By linking nutrient inputs, microbial
functional diversity and ecosystem function, the results of this study can be
utilized to make informed decisions regarding remediation of the negative
effects of human activities on biodiversity and ecosystem function.