* 0910147
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Revision of the New World scorpion genus Centruroides Marx, 1890: Systematics and Biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Lauren Esposito, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 05/31/2010
* USD 14,847.00

Despite notoriety, worldwide distribution, medical, ecological and conservation
importance, scorpions are poorly studied taxonomically. New species and
distribution records continue to be discovered, yet scorpions are increasingly
threatened by habitat destruction and harvesting for the souvenir and exotic pet
trades. Scorpion research is hampered by infrequent application of modern
concepts and techniques. This project will use genetic and anatomical data to
revise a diverse and medically important genus of New World scorpions, the bark
scorpions, Centruroides. Fieldwork will be conducted to discover new species,
document distributions, and gather fresh material. The taxonomy will be revised
based on objective analysis, and a monograph on the entire genus will be
produced. Identifying and defining Centruroides species is problematic. The
characters traditionally used often overlap between closely related species, are
vaguely defined, and often vary within a population. It may be difficult even
for specialists to identify species. Without a sound taxonomy, it is thus
impossible to determine which species are medically important and dangerous to
prepare and administer anti-venom. This project will produce revised species
descriptions and interactive identification keys, illustrated with digital
images and links to maps of species distributions, for all Centruroides. An
expert in scorpion systematics will be trained, and results will be disseminated
via the Internet for use by medical professionals and the public.