* 0910963
* Guanidine Rich Synthetic Macromolecules-Transduction Domain Mimics
* MPS,CHE
* 10/15/2009,03/31/2013
* Gregory Tew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 03/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Gregory Tew of the University
of Massachusetts Amherst whose research will develop a novel class of biomimetic
polymers with potent cell-penetrating activity. Preliminary work has
demonstrated the ability to build cell-penetrating peptide, or protein
transduction domain mimics. The comprehensive structure-activity relationship
proposed is essential for gaining novel insight and laying a foundation for
understanding the behavior of these unique molecules. This work will probe
fundamental concepts between polymer chemistry and membrane transduction
activity. And, since these molecules traverse the phospholipid membrane, new
insights will be gained on how molecules bind with and move across this
critically important biological barrier.

Research by Professor Tew combines state of the art organic and polymer
chemistry with translocation across membranes and provides the opportunity to
develop non-peptidic molecules that traverse the biological cell membrane
barrier. This will have important applications in drug and non-viral gene
delivery and also lay the foundation for learning how to target membranes within
cells. Students trained within this multi-disciplinary proposal will become
young scientists who are able to work across traditional disciplines. Professor
Tew is an active participant in the National Organization for the Professional
Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) National
Meetings. He conducted a workshop entitled "Landing Your First Tenure Track
Faculty Position" at the 2006 National Meeting and was recently appointed to the
technical programming committee. This successful workshop was scheduled again
for the 2009 Annual Meeting. A peer-mentoring program was established within
Polymer Science and Engineering (PSE) at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
in 2005 which has received campus-wide recognition. The current proposal will be
integrated into these on-going activities and specifically will be used as a
platform for a new workshop at NOBCChE between students, the NOBCChE community,
and industry focused on intellectual property and science. A provisional patent
application has been filed covering the materials discussed in this proposal. It
will be used as the platform to engage NOBCChE students in the topic of
"translational research".