* 0910908
* HCC: Large: Intelligent Tracking Systems that Reason about Group Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,858,292.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The ability to reason about the complexity of living organisms in diverse
environments is one of the hallmarks of intelligence. In this project the PI and
her interdisciplinary team of investigators will design computer vision
algorithms for intelligent tracking of large groups of living individuals in
three-dimensional space. She will develop specific systems for tracking groups
of microorganisms, bats, birds, and humans. And she will formulate machine
learning methods for analyzing group behavior, specifically the conditions for
formation and dispersal of groups, and the interactions of individuals within a
group. An important innovative aspect of this research is the systematic and
comprehensive approach to reasoning about the motion of large groups of living
organisms observed in video data, independently of whether they happen to be
humans, animals, or cells. Previous efforts in this area have typically focused
on studying the behavior of a single type of organism, and on testing theories
of behavior based predominately on simulations, without the appropriate
analytical tools to automatically explore and quantify the vast number of visual
data sets. This project, on the other hand, will base research findings on the
analysis of thousands of trajectories of individual group members moving in 3D
space. To this end, the PI and her team will collect video data in the field and
in public spaces to ensure optimal data capture conditions. They will use these
data to develop robust solutions for the problem of matching hundreds of
individual bats, birds, or people from frame to frame. They will generate
stereoscopic reconstructions of movement trajectories based on multiple
calibrated cameras, and use machine learning to model group behavior and mine
the trajectory data. Finally, they will compare the findings of their reasoning
system against current theories about the formation of groups and the
interactions of individuals within a group. A similar, systematic research
strategy will be employed to address understanding of the behavior of single
cells. The team will design microscope imaging protocols, develop solutions for
the segmentation and tracking of individual cells, and use statistical learning
techniques to discover patterns and correlations in the behavior of the cells on
physiologically relevant substrates.

Broader Impacts: Understanding the processes by which groups of animals and
microorganisms behave is crucial to the effective conservation of populations
and ecosystems and the management of cellular environments. Project outcomes
will advance knowledge across the fields of computer vision, artificial
intelligence, behavioral ecology, and biological engineering, and will provide
new tools for answering urgent economic and ethical questions, for example about
the mortality of birds and bats in wind energy facilities.