* 0910143
* Connection, Community, and Engagement in STEM Education (Large Empirical, Contextual Research Topics in STEM Education)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Dean Kelley, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2015
* USD 275,000.00

The goal of this research project is to advance knowledge about student and
faculty perceptions of connection to community as factors in academic
engagement. The three phases of this research will mold basic research results
into applied strategies for improvements in engagement in higher education STEM
environments. The first phase is a tool development phase which will provide a
valid tool box for evaluating target constructs (engagement, participation,
affect, cognition, etc.). Three data collection tools will be developed: student
surveys, student focus group protocols, and faculty interview protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second phase focuses on addressing the following
research question: What connections to community are contributing to significant
differences in academic engagement? and How do institutional characteristics
mold the classroom experience toward increased community? Surveys will be
administered to students and focus group and interviews conducted with students
at five different post-secondary institutions. Data will be analyzed within and
across institutions to gauge the effects of higher education institutional
characteristics on student affect, perception, cognition, sense of belonging,
engagement, and participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the third phase
emphasizes applying results to develop strategies by which successful community-
building characteristics of the various participating institutions can be
transferred elsewhere. In all phases, the research team brings a broad range of
diversity of expertise and institutional fabric to the proposed study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five different types of institutions are represented in
this effort: Research 1 (University of Washington), Comprehensive (Minnesota
State), Master's L (Simmons College), Private, Faith-Based (Seattle Pacific),
and HBCU (Tuskegee). Each of these institutions has unique historical strengths
for undergraduate education; this research will improve understanding of how
these strengths impact connections to community via mediating engagement and
subsequently predicting student learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;