* 0910211
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Aplanulata (Cnidaria: Hydrozoa): A Model Clade for Investigating the Evolutionary and Developmental Basis of Hydrozoan Body Plan Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Paulyn Cartwright, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 14,991.00

This project aims to understand the genetics of body construction and diversity
in a group of aquatic invertebrate animals called hydrozoans. This group
includes a well studied freshwater invertebrate Hydra, whose body consists of a
tubular column with a ring of tentacles on top. Because the genetics and
physiology of Hydra have been thoroughly examined and it grows well in the
laboratory, the species is a valuable genetic and developmental resource. The
goal of this study is to document the role of genes controlling development in
Hydra and two related species that differ markedly in the construction of their
body columns and the size and location of tentacles on the column. These
differences in body plan are caused by differences in the timing of gene
expression and the locations on the body column where genes are turned on and
off. By examining when and where these developmental genes are active in the
bodies of the animals, this study will gain insight into the evolution and
function of these genes in the development of body plan morphology in these
simple invertebrates. Using a comparative approach of studying three closely
related species with different body plans, the study will provide insights into
the role of developmental genes in the evolution of morphological
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research will be integrated into an
undergraduate course on embryology and development. Additionally, an
undergraduate student will take conduct an independent research project. A web
site for the public and other researchers will synthesize information on
developmental genetics of these organisms, which are important models for
understanding development in many species.