* 0910455
* Student Research Workshop in Computational Linguistics at the ACL 2009 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Brian Roark, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2010
* USD 20,100.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization in the field of natural language processing. The ACL's annual
conference is the major international conference in this field. This project is
to subsidize travel, conference, and housing expenses of students selected to
participate in the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) Student
Research Workshop, which is part of the ACL conference on August 2-7, 2009 in
Singapore. The workshop consists of two tracks: full paper presentations and
poster presentations. All selected work has only student authors. The full paper
sessions are composed of paper presentations followed by a discussion panel led
by respected researchers in the field. The workshop is organized and run by
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Student Research Workshop provides a valuable
opportunity for the next generation of natural language processing researchers
to enter the computational linguistics community. It allows the best students in
the field to take their first important step toward becoming professional
computational linguists by receiving critical feedback on their work from
external experts, and by making contacts with other students and senior
researchers in their field. The students who are involved in running and
selecting papers for the workshop also gain valuable opportunities for
professional growth and interaction with the researchers on the organizing
committee of the main conference. The workshop contributes to the maintenance
and development of a skilled and diverse computational linguistics and natural
language processing research community.&lt;br/&gt;