* 0910940
* AF: Large: Networks, Learning and Markets with Strategic Agents
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Lawrence Blume, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 3,138,984.00

An active line of algorithmic research over the past decade has developed
techniques for analyzing systems of self-interested agents. A crucial challenge
in analyzing such systems is to predict aggregate properties at large scales;
this requires drawing conclusions about global phenomena in systems whose
behavior is currently only well-understood at the level of individual agents or
pairs of agents. Deriving conclusions about macroscopic properties of systems
described at a microscopic level is important in both computing and the social
sciences. Market prices, for instance, arise from the microscopic interactions
of individual traders. Understanding both the normal functioning of markets and
their failure requires methods that can bridge the gap between these different
scales of resolution.

This project uses ideas about networks and learning from algorithmic game theory
to bridge the micro-macro gap. The research on networks considers theories of
bargaining and trade in which participants are constrained by a network
structure. This includes models for the distribution of power among agents in a
network, as well as models in which prices in a market arise strategically
through the interaction of market-making intermediaries in a network. The
research develops models of market failures, particularly the kinds of cascading
breakdowns of trust that played a crucial role in the global financial crisis in
2008. The project employs learning models to capture how perceived counterparty
risk -- the ability of one's trading partner to complete a transaction ---
spreads through a market.

The research on trust in financial markets can potentially contribute to broader
policy debates about methods for restoring trust in markets. Currently there is
a lack of analytical techniques that can tractably manipulate non-trivial
learning dynamics to uncover the resulting network-level consequences, such as
cascades. The research will provide tools for analyzing the determinants and
evolution of trust in financial markets.

The project will also inform the development of introductory courses that cut
across many disciplines, providing undergraduates from a wide range of
backgrounds with a computationally grounded perspective for reasoning about the
behavior and consequences of networks of interacting agents.