* 0910540
* Finite Element Approximation of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Falk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 315,552.00

The first area of proposed research involves the study of compatible
discretizations of partial differential equations, i.e., numerical approximation
schemes that inherit or mimic fundamental properties of a partial differential
equation. The proposed research seeks to capitalize on the idea that some of the
same concepts that lead to the well-posedness of&lt;br/&gt;boundary value
problems for partial differential equations can be used to develop compatible
and stable finite element schemes for their approximation. The plan is to use
this idea to develop a simpler and more systematic analysis of finite element
methods, which based on past work, should then lead to the design of new and
better numerical approximation schemes for a variety of applied problems. The
second project proposed is the further development of a new numerical
approximation scheme recently developed by the P.I. for the simulation of a
parallel-plate Electrowetting on Dielectric Device. Electrowetting is an effect,
based on a relationship between electrical and surface tension phenomena, that
allows for control of the shape and motion of a liquid-gas interface, through
the use of an applied voltage. The liquid surface changes shapes when a voltage
is applied in order to minimize the sum of the surface tension energy and
electrical energy. The proposed research is to first investigate the new
approach computationally to see how the results compare with experiments, and
then to establish stability of the method and derive error estimates. Some novel
features of the method are that the changing boundary position is now a variable
in the formulation and the unknown velocity can be approximated by standard
simple finite element spaces. The final project is the design of new simpler
quadrilateral and hexahedral finite elements for use in the mixed finite element
approximation of partial differential equations. A main issue is that such
elements, when defined in the usual way, do not retain the same approximation
properties as those defined on squares and cubes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical modeling of physical and biological processes
using partial differential equations has become the standard method of studying
a host of important problems. Such models capture in a concise and precise way
the fundamental features of the process being modeled. Unfortunately, the
resulting equations rarely have solutions that can be expressed by simple
mathematical formulas. Hence, the development of reliable and efficient
numerical approximation schemes are necessary to make this method into a
practical approach and is central to progress in many areas of science and
engineering. Part of this development involves the investigation of the
theoretical underpinnings of numerical methods. Such investigation can lead to a
greater understanding of existing methods and to the development of new methods
with desirable properties. Thus, such study has the potential to improve the
accuracy of, or even make possible, essential computer simulations performed by
scientists and engineers. This project is concerned with the study of numerical
methods for approximating equations modeling phenomena in a variety of
applications. One central theme is to develop approximation schemes that
preserve discrete versions of some of the key properties of the mathematical
model, in order to more accurately capture the fundamental features of the
underlying process being modeled.