* 0910011
* Dissertation Research:   Balancing the influence of biological and architectural diversity on rainforest productivity along an elevation gradient in Hawaii
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Eben Broadbent, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2010
* USD 14,724.00

Tropical forests cover more than 12% of surface area and contain &gt;50% of
sequestered carbon on land, and are important contributors to the global carbon
cycle. The carbon dynamics of tropical forests are dependent on climatic
conditions, such as cloud coverage, solar radiation, and temperature. At short
time scales, i.e. within a year, climate influences forest productivity directly
by controlling rates of photosynthesis and respiration. Over longer periods,
climate changes may alter forest 3D structure and composition, but this is
difficult to determine because large areas of forest are needed to assess this,
and collection of field data can be problematical. Thus, studying the spatial
and temporal interactions among forest structure, composition and carbon
dynamics requires new methods. This study utilizes a new airborne imaging
system, LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging), which measures properties of
scattered light, and hyperspectral imaging, which provides information using a
vast portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, to develop detailed 3D maps of
forest structure. Microclimate and leaf physiology data will be collected
simultaneously to develop and validate a high-resolution 3D model of forest
photosynthesis. By using a study transect comprising three km2 of tropical
forest situated along an elevation gradient, it will be possible to quantify
effects of forest structure, composition and climatic differences on forest
photosynthesis and productivity at scales not before feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new tool for large-scale and
cost-effective monitoring of forest carbon dynamics. The researcher also plans
to develop a video presentation on this subject for use at the high-school and
undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;