* 0910084
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Historical and ecological causes of ant diversity along environmental gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Jean-Philippe Lessard, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2011
* USD 8,180.00

Biodiversity is distributed unevenly on the planet. Scientists have focused
primarily on current climatic conditions as main drivers of diversity, while the
importance of evolutionary processes has received less attention. The proposed
research project aims to gain a better understanding of the role of evolutionary
history in shaping current patterns of ant diversity in North America. The
increased availability of molecular information allows a clearer understanding
of evolutionary history and relationships among ant species. In turn this
information can be used to examine the history of dispersal and colonization of
populations over geological time scales. This work benefits from the
availability of a large and newly compiled database on the distributions and
diversity of ants, as well as the availability of a recently published phylogeny
of ants, to gain new insights into the factors governing ant diversity. The
proposed work entails collaboration with the Danish Center for Macroecology
(DCM). The DCM is involved with Danish and International NGOs as well as with
organizations such as UN/UNEP and the World Bank. Ecologists at the DCM also act
as science advisors to the Danish parliament on issues relating to biodiversity
and climate change. Therefore, the results of the proposed work will have impact
beyond the scientific community in the US.