* 0910551
* 2009  Evolutionary and Ecological Functional Genomics Gordon Research Conference
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Scott Edwards, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2010
* USD 16,100.00

This project supports advancement of the developing fields of ecological and
evolutionary genomics through support of the 2009 Gordon Conference on Ecology
and Evolutionary Functional Genomics. It will accomplish this through funding
the travel costs of about 40 speakers, post-doctoral speakers, post-docs, and
graduate students to attend the semi-annual conference. Ecological and
evolutionary genomics have wide applicability and importance, but conferences
that focus on application of genomic technologies to ecology and evolutionary
questions are uncommon in the United States. The conference will provide an
important forum for linking scientists and scientific information from diverse
disciplines and for sparking research agendas at the frontiers of ecological and
evolutionary genomics. Topics at the conference are diverse and include genomics
of host-parasite and host-symbiont interactions, evolution of infectious
disease, microbial metagenomics, genomics of development and behavior, and
sequencing technologies. Additionally, a special session on global change
genomics will highlight this important force and genomic approaches to better
understanding and managing its effects. The conference is broadly
interdisciplinary, and the speakers include a diverse mix of junior and senior
scientists, including many women and members of underrepresented groups. The
overall structure of the conference is well-designed to promote interactions
among participants. Increased participation in the meeting by young scientists
will be supported by this project.