* 0910208
* Real and Formal Pericyclic Processes of Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Harmata, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2012
* USD 420,000.00

This project will continue studies involving pericyclic reactions or their
equivalents using reactive intermediates. Allylic cations offer a wide range of
reactive motives, including cycloadditions and ene reactions. The latter have
not been studied extensively and formally offer a process by which C-H
activation occurs. Studies to explore the scope of this process, both in an
inter- and intramolecular context, will be undertaken. The basic scheme lends
itself naturally to an investigation of the homo-Cope rearrangement, which will
also be pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ketenes undergo a cycloaddition reaction
with alkenes to form cyclobutanones. Details of the control of regiochemistry in
such cycloadditions are incomplete. A study of this process, linked to
specifically controlling the outcome of the reaction with vinylcyclopropanes
will lead to the synthesis of cyclobutanones substituted regioselectively with
cyclopropanes. Such substrates are envisioned to undergo a ring expansion to
form seven-membered rings, under the influence of catalytic amounts of certain
transition metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the influence of substituents
on the rates of certain electrocyclic reactions is a topic of current interest.
The electrocyclization of hexatrienes is generally a slow process with a
relatively high activation energy. Recent evidence suggests that electronic
effects can have a profound influence on the rate of such processes. Carbanions
offer the opportunity to develop extremely rapid electrocyclizations in this
class that are also diastereoselective and enantioselective, depending on the
exact means by which the carbanion is generated, resulting in the preparation of
highly substituted six-membered rings. The development of such reactions will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Michael Harmata of the
Department of Chemistry at University of Missouri-Columbia. Professor Michael
Harmata's research efforts revolve around the development of new carbon-carbon
bond forming reactions based on pericyclic reactions of reactive intermediates,
especially those of allylic cations and cyclopentadienones, among others. The
studies to be undertaken will expand the scope of knowledge of reactive species,
resulting in the discovery/invention of new, powerful synthetic processes of use
for the synthesis of complex organic chemicals of potential impact to the
synthesis of new pharmaceuticals, new materials, and new agrochemicals, as well
as new entities of fundamental interest to a broad scientific community.