* 0910562
* III: Small: Medieval Unicorn: Toward Enhanced Understanding of Virtual Manuscripts on the Grid in the Twenty-First Century
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Kevin Franklin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2011
* USD 128,381.00

Computation has revolutionized the study of historic documents and is growing
rapidly in terms of use and importance to interdisciplinary technology/domain
groups and individual scholars and researchers. An interdiscipinary team at the
University of Illinois proposes to research and develop cyber tools for
exploratory visual studies and quantitative analyses of large volumes of
midieval manuscipts. The project will focus on visual imagery embedded in thes
manuscripts and where the analysis tools will require large amounts of
computational resources and scalable algorithms. The test collection will be
digitized copies of Froissart's Chronicles, a set of midieval manuscripts
available for reserch and teaching over the Worldwide Universities Network grid
and accessible through Virtual Vellum ( developed at the University of
Sheffield, UK, and funded by the UKs Arts and Humanities and Engineering and
Physical Sciences experimental e-Science program.) The broader scientific
impacts resulting from the proposed activities are expected to be in new
methodologies, scalable algorithms. The work will also provide new exploratory
frameworks that will support questions related to studying broad, difficult and
complex topics such as the composition and structure (codicology) of manuscripts
as cultural artifacts of the book trade in later medieval Paris and identifying
the characteristic styles and iconographic signatures of particular artists. The
research will contribute to a body of recent scholarship that seek to define how
books were made, how they circulated, and what their cultural value was in the
late medieval period.