* 0910417
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial Source Tracking Using Mitochondrial DNA for Identification of Contaminant Sources
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Brett Baldwin, MICROBIAL INSIGHTS INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will result in a suite
of microbial source tracking assays to provide cost-effective identification of
fecal contamination sources in surface waters. Beach closures and advisories
exceeded 20,000 days in each of the past 3 years with more than 60% caused by
fecal pollution. Overall, 13% of surface waters do not meet quality standards
due to fecal contamination. The problem continues more than 30 years after the
Clean Water Act because traditional methods cannot identify fecal inputs from
the myriad of human (wastewater treatment plants, septic fields), agricultural
(confined animal feeding operations), and natural wildlife activities. Microbial
source tracking (MST) using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) offers
a rapid but sensitive approach to quantify fecal inputs and most importantly
identify the source. The primary milestone of the project will be rigorously
validated qPCR assays that provide conclusive identification of fecal
contamination sources allowing end users to eliminate fecal inputs and protect
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is the
development and validation of an mtDNA based qPCR method to identify fecal
contamination sources which will ultimately lead to improved water quality.
Fecal contamination of water resources currently results in beach closures and
restrictions on shellfish harvesting that severely impact waterfront
communities. Moreover, periodic outbreaks of waterborne diseases clearly
highlight the need for improved detection of fecal contamination indicators to
protect human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).