* 0910424
* Collaborative Research: SGER--Measurements of Particle Size and Fall Velocity Distributions within Supercell Thunderstorms
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Katja Friedrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2010
* USD 40,638.00

The investigators will develop a unique network of mobile and rapidly deployable
low-cost laser disdrometer instruments for the collection of in situ
microphysical data within severe storms during the first year of the
Verification of the Origins of Tornadoes Experiment 2 (VORTEX2) campaign in
spring of 2009. Measurements will be coordinated with other VORTEX2 components
enabling fusion of data sources for a more complete retrieval of the near
surface buoyancy, microphysical composition and kinematics of the storm. The
microphysical composition of severe storms is known to have significant impacts
on storm evolution and behavior, particularly by controlling the cold pool
characteristics beneath the storm. While polarimetric radar observations can
provide information related to the microphysical character of a storm, the
microphysics of the near surface environment, believed to be most important for
tornadogenesis, is usually below the radar horizon of even mobile polarimetric
radar platforms. Microphysics can play a key role in near surface buoyancy
tendency which several recent studies have shown may modulate the likelihood of
tornado development. As such, in situ measurements of near surface microphysics
within rainy downdrafts are needed in order to determine cold pool buoyancy
characteristics and to infer relations with polarimetric radar observations
collected above the surface. The research will lead to a greater understanding
of the relationship between storm microphysics, cold pool characteristics
beneath severe storms and storm behavior.

The intellectual merit of the research stems from the novel in situ
microphysical data collection method within severe storms coordinated with
mobile polarimetric radars. Two methods for optical disdrometer deployment will
be simultaneously explored in a collaborative approach to maximize data
collection. There are considerable challenges and hazards associated with data
acquisition within severe storms. This effort marks a first known attempt to
collect in situ near surface measurements of particle size distributions by a
network of disdrometers. The collected observations will enable new
understanding of the relationship between microphysical characteristics of
severe storms and their behavior in line with several key foci of the VORTEX2.

The Broader impacts of the work include improved predictability of severe storm
behavior. This is expected to emerge from a better understanding of storm
evolution dependence on microphysical characteristics, which to date remains
relatively unknown. Better understanding of severe storm behavior can ultimately
lead to more timely and accurate warnings that can save lives and allow
additional time to protect property. Further, the developed instrumentation
suite for this project will also be quite suitable for application to particle
size distribution measurements in other types of precipitating systems. The
verification of microphysical parameterizations used in storm-scale numerical
weather prediction models also would benefit from verification data provided in
part by the measurements. Particle size distribution measurements will also aid
in mobile radar calibration and attenuation metrics. This project will enable
graduate students opportunities to participate in data collection efforts as
part of a major field campaign.