* 0910574
* Collaborative Research: Earthquakes on Nonplanar Faults: Rupture Dynamics and High Frequency Ground Motion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,326.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding seismic ground motion in
the high frequency range (&gt;1&lt;br/&gt;Hz) is of substantial interest to the
engineering community since the resonance frequency of most man-made structures
lies within it. In this frequency range, ground motion is relatively incoherent
and all frequencies are present, suggesting a source process that excites waves
of all wavelengths. This project explores earthquake rupture propagation on
rough faults with the working hypothesis that the irregular propagation induced
by roughness might be responsible for producing observed levels of high
frequency radiation. In particular, natural faults are well described as self-
similar fractal surfaces:&lt;br/&gt;roughness is present at all scales and the
amplitude of the roughness associated with a particular wavelength is
proportional to that wavelength. Slip on nonplanar faults perturbs the local
stress field, causing local accelerations and decelerations of propagating
ruptures and the emission of seismic waves. In addition to the specific focus on
high frequency ground motion, the project investigates general characteristics
of earthquake dynamics on nonplanar faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
questions will be addressed using direct numerical simulations of dynamic
ruptures on nonplanar faults. The faults are governed by rate-and-state friction
laws featuring extreme velocity-weakening behavior at coseismic slip rates, as
observed in laboratory experiments. The off-fault response is modeled as that of
a Drucker-Prager elastic-plastic material (similar to a Mohr-Coloumb material)
in either a rate-independent or viscoplastic formulation.&lt;br/&gt;The
irregular geometries are handled using a coordinate mapping technique and high
order finite differences are used to approximate the governing equations
numerically. The particular numerical method features several mechanisms
(upwinding and the adaptive selection of finite difference stencils) that
prevent the development of spurious oscillations that would otherwise
contaminate the solution at the high frequencies of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;