* 0910795
* Virunga Volcanic SO2 Emissions Research (VISOR) Project
* GEO,EAR
* 08/16/2008,05/31/2012
* Simon Carn, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2012
* USD 124,407.00

Sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions from non-arc volcanoes constitute a significant
component of the global volcanic sulfur budget, and have been assumed to scale
directly with erupted lava volume (i.e. that there is no excess sulfur).
However, to date there have been very few efforts to prove this, particularly
for alkaline volcanoes. This project will merge remote sensing and petrological
analysis to investigate the origins and dynamics of SO2 emissions from
Nyamuragira and Nyiragongo, the active, alkaline volcanoes in the Virunga region
of the western arm of the East African Rift in DR Congo. Both Nyamuragira and
Nyiragongo are prodigious sulfur emitters, the former during its frequent
effusive eruptions and the latter via persistent passive degassing since 2002.
To date there has been no concerted attempt to link these SO2 emissions with
magma production, or to investigate the origin of the exceptional SO2 output.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main components of the VISOR project are: (1) Analysis
of satellite data collected by several instruments since 1978 to develop a
complete record of recent SO2 emissions from the Virunga volcanoes. An up-to-
date map of recent lava flows will also be constructed; (2) Fieldwork in DR
Congo to collaborate with Congolese scientists at the Goma Volcano Observatory
(GVO) on ground-based SO2 monitoring at Nyiragongo, including measurement of SO2
emissions and interpretation of the data alongside other volcanological datasets
collected by GVO and collaborators. Validation of satellite measurements will be
achieved by comparing coincident field- and satellite-based SO2 measurements;
(3) Petrological analyses of volatile concentrations and speciations in
historical eruptive products of Nyamuragira and Nyiragongo to determine the
extent of magma degassing during eruptions. These data will be combined with the
remotely sensed SO2 measurements to assess the relationship between melt sulfur
loss and measured SO2 production for a series of eruptive events; thus shedding
new light on the incidence of excess sulfur emissions at non-arc, alkaline
volcanoes, and into the behavior of sulfur and other volatiles in alkali-
basaltic magmas. Broader impacts of this study include: strengthening of
international collaborative links between groups in the USA, Africa, and Europe;
training of a female graduate student in remote sensing, petrological techniques
and fieldwork; a valuable infusion of expertise and collaborative activity for
African scientists at GVO, which has suffered many years of neglect and civil
unrest; outreach projects in Goma using satellite data acquired for the project;
and the addition of exotic volcanic rock compositions to the National Rock
Collection archive at the Smithsonian Institution, for future research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;