* 0910343
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Beyond the black box: understanding the relationship between microbial community structure and function under environmental stress and disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Lisa Tiemann, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

Soil microbial communities mediate global nutrient cycles and are an integral
part of the cycling of greenhouse gases, yet disturbance can alter the
functional dynamics and composition of these communities. Without an
understanding of how microbial communities are structured and what factors most
influence changes in these structures and ultimately function, scientists cannot
fully understand the impacts of human disturbances such as global climate change
on ecosystems. This research will assess the degree of coupling between
ecosystem process rates and microbial community composition as revealed by
genetic analyses of soil DNA. Measures of microbial community structure will be
coupled with measures of specific ecosystem process rates that are associated
with appropriate genetically based groupings. The coupling of these measures of
microbial community structure and function under stress or disturbance is a
first step towards incorporating microbial biodiversity into ecosystem models.
This research will provide an opportunity for the co-PI to further her efforts
to reach out to K-12 students in Kansas. The co-PI serves as a Fellow in NSF's
GK-12 program at the University of Kansas, collaborating with a middle school
biology teacher to incorporate real scientific inquiry experiences into her
classroom. As part of an on-going effort to share scientific progress with
schoolchildren, the co-PI presents her work at local schools via events such as
an elementary school science night, the "Expanding Your Horizons" conference for
girls in Kansas, and a lecture on global climate change at a local high school.