* 0910469
* Collaborative research:  Earthquake triggering by slow slip events beneath Kilauea's south flank
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Cecily Wolfe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2013
* USD 139,594.00

(a) Technical description This project involves the analysis of data from a
temporary NSF-funded seismometer deployment on the south flank of Kilauea
volcano, Hawaii, which we designed and deployed in anticipation of a "slow slip
event" (SSE) that occurred in June 2007. The temporary seismic array recorded
high levels of background seismicity as well as two swarms of flank earthquakes:
one in June 2007, triggered by the expected SSE, and another in April 2007,
possibly from a pore pressure change on the detachment fault beneath Kilauea's
flank induced by the dynamic waves from the Mw 8.1 Solomon Islands earthquake.
Our efforts involve picking and locating microearthquakes recorded on the
temporary array and the USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory seismic network,
obtaining focal mechanisms from first motion polarities, and performing double-
difference tomography. We will integrate the results of our high precision study
with other observations of seismicity and deformation for this region. We expect
to make progress on a number of important questions regarding the tectonic
framework and background seismicity patterns of Kilauea's south flank, the
relation of the triggered seismic swarms to the geodetically observed SSE's, the
possible existence of triggered Hilina Pali normal faulting earthquakes, and the
frictional behavior of the detachment.

(b) Nontechnical explanation We will study earthquakes occurring beneath the
south flank of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii, taking advantage of data collected by a
dense, temporary seismic array. The array was deployed in 2007 with NSF support
in anticipation of a "slow slip event" (SSE) that ultimately occurred in June
2007. Our focus will be on the locations and fault geometries of earthquakes
triggered by this SSE, and by a second set of earthquakes that may have been
triggered by passing seismic waves from a large distant earthquake. This project
is important for understanding earthquake, landslide, and tsunami hazards in
Hawaii, where the style of faulting ranges from regular earthquakes to slow
earthquakes to long-term creep. In particular, understanding the nature of the
triggering of small earthquakes by the SSE may provide clues to the triggering
of large flank earthquakes such as the damaging 1975 magnitude 7.2 Kalapana
earthquake.

This project was supported by the Geophysics and Marine Geology & Geophysics
Programs and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).