* 0910317
* Dissertation Research:  The role of deltaFosB in social behaviors of the monogamous prairie vole (Microtus ochrogaster)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Karen Bales, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2010
* USD 7,751.00

Monogamy is characterized by the formation of strong and selective preferences
for a specific partner ("pair-bonding"). Pair-bonding is associated with a
number of significant changes in both behavior and physiology; however, the
mechanisms for these changes are not completely understood. This research will
explore a potential cellular mechanism for neural adaptations involved in the
social behavior of a monogamous rodent, the prairie vole (Microtus ochrogaster).
Specifically, the studies will focus on a unique protein, delta-FosB, which has
emerged as a potential molecular 'switch' mediating long-term adaptations in the
brain. This protein has been shown to accumulate in the brains of animals that
are repeatedly exposed to drugs, food-reinforcement and wheel-running. However,
the role of this protein in naturalistic, species-typical behavior is not well
characterized. The proposed research consists of three goals: 1) examine delta-
FosB accumulation in the brain following the formation and maintenance of a pair
bond, 2) explore whether increasing levels of delta-FosB in the brain
facilitates pair bond formation in the monogamous prairie vole, and 3) examine
region-specific delta-FosB accumulation as a result of social separation (a
chronic stressor and model of 'grief'). This study is designed to expand
understanding of the evolution and neurobiology of social behavior. This
research will also inform our understanding of the biology of attachment, grief
and mourning in humans, as social bonds are a critical component of human
behavior. Finally, this research will provide training in neuroscience for a
female graduate student and multiple undergraduates.