* 0911708
* Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship for service
* EHR,DGE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Clifford Bergman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,956,883.00

Computer Engineering (32)

This project expands the capacity of the Iowa State University (ISU) SFS Cyber
Corps program. Designated by the National Security Agency as a charter Center of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education, ISU further recognizes
the importance of the information assurance (IA) field by supporting an IA
Center on campus. Through this project, ISU continues participation in the NSF
SFS program. Faculty from the Departments of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Computer Science, Political Science, Mathematics, Educational
Leadership, and Logistics, Operations, and Management Information Systems lead
the interdisciplinary Cyber Corps program. Students work closely with the
faculty to receive IA training, conduct research, and develop as leaders and
team members. Students complete IA courses and develop deeper problem-solving
skills through more in-depth research efforts and involvement with major
professors. All students participate in the unique and critical component of the
ISU SFS program: leadership, teamwork and professionalism development. The
expanded SFS program provides faculty team leaders with a foundation to develop
a year-round recruiting plan with special emphasis on: increasing the number of
participants from underrepresented groups; further enhancing the selection
process; supporting the strong student cohort experience; increasing the scope
of mentoring for students; more systematically involving all students in IA
research; and employing additional measures of program success. This
infrastructure allows placing 100% graduating students in the federal government
after graduation.

The ISU SFS program continues to benefit society by providing the federal
workforce with new professionals who have the capacity to address the problems
of securing critical federal information infrastructure in innovative ways. It
contributes to the IA knowledge base by enhancing several ISU research programs
that address important issues including intrusion detection systems; network
security; data privacy and security; dependable systems and networks; and
security policy.