* 0911182
* Constraining Processes & Timescales of Magma Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Elisabeth Widom, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2013
* USD 257,485.00

Intellectual Merit: The processes that operate in active volcanic systems
ultimately control the timescales over which magmas evolve to explosive states,
as well as the nature of the resulting eruptions. Thus, linking processes and
timescales of magma evolution to eruptive behavior and eruptive volume is a
fundamental goal for understanding the past, present and future behavior of
active volcanic systems. A multi-faceted approach is proposed to constrain magma
differentiation processes and timescales via a multi-isotopic, macro- to micro-
scale study of constituent phases from chemically zoned, silicic volcanic
deposits in the Azores, in order to: [1] determine the relative roles of open
versus closed system processes in the development of silicic magmas in ocean
island settings; [2] document the nature of crustal assimilants and the history
of assimilation and recharge events; [3] establish the diversity of sources and
magma residence times of the "crystal cargo" and the implications for the
longevity of magmatic systems; [4] constrain the timescales of magma
differentiation for silicic, alkaline magmatic systems with a focus on liquid
(glass) ages; and [5] assess the link between eruptive volume and pre-eruptive
magma residence timescales with a focus on magmatic systems of restricted
compositional and tectonic variability. The proposed approach will involve
sample characterization at multiple scales using optical microscopy,
cathodoluminescence and microprobe analysis of mineral phases; major and trace
element and Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic analyses of whole rocks; Sr-O isotopic analyses of
glass and single sanidine crystals; U-series disequilibria analyses of glass
(238U-230Th-226Ra) and single sanidines (226Ra/Ba); and intra-crystal Sr isotope
microsampling and Ba and Sr abundance/diffusion profiling in sanidines. A unique
aspect of this project includes the direct determination of Ra and Ba partition
coefficients between sanidine and trachyte melt, which is critical for magmatic
differentiation timescale assessments using the 230Th-226Ra-(Ba) system.

Broader Impacts: Minority Student Support & Recruiting. This project will
support two Ph.D. students (including a Japanese-American female and, likely, an
African-American student), as well as two to three undergraduate students.
Student Training & Education: Students involved in this project will gain
extensive experience in a variety of state-of-the-art analytical techniques, and
at least one student will participate in fieldwork, receiving valuable training
in volcanology and field geology. It is anticipated that the field work will be
done in conjunction with a volcanology field workshop that will provide the
opportunity for additional students to benefit from this experience. Results
from this research will also be incorporated into the classroom in lecture
material as well as related hands-on, inquiry-based learning activities.
Mentoring Women in Science: The PI serves as a role model and mentor for women
in science, and currently has a research group with 4 female Ph.D. students. The
PI and her Ph.D. students have worked closely with undergraduates in the past,
and it is anticipated that this research group will help attract participation
of female undergraduate students. Outreach Activities: The PI and her graduate
students will be involved in outreach programs through Miami University's Limper
Geology Museum including providing research-based educational experiences to the
community through K-12 programs and a lecture series attended by local high
school students and retirees in the community. International Collaboration: The
project will foster ongoing international collaboration with Azorean geologists
of the Universidade dos AÃ§ores, with whom the PI has long-standing
collaborations including field projects and organization of a 2009 Azores
Penrose Conference. Volcanic Hazard Assessment: The results of this project will
help constrain eruptive history and processes and timescales of magma evolution
in several active, explosive volcanic systems, and should ultimately help
facilitate evaluation of volcanic hazards in the Azores and globally