* 0911681
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of a Late Jurassic Paired Magmatic Belt (Blue Mountains, NE Oregon): Evaluation of Magmatic Growth During Contractional Orogeny
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Harold Stowell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2012
* USD 282,157.00

The main goal of this research project is to understand the origin of plutons
and batholiths in the Blue Mountains province of northeastern Oregon with
important chemical characteristics (low Sr/Y, Na, Al, Sr, and high Y, in
contrast to high Sr/Y, Na, Al, Sr, and low Y). In addition, they will study the
significance of crustal deformation events involving arc-arc and arc-continent
collision. High and low Sr/Y plutons occupy large areas in ancient and modern
orogenic belts, such as in the Appalachian Mountains, New Zealand, and the
Sierra Nevada, yet considerable controversy exists regarding mechanisms of their
generation, the tectonic settings in which they form, and their role in the
evolution of continental crust through time. Previous models have proposed that
partial melting of subducting oceanic crust or lower continental crust may
generate high Sr/Y magmas. This project uses structural geology, geochronology,
and igneous and metamorphic petrology to test these pre-existing models, and
proposes a new model in which lateral tectonic collisions of island arcs played
an important role in controlling the onset and distribution of high Sr/Y
magmatism. This study, if successful, will provide new insights into the
mechanisms of high and low Sr/Y magma generation, their spatial and temporal
distribution in orogenic belts, and their relationship to mineralization in the
Blue Mountains province. This study also has broader implications for
understanding changes in the Mesozoic crustal structure of the Blue Mountains
province through lateral tectonic collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs their
undergraduate and graduate students are conducting a multidisciplinary study to
investigate the magmatic development of paired high and low Sr/Y plutons and
batholiths. This study focuses on understanding the timing and geochemical
characteristics of high and low Sr/Y magmatism, and its relationship to Late
Jurassic contractional deformation and metamorphism. We propose a new model in
which Late Jurassic orogensis occurred in response to collision (arc-arc) during
a relatively brief time interval (159-157 Ma), and resulted in crustal
thickening in the Baker terrane. This change in crustal structure led to the
establishment of two coeval, yet spatially and geochemically distinct belts of
Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous high and low Sr/Y plutons and batholiths at
147-143 Ma. We focus our study on the Blue Mountains province, because it
contains one of the best-exposed examples of paired high and low Sr/Y magmatic
belts associated with Late Jurassic contractional deformation in the North
American Cordillera. We test our model through integrated and detailed geologic
and structural mapping, geochemical and isotope studies (Sr-Nd-O), and U-Pb and
Sm-Nd radiometric dating. If we are correct in our interpretation of these
magmatic belts, this study will represent a unique opportunity to study
processes of high and low Sr/Y magma generation and the interplay between
collisional tectonics, magmatism and metamorphism in a Phanerozoic convergent
margin setting. &lt;br/&gt;