* 0911678
* Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics Conference; Summer 2009, Linz, Austria
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Susanna Fishel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 06/30/2010
* USD 22,875.00

In July 2009, the twenty-first international conference
entitled&lt;br/&gt;Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics (FPSAC) will
be held&lt;br/&gt;at the Research Institute for Symbolic Computation of the
Johannes&lt;br/&gt;Kepler University in Linz, Austria. As in the past, there
will be&lt;br/&gt;nine plenary speakers, about twenty-five contributed talks,
and two&lt;br/&gt;poster/software demonstration sessions. The continuing success
of the&lt;br/&gt;annual FPSAC conferences stems in part from their
considerable&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary breadth---linking leading researchers
in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial mathematics with strong researchers in allied
fields&lt;br/&gt;such as pure and applied mathematics, computer science,
physics, and&lt;br/&gt;biology. The span of this conference series is unique
among&lt;br/&gt;international conferences with an emphasis on
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As well as
its breadth, a second distinguishing characteristic of&lt;br/&gt;FPSAC
conferences is the concerted effort to recognize and
encourage&lt;br/&gt;outstanding young scientists. This is accomplished in part
by&lt;br/&gt;choosing at least one plenary speaker to be an ``emerging'' star
and&lt;br/&gt;by ensuring that talented young researchers are well represented
among&lt;br/&gt;the speakers selected for contributed talks. Another special
feature&lt;br/&gt;of the FPSAC conferences is a continuing effort to
emphasize&lt;br/&gt;inclusiveness among participants. The conference seeks to
draw&lt;br/&gt;substantial participation from groups which have been
traditionally&lt;br/&gt;under-represented in the mathematical sciences. FPSAC
2009 will be an&lt;br/&gt;excellent opportunity for these students and junior
researchers to&lt;br/&gt;make both domestic and international contacts that will
be of great&lt;br/&gt;value in their developing careers. This grant support
their&lt;br/&gt;attendence. Additionally, because of the variety of past
locations&lt;br/&gt;(2008: Chile, 2007: China, for example), FPSAC draws a
truly&lt;br/&gt;international crowd.