* 0911204
* SBIR Phase I:  Well-defined PEGylated multiblock polyamino acids for protein drug delivery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Koumalen Vayaboury, Alamanda Polymers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project contributes solutions to
two problems faced by therapeutic techniques using protein drugs: (i) current
carriers for protein drugs are nonuniform on a molecular level and (ii) the
efficacy of protein drugs diminishes by the carriers currently used for
administering protein drugs. An innovative synthetic technique is provided that
allows absolute control over the molecular weight of such carriers, hence
generating uniform carrier systems. The interaction of these new carrier systems
with the protein drugs is minimal and will therefore have no detrimental effect
on the efficacy of the protein drug. Moreover, this technique is a substantial
improvement over current techniques, since it does not rely on metal catalysts
and it is scaleable.

The broader impacts of this research are, to develop tailor-made drug delivery
vehicles by technologies that readily adopt to the specific biochemical
requirements of new protein drugs. Pharma companies are constantly identifying,
developing and manufacturing novel therapeutic peptides and proteins. All of
these novel protein drugs need a delivery vehicle that accommodates their
fragile nature. Hence, the proposed technology is responsive to societal needs,
that is, a critical demand for new types of drug delivery systems to keep pace
with the developments of the pharma industry. The drug delivery systems proposed
by Alamanda Polymers hold this potential and are of interest to academic and
national research institutions and biotechnology companies.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).