* 0911499
* Collaborative research: Unraveling coseismic and postseismic deformation: A prerequisite for analyses of stress-coupling and tsunami genesis
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephan Grilli, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 08/31/2013
* USD 173,530.00

The December 26, 2004 M9.2 Sumatra-Andaman Earthquake (SAE), the third largest
earthquake ever recorded, ruptured the boundary separating the subducting Indo-
Australian Plate from the overriding Burma Plate and triggered a devastating
tsunami that significantly impacted 9 countries bordering the Indian Ocean. Near
the epicenter, the tsunami caused over 30 meters of run-up in some coastal areas
of Northern Sumatra, almost instantly killing over 200,000 people. The rupture
of the SAE included more than 20 meters of fault-slip, based on associated
seismologic data and GPS measurements of seafloor and ground deformation. This
magnitude of deformation provides a rare opportunity to conduct a regional-scale
in-situ rheological experiment, in which the coseismic fault-slip is the impulse
and the subsequent deformation is the response. Modeling these measured
perturbations can test hypotheses of coseismic (including tsunami-genesis) and
postseismic (including earthquake-coupling and tsunami run-up) behavior.
Specifically, Finite Element Models (FEMs) of the subduction zone near the
epicenter allow for a quantitative evaluation of the role of rheologic
partitioning and processes, on the stress, strain, and pore pressure that govern
coseismic and postseismic behavior. Tsunami propagation models can then use FEM-
generated seafloor deformations to predict coastal run-up. This modeling and
interpretive study of the SAE will address the following scientific questions:
(1) How does the distribution of material properties (i.e., structure, density,
porosity, and stiffness of rock formations in the subduction zone) affect fault-
slip estimations ? (2) How does this distribution influence seafloor
deformation, tsunami genesis, and run-up predictions ? (3) What is the timing
and distribution of poroelastic and viscoelastic postseismic deformation ? (4)
What afterslip is required ? (5) Do Coulomb stress and pore pressure transients
correlate to aftershock occurrence ? These questions are underpinned by a more
fundamental question: How do we construct and constrain models of coseismic and
postseismic behavior as a synthesis of processes, all of which contribute to the
deformational system ? Accordingly, the primary goal of the proposed research is
to determine the distribution and calibration of rheologic properties that
describe coseismic and postseismic behavior of the SAE. More specifically, FEM
simulations will address aftershock occurrence in both space and time (including
stress-coupling between the SAE and the March 25, 2005 M8.7 Nias earthquake that
occurred 350 km away from the SAE epicenter). FEM-generated seafloor deformation
predictions will drive tsunami propagation simulations. Because we expect that
variations in material properties (and possibly secondary splay faulting) will
cause both long and shorter scale seafloor deformations, tsunami generation and
propagation simulations will be performed with the dispersive long wave model
FUNWAVE. Tsunami hazards will be expressed in terms of simulated run-up and
inundation for the most affected areas of the Indian Ocean (e.g., Northern
Sumatra), and compared to the observed impact of the 12/26/04 tsunami. This
synoptic approach to simulating coseismic and postseismic deformational systems
may significantly advance tectonic and tsunami coastal hazard assessment
capabilities for the SAE and impact future assessments of similar mega-thrust
earthquakes for other subduction zones hosting high population densities, such
as the upper US West Coast (Cascadia) and Japan. Techniques for designing and
implementing FEMs will be disseminated to the scientific community during a
workshop in the latter stages of this project. Students will use Abaqus software
to construct FEMs that simulate fault-slip, which can be used in forward and
inverse models of deformation and drive of postseismic processes, including
poroelastic and viscoelastic deformation.