* 0911442
* Melting of Carbonated MORB-like Eclogite and Genesis of Ocean Island Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rajdeep Dasgupta, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2013
* USD 293,267.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry of oceanic island basalts
(OIBs) reflects the complexity of compositions and processes in the Earth's
mantle. Isotope and trace element geochemistry have established that parent
lithologies of OIBs in the Earth's mantle are heterogeneous. However, the case
of major element heterogeneity in OIBs is not completely understood as the full
spectrum of major element compositions of OIBs have so far not been produced by
laboratory experiments. Especially, the major element compositions of OIBs that
carry isotopic signatures of recycled crust cannot be reconciled with existing
melting experiments on subducted oceanic crust. This proposal is to test whether
melting of subducted oceanic crust, in the presence of CO2-rich fluids or
carbonates, produces magmas (partial melts of the Earth's mantle) with major
element compositions similar to alkalic OIBs. The aim is to constrain the major
and trace element compositions of silicate partial melts derived from carbonated
basaltic eclogite, and the compositional evolution of such melts through
reaction with mantle peridotite. The experiments will be performed at a pressure
range of 2 to 4 GPa. In particular, the experiments will be performed to address
the following fundamental questions: (1) What are the compositions of silicate
partial melts of silica-excess eclogite in the presence of CO2 and can
carbonated crust act as a root source of alkalic OIBs? (2) How do
eclogite+CO2-derived melt compositions change owing to interaction with shallow
mantle, depleted harzburgite? (3) What is the contribution of recycled
carbonated crust in the origin of intraplate basalts? (4) What are the plausible
conditions (depths/temperatures/source compositions) of generation of alkali
OIBs?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this work, laboratory experiments will be
conducted to simulate high pressure, high temperature conditions relevant for
magma generation processes beneath oceanic islands. Analysis of the partially
molten quenched rocks will be carried out using well established techniques of
optical and electron microscopy, electron probe microanalysis, and mass
spectrometry. The obtained results will further the understanding of genesis of
basalts (the dominant rock that makes up the ocean floor) and will add to link
melting of heterogeneous mantle rocks and deep carbon cycle. The results will be
integrated with other sister-disciplines in the broad field of solid Earth
science that seek to capture the complex processes in the Earth's mantle in
general and in the source regions of basalts in particular. The work will
support a newly established experimental petrology laboratory and a starting
faculty member at Rice University. The research will also involve education and
training of graduate and undergraduate researchers.