* 0911642
* Multi-scale Monitoring and Modeling of Land Use and Climate Change Impacts on the Terrestrial Hydrologic Cycle: Implications for the Great Lakes Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Remke Van Dam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 243,552.00

Multi-scale Monitoring and Modeling of Land Use and Climate Change Impacts on
the Terrestrial Hydrologic Cycle in the Great Lakes Basin

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Vadose-zone soil moisture is an important driver of processes in agricultural,
hydrological, ecological, and climate systems, yet the detailed nature of plant
water use across ranges of scales is often poorly characterized. With projected
changes in climate and land use (including afforestation, urbanization, and
agricultural intensification), there is a critical need to understand the likely
impacts on the hydrologic cycle and ecosystem health. Important hydrological and
biophysical processes are not adequately characterized with point estimates, and
models of root-water uptake are generally unable to accurately predict such
changes. Our objectives are to: 1) quantify multi-scale dynamics of vegetation-
water interactions across different land cover types to improve predictive
capabilities of hydrologic models, and 2) explore the impacts of land use and
climate changes on local to regional scale hydrologic fluxes. To explore the
likely effects of projected changes in climate and land cover, we propose to use
time-lapse electrical resistivity imaging and a novel coupling of a fully-
integrated terrestrial hydrology model with a dynamic vegetation growth model to
study managed and natural sites along a climate gradient across a range of
soils. Our research will provide: 1) improved knowledge and predictive
capability of short- and long-term processes that drive the terrestrial water
cycle, 2) root-zone moisture and root-development data that will improve coupled
land surface and climate models, and 3) quantitative information about
implications of land use and climate changes across a range of scales.