* 0911501
* Simple Models for Trace Element Fractionation During Concurrent Melting, Melt Migration, and Melt-rock Reaction in an Upwelling Heterogeneous Mantle Column
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Yan Liang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2012
* USD 305,678.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Intellectual Merit: Several lines of evidence suggest that melt generation and
segregation regions in the mantle are heterogeneous and consist of chemically
(e.g., enriched vs. depleted) and lithologically (e.g., peridotite vs.
pyroxenite) distinct domains of variable size and dimension. Partial melting of
such regions give rises to a diverse range of basaltic magma compositions. To
preserve geochemical signatures developed at depth, basalts must rise to the
surface without extensive re-equilibration with their surrounding mantle
wallrocks. This can be accomplished by focused melt flow through high-porosity
melt channels. To form high-porosity channels, pyroxenes in the peridotite
matrix must dissolve in the percolating melt. The matrix dissolution rate and
melt suction rate are important in determining the spatial distribution of the
channel and chemical compositions of the melt extracted at the top of the
channel and the matrix. During grain-scale porous flow, re-equilibration between
crystals and their interstitial melt may be incomplete. Models for trace element
fractionation and distribution during melting and melt extraction in the mantle
must include these fundamental observations or constraints as part of the
formulation. The primary objective of this project is to develop self-consistent
models for trace element and isotope fractionation and distribution during
concurrent melting, melt migration, and melt-rock interaction in an upwelling,
heterogeneous, two-porosity double lithology mantle column. Both steady-state
models and time-dependent models will be developed. The steady-state models will
be used to constrain the relative melt suction rate using selected incompatible
trace element abundances in diopside in abyssal peridotites and peridotites from
Oman ophiolite. Laboratory dissolution experiments will be conducted at selected
temperatures and pressures to determine the rates of harzburgite and lherzolite
dissolution and the depth of high-porosity melt channel initiation along two
mantle adiabats: one for melt migration beneath the mid-ocean ridge and the
other for melt migration in a mantle plume. Results from these laboratory and
geochemical studies will provide critical inputs to the general time-dependent
melting models that will allow geochemists to map chemical heterogeneities
observed in erupted basalts into their mantle sources, and to infer the
processes of melt segregation and melt-rock interaction from trace element
abundances in residual peridotites, mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB) and ocean
island basalts (OIB).

Broader Impacts: The origin and distribution of mantle heterogeneity are of
central importance to a broad range of Earth and planetary scientists. The
dynamic parameters obtained using the new melting models will likely stimulate
geodynamists to develop more sophisticated 2-D and 3-D models for melt migration
beneath mid-ocean ridges and in mantle plumes. The distribution of high-porosity
melt channels in the mantle as inferred from this proposed study will motivate
structure geologists to conduct more detailed mapping in ophiolites,
geophysicists and seismologists to design new experiments to image the mantle
beneath mid-ocean ridges. Results from this study will also be disseminated to a
broader audience through public lectures, and undergraduate and graduate
courses. And finally, the proposed project will provide hands on experience for
undergraduates, research opportunities for senior thesis, experimental,
computational, and educational experience for graduate students.