* 0911497
* Collaborative Research: Titanium in Deforming Quartz and the Thermo-mechanics of Detachment and Thrust Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Donna Whitney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2013
* USD 340,465.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the role of
deformation in the distribution of titanium (Ti) and other trace elements in
quartz over a wide range of temperature and deformation conditions in nature and
experiments. The mobility of Ti in deforming quartz is addressed by high-
pressure/high-temperature experiments that test the role of dynamic
recrystallization on Ti migration in quartz. In parallel, this research uses
natural quartz rocks to investigate two tectonic settings: (1) contractional
(thrust) systems, in which rocks deformed during heating and burial; quartz
microstructures locked in over a narrow range of temperatures but display a wide
range of microstructures; and (2) extensional (detachment) systems, in which
rocks deformed over a wide temperature range but developed similar
microstructures as hot rocks exhumed towards the Earth's surface. In experiments
and natural rocks from detachment and thrust systems, this project examines how
inherited Ti is redistributed as a function of deformation and temperature
conditions. Natural samples are from the Heavitree Quartzite in the Ruby Gap
Duplex, central Australia (thrust); the Siviez-Mischabel nappe in the western
Alps, Switzerland (thrust); and the Kettle and Snake Range extensional
detachment systems, western United States. Research methods include petrographic
and electron backscatter diffraction characterization of quartz microstructure,
types of recrystallization, and crystallographic preferred orientation;
cathodoluminescence imaging of trace element zoning in quartz; and ion
microprobe analysis of Ti in quartz in experimental and natural
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quartz is silicon dioxide (SiO2) but may contain
trace amounts of other elements, such as titanium and aluminum. The abundance of
these trace elements may correlate with temperature, thereby providing a means
to calculate the temperature at which quartz-bearing rocks locked in their
composition when they formed during tectonic events. Documenting the thermal
evolution of the crust in different tectonic settings (contraction, extension)
is important for understanding how tectonic processes operate over time.
Although the Ti content of quartz is increasingly used to calculate paleo-
temperatures of quartz-rich rocks, the role of deformation in the distribution
of trace elements in quartz must be understood. A combined field and
experimental study of the effect of deformation in different thermal and
tectonic settings can evaluate the effect of deformation on trace element
distribution in quartz.