* 0911300
* Observationally Constrained High Resolution Dynamics of the Present-Day Lithosphere-Mantle System
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2012
* USD 237,923.00

One of the most challenging problems in geophysics is the quantification of
stresses and rheology of the Earth's plates and plate boundary zones. We address
this problem through a comprehensive global treatment of the lithosphere/mantle
convection system. We first solve the depth-integrated 3-D force-balance
equations (using thin sheet approximation) for the lithosphere, where the
effective body force inputs are: (1) the horizontal variations in depth
integrated vertical stress (gravity potential energy differences - GPE) and (2)
the horizontal and radial tractions applied to the base of the lithosphere,
associated with large-scale mantle circulation. GPE estimates rely on accurate
(seismically-defined) crustal and upper mantle structure. Mantle circulation
models satisfy plate motions, geoid, and dynamic topography. Plate motions are
self-generated, and not imposed. Convection models have both radial and lateral
viscosity variations, and are driven by deeper density buoyancies, inferred from
tomography and history of subduction. Modeling performed to date has provided an
unprecedented quality of fit between model deviatoric stress fields and stress
indicators; the GPE differences calibrate the magnitudes of deviatoric stress,
and the observationally - constrained modeling has placed limits on the
magnitude and distribution of tractions that exist at the base of the
lithosphere. This modeling of the lithosphere system, therefore, plays an
important role in constraining convection models as well. We are also
calculating forward dynamic models of the lithosphere that predict the full
horizontal velocity gradient tensor field (which can be compared with GPS
measurements), along with the deviatoric stress field. The forward modeling,
which incorporates anisotropic treatment within transform fault zones, enables
us to refine our estimates of depth integrated effective viscosity within the
plates and plate boundary zones and further refine coupling models. A final and
important part of this project is to investigate full 3-D lithosphere models
that are coupled to full 3-D convection models. We will build the global
infrastructure, incorporating subduction in 3-D, continental orogeny in 3-D, the
role of anisotropic zones (e.g., strike-slip faults), layered elastic and
viscous systems, viscoelastic and power law mantle rheology, and full 3-D
flexure. This global-scale 3-D treatment of the lithosphere is necessary in
order to make further progress on the problem of understanding lithosphere
interaction with mantle circulation. This observationally-based treatment will
have a significant impact on the understanding of the lithosphere/convection
system. Because this work places constraints on the absolute magnitudes of
deviatoric stress and the lateral variations in strength of the lithosphere, it
has implications for understanding fault mechanics, and even the earthquake
rupture energy budget and earthquake cycle. The 3-D spherical treatment is
precise and the codes and method are being made available to researchers.