* 0911612
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of in-stream restoration on hydrological, chemical, and biological heterogeneity in the hyporheic zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Laura Lautz, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 197,645.00

Billions of dollars are spent annually on stream restoration, but
assessments&lt;br/&gt;of restoration impacts on in-channel ecosystems are rare,
and investigations into hyporheic impacts are practically absent. Most
restoration projects aim to improve degraded stream structure and function by
manipulating channel morphology to replicate pre-degradation conditions. The
complex interactions of surface and subsurface flow in the hyporheic zone
associated with restoration structures may play an important role in the
ecological recovery of&lt;br/&gt;these projects, particularly with respect to
water quality and aquatic habitat. The overall objective of this project is to
assess 1) the degree to which in-stream restoration projects
mimic&lt;br/&gt;natural bedform processes by inducing rapid hyporheic
interaction, and 2) the resultant impacts on heterogeneity of associated
physical, chemical, thermal and biological patterns in streambeds. Restoration
projects will be assessed in the field relative to degraded sites, where
restoration projects have not been implemented, and reference sites, which
represent an ideal condition and on which the restoration design was based.
Computational modeling will guide&lt;br/&gt;site instrumentation, investigate
hydraulic drivers of water flux, and scale the results to larger reach lengths.
The questions we will address include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Does an engineered stream
restoration design serve as an analog of natural stream features that drive
hydraulics and enhance water flux through the streambed? Are streambed fluxes
comparable in magnitude and spatial heterogeneity to those found at reference
reaches that&lt;br/&gt;serve as the basis for the engineering
design?&lt;br/&gt;2. Does water flux through the streambed around restoration
structures generate a mosaic of redox conditions and thermal patterns that are
more spatially heterogeneous and span a greater range than those found at non-
restored sites? Are these spatial patterns comparable to the spatial patterns
found at reference sites?&lt;br/&gt;3. Does the mosaic of hydrologic, redox and
thermal conditions diversify habitat for hyporheic macroinvertebrates and result
in greater hyporheic invertebrate taxonomic richness and community patchiness,
compared to non-restored sites?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work addresses
current gaps in our knowledge of how instream&lt;br/&gt;restoration projects
impact hyporheic exchange and improve hyporheic function,&lt;br/&gt;particularly
in terms of water quality and habitat restoration. The results of our work will
inform future restoration design and demonstrate that restoration design
considerations should include the vertical component, not simply channel form
and process. Through exploratory computational modeling of hyporheic fluxes
around proposed restoration structures, we can examine whether restoration
designs maximize physicochemical and biological diversity in the stream system,
restoring ecological function. The project team will actively engage
practitioners through participation in training and workshops on stream
restoration held annually throughout Upstate New York. Our work will also
establish post-restoration monitoring at projects implemented by state and
federal agencies. The proposed project explicitly incorporates the active
participation of graduate and undergraduate students in research. Women and
traditionally underrepresented minorities will be actively recruited for
graduate student participation. Three undergraduate students will be recruited
to complete independent research projects related to the modeling and biotic
components of this project. We will activelyengage a broader audience of
graduate and undergraduate students in this research program by incorporating
educational experiences that are directly linked to active research into the
curriculum of four courses at Syracuse University and SUNY ESF.