* 0911242
* Development of Efficient X-Ray CT Image Segmentation Techniques for Quantitative Analysis of Phase Distributions and Flow Processes in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Marcel Schaap, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 249,820.00

Development of Efficient X-Ray CT Image Segmentation Techniques for Quantitative
Analysis of Phase Distributions and Flow Processes in Porous
Media&lt;br/&gt;Markus Tuller, Pavel Iassonov and Marcel Schaap&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Nondestructive imaging methods such as X-Ray Computed
Tomography (CT) yield high-resolution 3 D representations of pore space and
fluid distribution within porous materials. Steadily increasing computational
capabilities and easier access to industrial and synchrotron X Ray CT facilities
have contributed to a recent surge in microporous media research with objectives
ranging from theoretical aspects of fluid and interfacial dynamics at the pore-
scale to practical applications such as (D)NAPL transport and dissolution. In
recent years, significant efforts and resources have been devoted to improve CT
technology, micro-scale analysis, and fluid dynamics simulations. However, the
development of adequate image segmentation methods for conversion of grayscale
CT volumes into a discrete form that permits quantitative characterization of
pore space features and subsequent modeling of liquid distribution and flow
processes is lacking far behind. &lt;br/&gt;A preliminary study revealed that
most of the documented segmentation methods that were originally developed for
optical character recognition, pattern analysis, or medical research yield
vastly different results when applied to X-Ray CT data of porous materials.
Furthermore, there is virtually no commercial or open-source software with
advanced image segmentation capabilities suitable for automated processing of
large CT data sets available.&lt;br/&gt;To overcome these shortcomings we will
identify the most promising segmentation methods and develop new hybrid
algorithms tailored to industrial and synchrotron X-Ray CT data of natural
porous media. Lattice Boltzmann simulations within X-Ray CT-derived discretized
pore space compared to independently measured hydraulic properties will guide
the development process. The generated algorithms will be combined in a user-
friendly, stand-alone, and well documented software package and made available
to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;