* 0911423
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Detectors Based on Transparent Microwires and Nanowires on Plastic Film
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Anthony Kewitsch, Telescent Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,805.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new type of optical power monitor based on microwires and nanowires patterned
within a transparent multi-layer anti-reflection coating. These wires are
nanometer to micron wide traces patterned within an indium tin oxide (ITO)
conductive layer. ITO typically absorbs 1 to 10% at visible and infrared
wavelengths, depending on its thickness. Localized heating of ITO occurs when
the optical intensity passing through the conductive trace exceeds about 1
mW/mm2. The temperature change produces a proportional resistance change that
can be measured electronically. This detector samples and transmits light with
nearly zero insertion loss. By incorporating this patterned ITO coating within
traditional antireflection coatings and thin film interference coatings, novel
detection schemes can be developed. Moreover, by reducing the dimensions of the
trace to the nanometer scale, the detector also has the potential for high-speed
operation with a bandwidth approaching GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts/commercial potential of this project will be a detection technology that
enables a wide range of new optical monitoring applications by eliminating
costly and bulky assemblies. For instance, inexpensive and miniature optical
monitors can potentially replace the ten million passive fiber optic connector
adapters produced annually for fiber optic communication systems. By
transparently measuring the optical power through fiber optic junctions in a low
cost fashion, advanced self-monitoring and self-diagnosing communication network
architectures can be realized for Fiber-to-the-Home and data centers. This
technology promises to reduce the cost to measure power within optical fibers by
two orders of magnitude. These detectors have the potential to be mass-produced
on flexible plastic film, window glass, mirrors, or even on curved substrates
such as light bulbs and lenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."