* 0911587
* Probing the Rheology of Tibetan Lithosphere: Surface Deformation in Response to Climatically-Induced Changes in Lake Loads
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Kevin Furlong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2013
* USD 459,877.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Direct measurements of the deformational properties of actively deforming
lithosphere remain elusive and lead to fundamental gaps in the understanding of
how the evolution of rheology controls the evolution of orogenic systems.
Despite abundant geophysical and geological data for the Indo-Asian collisional
orogen, the mobility of the lower crust beneath central Tibet, its physical
state, and the role that localized channel flow has played in the evolution of
the Plateau and the Himalaya remain first-order questions. This project focuses
on characterizing the deformational response of Tibetan lithosphere to time-
varying surface loads to place quantitative constraints on the rheology of the
crust. The project utilizes flights of relict shorelines around several large
lakes within the internally-drained interior of the Tibetan Plateau. These
shorelines indicate former positions of more extensive lake levels, and the
withdrawal of the lakes in response to climatically-driven hydrologic changes
represents a load removed from the lithosphere. Because the shorelines represent
a paleo-horizontal datum, deflection of these markers during flexural isostatic
rebound can place constraints on the elastic strength of the lithosphere and the
viscosity of the underlying substrate. The study will couple detailed field
observations and geochronology with rigorous deformational modeling (elastic
flexure and 3-D visco-elastic deformation) to link the history of lake unloading
to physical properties of the lower crust and mantle. In doing so, two
fundamental questions about the Tibet-Himalayan orogen will be addressed: (1) Is
Tibetan crust capable of lateral flow on geologic timescales, and (2) Do the
rheologic properties of Tibetan lithosphere vary among the individual terranes
comprising the plateau? The answers to these questions extend far beyond the
specifics of the Tibet-Himalayan orogen and will provide additional constraints
on the conditions that favor or impede lower-crustal flow during orogenesis in
both active and ancient mountain belts.

Deformation within the deep crust is a fundamental process that links the
driving forces for plate tectonics - flow in the earth's mantle - to slip on
tectonic faults in the upper, brittle crust. Because direct measurements of the
physical properties of the deep crust are technically infeasible, the behavior
of the deep crust during mountain building is hotly debated. In particular,
whether the deep crust is capable of widespread, lateral flow has implications
for both strain accumulation on plate boundary fault systems - transient
deformation along the Cascadia margin in the Western US is thought to be related
to deformation in the deep crust - as well as the rates and patterns of
development of high topography in Asia. The latter problem is one of great
interest in that high topography of the Tibetan Plateau fundamentally influences
atmospheric circulation. Understanding the processes and rates by which this
high topography developed will enable more rigorous tests of the possibility
that growth of the Tibetan Plateau played a central role in climate change over
geologic timescales. This study will yield new insight into the nature of
deformation within the deep crust beneath Tibet, information that is sorely
lacking in today?s models of mountain building. In doing so, the project will
also provide new constraints on climatically-driven changes in lake levels,
information that is central to a more comprehensive understanding of the water
budget in this resource-limited part of the world. Finally, the results will
guide a more general understanding of how flow in the deep crust influences the
overall deformation of the earth?s surface, including the potential for
earthquake-generating slip on tectonic faults.