* 0911071
* Faulting under high confinement: Experimental investigation and model development
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Carl Renshaw, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 418,590.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep earthquakes, some of which are
among the largest and most damaging of all&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes, have been a
paradox since their discovery in the 1920s. The combined increase
of&lt;br/&gt;confining pressure and temperature with depth inhibits frictional
sliding, the principal earthquake&lt;br/&gt;mechanism for shallow earthquakes,
along fault planes beyond depths of a few tens of&lt;br/&gt;kilometers, yet
earthquakes occur to depths approaching 700 km. Brittle-like shear failure
under&lt;br/&gt;high-confinement also occurs with impact cratering in both rock
and ice and limits the steady&lt;br/&gt;state flow stress of highly confined
rock+ice mixtures and thus the may provide important&lt;br/&gt;constraints on
the thermomechanical evolution of certain moons and planets. This
project&lt;br/&gt;includes new experiments and modeling aimed at elucidating the
fundamental physical&lt;br/&gt;mechanism(s) that underlie localized brittle
compressive failure under high confinement.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments
demonstrate a transition in brittle-like failure mode with
increasing&lt;br/&gt;confinement and that the high confinement faults appear not
to be friction controlled. Nor do&lt;br/&gt;they appear to be related to other
well established faulting mechanisms, including mode II&lt;br/&gt;cracking,
dehydration embrittlement, or phase transformations. Their working hypothesis is
that&lt;br/&gt;at play is a fundamentally different faulting mechanism called
plastic faulting -- a non-frictional&lt;br/&gt;shear instability aided by
adiabatic heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spirited by past success in using ice as
a model material for rock?ice was involved in the&lt;br/&gt;discovery of
transformational faulting and our own discovery of what appears to be a
universal&lt;br/&gt;mechanism of moderate-confinement brittle failure?and
encouraged by its marked similarity to&lt;br/&gt;the behavior of rocks and
minerals, this project consists of a three-year program of
triaxial&lt;br/&gt;compression experiments to determine the effects, if any, of
confinement, grain size and strain&lt;br/&gt;rate on both the terminal failure
stress and the failure mode, with attention to microstructural&lt;br/&gt;detail,
as observed using visual microscopy, cold stage SEM electron backscatter
imaging, and&lt;br/&gt;cold room enabled micro-CT tomography. The researchers
seek to reveal the&lt;br/&gt;physics of failure, and then to develop
quantitative models of plastic fault initiation that only rely&lt;br/&gt;on
independently measurable parameters. Such models are prerequisites for any
conclusions&lt;br/&gt;concerning the possible role of a particular failure
process in geophysical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work also
will contribute to Dartmouth's long tradition of involving undergraduates in
research, through senior honors theses&lt;br/&gt;and through the Dartmouth?s
Women In Science (WISP) internship program. Students involved&lt;br/&gt;in this
project will participate in professional development opportunities through
Dartmouth's&lt;br/&gt;Center for the Advancement of Learning and in educational
outreach programs, including Junior&lt;br/&gt;Science Caf√©s in regional high
schools, Igloo Build programs sponsored by the Montshire&lt;br/&gt;Museum of
Science, and those supported through Dartmouth's NSF-funded Polar
Studies&lt;br/&gt;IGERT program, including courses on communicating polar
science and the ethics and policy&lt;br/&gt;implications of polar research, and
educational outreach activities with communities in&lt;br/&gt;Greenland.