* 0911041
* NetSE: Large: A theory of network architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* K. Mani Chandy, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2013
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project is developing a theoretical foundation for the design of network
architecture, which is essential to understanding highly evolved, organized, and
complex networks, inspired by and with application to technological, biological,
ecological, and social networks, and with strong connections to real-world data.
Architecture involves the most universal, high-level, and persistent elements of
organization, usually defined in terms of protocols ? the rules that facilitate
interaction between the diverse components of a network. Network technology
promises to provide unprecedented levels of performance, efficiency,
sustainability, and robustness in almost all technological, natural, and social
systems. The ?robust yet fragile? (RYF) feature of complex systems is
ubiquitous, and a theoretical framework to manage the complexity/fragility
spirals of our future infrastructures is critical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is both theoretical and practical. A theory
of architecture is crucial for the design of future networks and is at the heart
of sustainability. Comparison of architectures from biology, ecology, and
technology has identified a variety of common characteristic organizational
structures. These observations will form the basis for a mathematical theory of
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is through
the application of network architecture design to multiple areas of engineering
and through the development of a unified approach to teaching systems and
complexity. The project involves a diverse collection of researchers, including
women and underrepresented minorities. Research results are disseminated not
only through domain-specific journals, but also in the broad-interest high-
impact literature (e.g. Science, Nature, PNAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;