* 0911460
* Folding of synthetic random coil side-chain functionalized copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Marcus Weck, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Marcus Weck of New York
University who will establish basic design principles for side-chain induced
folding processes in random coil polymers. In particular, two classes of
interactions will be explored as inducing elements, donor-acceptor interactions
and chiral induction. The proposed research will also create polymeric materials
with well-defined three-dimensional architectures. Rationally designed side-
chain functionalized homo- and co-polymers based on ring-opening metathesis
polymerizations (ROMP) are the basis for the proposed study. The next generation
of complex, diverse, and highly functionalized polymers will be based on self-
assembled 3D architectures and will be useful for a variety of applications
including electro-optical, biological, energy, and computer applications.
However, basic design principles that would allow for the programmed design,
synthesis, and optimization of such materials are not available. The proposed
work would allow for the development of such design principles. Furthermore, the
design principles that will be developed are not only relevant to the proposed
side-chain polymers but can also be translated potentially to biopolymers, main-
chain polymers and oligomers. Finally, the outcome of the proposed studies will
also allow for the development of new synthetic methodologies in polymer
science.

The research by Professor Weck could have a significant impact on materials
science as it will provide novel polymers to address some key questions from
folding, to aggregation, to catalyst design. These can lead to possible uses of
the resulting polymers in biological, electro-optical, computer and energy
industries. The proposed research will be used as an education and outreach tool
to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, to initiate an
interdisciplinary polymer curriculum at his institution, and to offer workshops
to introduce polymer chemistry to faculty at undergraduate institutions. The
workshops present basic concepts and experiments on how to incorporate polymer
science into the chemistry curricula. Finally, the PI has extensive
collaborations with industry on polymer-related problems, transferring knowledge
to the private sector, and bringing his science to the marketplace.