* 0911975
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Luminescent Manganese-Doped Zinc Selenide Quantum Dots to Enhance Silicon Solar Cell Efficiency through Spectral Down-Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Thomas Penner, NANOMATERIALS AND NANOFABRICATION LABORATORIES
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2010
* USD 99,981.00

This Small Business Technology Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
a spectral down-converter based on metal ion-doped nanocrystalline quantum dots
to increase the efficiency of polycrystalline silicon solar cells. Attempts to
add a luminescent spectral down-conversion layer to semiconductor solar cells to
shift inefficiently-utilized light below 500 nm in the solar spectrum to longer
wavelength have been made over several decades because of predicted relative
efficiency gains of 10-20%, a very significant improvement. No practical device
has resulted because of the very high performance requirements for the emissive
over-layer. Manganese-doped zinc selenide nanoparticles exhibit little
absorption longer than 500 nm, yet luminescence with high efficiency in a single
band near 600 nm, thus eliminating both optical filtering and luminescence
reabsorption. The objective of this project is to evaluate this material?s
potential to be a practical spectral down-converter. This involves modeling
calculations using solution data as input, measurement of actual performance
gains using liquid-reservoir down-converter plus solar cell, and preparation of
concentrated thin solid films and their photophysical evaluation. It will then
be possible to determine the efficiency gains that can be expected from an
integrated thin-film down-converter/solar cell module.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of even small improvements in the
efficiency of polycrystalline silicon solar cells, which represents a mature
technology are very difficult and costly to realize. Yet the advantages of
improving their performance is potentially enormous, both commercial and
societal, given their current and anticipated increased utilization. Therefore a
gain in efficiency on the order of 10% (relative) would have a large commercial
impact, especially if it can be obtained from a fairly simple and inexpensive
add-on layer.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."