* 0911677
* Is the Tibetan Plateau Rising?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2012
* USD 327,277.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tibetan Plateau is the largest area
of high topography on the planet. Is the Tibetan Plateau rising higher today? Is
it growing taller due to ongoing contraction as India continues to collide with
Eurasia? Is it collapsing due to extension driven by its excess gravitational
potential energy? Is it roughly in balance, no longer growing higher, but simply
changing shape? Are parts of the plateau presently evolving in different ways?
This project, a joint effort between researchers at the University of Alaska and
several Chinese research institutions, aims to address these questions. Global
Positioning System (GPS) measurements from the Tibetan Plateau and its
surroundings are dense enough and precise enough to make meaningful measurements
of vertical motions in Tibet and the rest of the India-Eurasia collision zone.
Using several years of GPS data and careful attention to detail in the data
analysis, a realistic vertical measurement precision of approximately 1
millimeter per year can be attained even with campaign surveys. Hundreds of
campaign GPS sites in China and the rest of the India-Eurasia collision zone now
have enough data to provide robust estimates of vertical velocities. These data
will be completely reanalyzed the using the next generation of models and
orbits, and models to explain the observed rates and spatial variation will be
developed. Accuracy will be assessed using vertical rates over a wide area,
including regions of no expected deformation, and by comparing estimated GPS
vertical motions with complementary data from repeated leveling and
InSAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship of instantaneous vertical rates to
long-term geologic uplift or subsidence rates requires more investigation, and
this study will be first to focus on systematic regional measurement and
modeling of vertical motions in a region of spectacular active tectonics.
Improved understanding of crustal deformation will lead to a better
understanding of earthquake hazards in China, a heavily populated region prone
to earthquakes. Although this project focuses on vertical motions, we a more
precise estimate of horizontal motions will also obtained, and the modeling of
elastic deformation using both vertical and horizontal motions may produce
significant new understanding of some of the tectonically active regions in
China. The occurrence in May 2008 of the devastating Wenchuan earthquake, in a
region of slow convergence yet extremely steep topography, drives home the need
to better understand deformation processes in China. This study will make GPS
time series and velocities from China, which are not easily accessible to US
investigators, available in a usable form.