* 0911428
* Collaborative Research: Incorporating Temperature-dependent Physical Properties into Numerical Models of Magmatic and Related Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2012
* USD 74,939.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most geologic processes within the
interior of the Earth are driven by heat transfer. These processes include magma
generation, volcanism, geothermal systems, and generation of several types of
ore deposits. Current mathematical and computer models used to study these
processes generally assume fixed values for several fundamental properties of
rocks such as heat capacity, that is the ability of rocks to hold heat, thermal
diffusivity, that is the ability of rocks to transfer heat, and the amount of
heat that is necessary to melt rocks. The values of these properties for many
types of rocks, in particular how they vary with temperature, are still poorly
known, and one aspect of the research focuses on experimental measurements in
the laboratory. The new values will then be applied to modeling the growth of
well-characterized magma bodies within the Earth's crust by continued or
episodic magma injection, and how growth and crystallization of these plutons
drives metamorphism of the surrounding rocks and geothermal systems. The project
will provide an opportunity to train students and young scientists in research
that will have laboratory, computational and field components. The ability to
view complex natural processes from multiple perspectives is key to the training
of successful geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for improved data on
temperature-dependent properties of rocks that can be incorporated into
integrated thermal models is motivated by recent advances in understanding of
how granitic plutons are constructed, and because intrusion-induced metamorphic
and geothermal systems generally have longer durations than simple conductive
and convective thermal models typically predict. There has been a paradigm shift
from viewing plutons as large volumes of magmas that are emplaced in a single
pulse as diapirs to viewing plutons as bodies that grow over extended periods,
from tens of thousands of years to millions of years. Prolonged injection of
magma has consequences for crystallization histories of plutons and duration of
metamorphic-geothermal systems, all of which are controlled by heat transfer.
The aim of the project is to determine temperature-dependent properties of
minerals and rocks and to develop integrated numerical models for magmatic-
metamorphic-geothermal systems. The modeling will be field-tested by examination
of the growth of the Harney Peak Granite pluton in the Black Hills and how its
growth influenced its thermal aureole. The laboratory data will be useful to
workers who study processes in many other geologic settings.