* 0911547
* Collaborative Research:  Impacts of In-Stream Restoration on Hydrolocgical, Chemical, and Biological Heterogeneity in the Hyporheic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2015
* Theodore Endreny, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 275,335.00

Billions of dollars are spent annually on stream restoration, but
assessments&lt;br/&gt;of restoration impacts on in-channel ecosystems are rare,
and investigations into hyporheic impacts are practically absent. Most
restoration projects aim to improve degraded stream structure and function by
manipulating channel morphology to replicate pre-degradation conditions. The
complex interactions of surface and subsurface flow in the hyporheic zone
associated with restoration structures may play an important role in the
ecological recovery of&lt;br/&gt;these projects, particularly with respect to
water quality and aquatic habitat. The overall&lt;br/&gt;objective of this
project is to assess 1) the degree to which in-stream restoration projects mimic
natural bedform processes by inducing rapid hyporheic interaction, and 2) the
resultant impacts on heterogeneity of associated physical, chemical, thermal and
biologicalpatterns in streambeds. Restoration projects will be assessed in the
field relative to degraded sites, where restoration projects have not been
implemented, and reference sites, which represent an ideal condition and on
which the restoration design was&lt;br/&gt;based. Computational modeling will
guide site instrumentation, investigate hydraulic drivers of water flux, and
scale the results to larger reach lengths. The questions we will address
include: 1. Does an engineered stream restoration design serve as an analog of
natural stream&lt;br/&gt;features that drive hydraulics and enhance water flux
through the streambed? Are streambed fluxes comparable in magnitude and spatial
heterogeneity to those found at reference reaches that serve as the basis for
the engineering design? 2. Does water flux through the streambed around
restoration structures generate a mosaic of redox conditions and thermal
patterns that are more spatially heterogeneous and span a greater range than
those found at non-restored sites? Are these spatial patterns comparable to the
spatial patterns found at reference sites? 3. Does the mosaic of hydrologic,
redox and thermal conditions diversify habitat for hyporheic macroinvertebrates
and result in greater hyporheic invertebrate taxonomic richness and community
patchiness, compared to non-restored sites?&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
addresses current gaps in our knowledge of how instream&lt;br/&gt;restoration
projects impact hyporheic exchange and improve hyporheic
function,&lt;br/&gt;particularly in terms of water quality and habitat
restoration. The results of our work will inform future restoration design and
demonstrate that restoration design considerations should include the vertical
component, not simply channel form and process. Through exploratory
computational modeling of hyporheic fluxes around proposed restoration
structures, we can examine whether restoration designs maximize physicochemical
and biological diversity in the stream system, restoring ecological function.
The project team&lt;br/&gt;will actively engage practitioners through
participation in training and workshops on on stream restoration held annually
throughout Upstate New York. Our work will also establish post-restoration
monitoring at&lt;br/&gt;projects implemented by state and federal agencies. The
proposed project explicitly incorporates the active participation of graduate
and undergraduate students in research. Women and traditionally underrepresented
minorities will be actively recruited for graduate student participation. Three
undergraduate students will be recruited to complete independent research
projects related to the modeling and biotic components of this project. We will
actively engage a broader audience of graduate and undergraduate students in
this research program by incorporating educational experiences that are directly
linked to active research into the curriculum of four courses at Syracuse
University and SUNY ESF.