* 0911199
* Proton transport in water networks: Understanding cooperative effects in charge migration via isomer-selective vibrational spectroscopy of cold cluster ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2012
* USD 480,000.00

In this award funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Mark A. Johnson of Yale University will explore
the molecular-level interactions responsible for the unique properties
associated with an excess proton in water. Better understanding of water-
mediated proton transport is needed because this process occurs in many fields
of science and technology where only a small number of water molecules are
available. Examples range from trans-membrane proton pumps that mediate
electrical signaling in biological systems to proton exchange membranes that
conduct positive charge in fuel cells. One of the long-standing roadblocks
preventing direct observation of the local environment of an excess proton in
the condensed phase is that its vibrational signature is so broad that it masks
the molecular-level picture of how the charge is accommodated at various stages
along the transport chain. The focus of the research funded by Prof. Johnson's
award is to overcome this problem by exploiting very recent advances in the
preparation and photochemical manipulation of cold, size-selected water clusters
in the gas phase. These methods involve Ar-cluster mediated synthesis and pump-
probe vibrational spectroscopy of cluster ions using multiple stages of mass
selection. The specific goal is to obtain precise spectroscopic signatures that
can be analyzed to reveal how the degree of charge delocalization depends on the
different network topologies of the hydrogen-bonded environment. The target
systems chosen to express these effects are derived from water cluster-mediated
reactions that occur naturally in the atmosphere, and indeed promise to resolve
a long-standing puzzle regarding the observed deionization rate of the ambient
NO+ ion in the D region of the ionosphere (80 km altitude). A new type of
measurement will be developed that is capable of measuring the energetic
barriers to proton transfer, and thus expose the key factors controlling proton
mobility.&lt;br/&gt; The wide ranging implications of the basic science explored
in this effort provide a natural way to engage the interest and participation of
students at all levels - high school through Ph.D. candidates - with projects
that connect to issues of immediate importance to the society like energy (in
the case of fuel cells) and the environment (in the case of water-mediated
atmospheric chemistry). Several students already involved in this research are
from under-represented groups in the physical sciences, including undergraduates
at Yale University.