* 0911375
* Structure-selective RNA Cleavage by Metal Ion Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 512,436.00

This research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Janet Morrow at the University at Buffalo,
State University of New York, to examine the structure-selective cleavage of RNA
by mononuclear and dinuclear metal ion catalysts with the goal of developing
catalysts for RNA structure mapping and developing small molecules for specific
interaction with common secondary structures of nucleic acids. First,
mononuclear and dinuclear complexes of scandium(III) and lanthanides(III) will
be prepared and studied as structure-selective RNA cleavage catalysts. Second,
recognition agents that bind to uridine or thymidine containing bulges,
mismatches or loops in RNA or DNA, respectively, will be developed. These
recognition agents are based on zinc(II) macrocyclic complexes with attached
pendent aromatic groups. Third, zinc(II) complex binders will be tethered to
scandium(III) or europium(III) catalysts and the structure-selective cleavage of
RNAs containing uridines in bulges and loops will be studied. Lanthanide ion
complexes and their interactions with nucleic acids will be characterized by
using luminescence spectroscopy. In addition to training graduate and
undergraduate students in multidisciplinary research, research training will be
extended to undergraduate courses by the creation of a new laboratory module for
our CASPiE program (Center for Authentic Practice in Education). This module
will involve studies to monitor binding of small molecules to DNA. The Morrow
group will develop and maintain a specialized laser system for the direct
excitation of lanthanide luminescence and keep the facility open to all
researchers. This includes students and faculty members from the State
University of New York at Fredonia for our collaborative work on the study of
metal ion complex binding to nucleic acids. This work will provide new tools for
the study of RNA protein interactions and RNA structure in vitro and in cell
culture and will be a first step towards targeting specific RNA structures to
control biological function.