* 0911186
* Nanofibrous Conductive Polymers from Aminophenylporphyrins: Mechanisms for Conductivity and Applications in Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Carl Wamser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 492,502.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professor Carl C. Wamser of Portland State University. His research
proposes to develop the next generation of solar cells that depends on the
development of new materials that are durable and inexpensive, while also
satisfying the key criteria for efficiency, i.e., thermodynamics and kinetics
that optimize light harvesting, charge separation, and transport of electrons
and holes. The project will investigate novel polymers created by oxidative
polymerization of porphyrins with aminophenyl substituents. Since the polymeric
species have already been prepared, the thrusts of this proposal rely on the
structural characterization of the material and the determination of the
mechanism of its electronic conductivity. Specifically, the aims are to clarify
the structural linkages that interconnect the porphyrin units, develop a
mechanism for the polymerization process, elucidate the factors that govern the
electronic conductivity, and study the potential role of these materials in
novel solar cell configurations. New directions are proposed for the fabrication
of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), which should be of considerable
fundamental interest and could point to new directions for achieving major
technological goals in direct solar photoconversion. Considerable preliminary
evidence supports his capacity to synthesize robust porphyrin-based nanofibers
and coat them with electron-conducting semiconductor particles, so it is evident
that the proposed studies can be undertaken. The approach described is very
imaginative and offers a novel architecture to probe for efficient charge
separation/current generation by solar photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the proposed research will address renewable energy resources, which
are of tremendous global importance, not only for their inherent value, but also
as a means of minimizing global warming. Professor Wamser's concerns on climate
change and energy issues are incorporated into his academic activities. As part
of his teaching, in large classes, he emphasizes issues of sustainability and
the potential of solar energy in meeting human needs. A consequence of these
activities has been a continuous flow of undergraduate students into his lab who
are interested in the subject where they will receive a meaningful research
experience. During the summer, he has opened his laboratory to underrepresented
students as part of the ACS Project SEED. Interaction with high schools and the
community at large is an important component of his outreach activities.
Therefore, one of the major goals of this research project is to strengthen
Professor Wamser's credibility when communicating with the public.