* 0911070
* RUI: Guerbet Alcohols as Mesogen-Inducing Groups: Synthesis and Characterization of Bipyridine-Based Metallomesogens
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Bachman, University of the South
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 276,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this RUI project funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic,
and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials Research,
Robert Bachman of Sewanee: The University of the South will synthesize and study
new metallomesogens: liquid crystal forming metal complexes. The promise of
combining the useful properties of metal complexes with those of liquid crystals
has led to a longstanding interest in metallomesogens. These materials are a
technologically important class of compounds impacting many industries. The
complexes targeted in this work will use metal-metal interactions to both assist
in the formation of liquid crystalline phases and impart novel properties, such
as intense luminescence or conductive behavior, to the materials. Guerbet
alcohols, which are potent suppressors of crystallinity, will play a key role in
stabilizing the liquid crystalline phase at low (ambient) temperature while
allowing for the targeted metal-metal interactions to occur. Sewanee has been
reintroducing research training into the education of its science
undergraduates. This project will impact students' educational experiences and
will provide these undergraduates an opportunity to learn research skills at
their own institution.