* 0911346
* Significant and complex seismic anisotropy beneath the Himalayas and the southern Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Stephen Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2011
* USD 124,341.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Physical and chemical processes inside the Earth's deep interior are the
ultimate causes of features and phenomena observed on the surface of the Earth.
The rising of mountain chains such as the Himalayas, the formation of deep
valleys such as the Death Valley and the Rio Grande rift, and the occurrence of
devastating earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are just a few examples of the
consequence of the mighty internal forces of the planet Earth. Obviously, a
better understanding of those internal processes will lead to a better
understanding of natural hazards such as earthquakes and volcanoes.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of the Earth's interior is inaccessible: while
the center of the earth is about 6370 km deep, the deepest hole that the human
being can drill so far is merely 15 km. If we assume that the Earth has a volume
of a regular chicken egg, the hole that people can drill is about half way
through the eggshell. As a result, indirect techniques are routinely used to
image the Earth's deep interior. The most effectively techniques come from
computer analysis of elastic waves produced by earthquakes. Many motion-
detection devices called seismographs have been recording ground vibrations over
the past 50 years. The technique is similar to CAT-Scan used by medical doctors
in the hospital to image the internal structure of a patient. This project
measures the direction and strength of fabrics formed in the Earth's mantle
beneath the Tibetan Plateau using teleseismic P-to-S converted phases at the
core-mantle boundary. Splitting of teleseismic shear-waves is mostly the
consequence of lithospheric deformation and asthenospheric flow. Significant
seismic anisotropy with an averaged splitting time of about 1 s has been
observed in the vicinity of most present-day subduction zones and in ancient
collisional mountain belts, as a result of asthenospheric flow and lithosphere
shortening, respectively. Surprisingly, previous shear-wave splitting
measurements in the Himalayas and southern Tibet, which are the locations of the
prototype of active continental collision, suggested an isotropic or weakly
anisotropic upper mantle (with the majority of splitting times of 0.5 s or
less). A number of conflicting models regarding the geometry of the Indian
lithosphere beneath southern Tibet have been proposed based on shear-wave
splitting and other measurements. Reassessment of all the available data (Gao
and Liu, 2009, G-cubed) from station LSA which is located in the southern part
of the Lhasa block in southern Tibet revealed clear evidence of significant
anisotropy, with a splitting time of up to 1.5 s. When the PKS and SKKS in
addition to SKS phases are used, remarkable azimuthal variations of the
splitting parameters have been identified. The majority of the splitting
parameters can be interpreted as a combined effect of two layers of anisotropy.
The top layer has a NE-SW fast direction which can be considered as the result
of lower-crustal plastic flow, and the lower layer has a nearly E-W fast
direction which can be interpreted as reflecting the asthenospheric flow
associated with the motion of the Eurasian plate.

The project expands the reassessment of mantle anisotropy in southern Tibet from
one station to about 100 stations by applying a systematic shear-wave splitting
measurement procedure. A uniform data processing method is used to all the data
sets which were collected by a total of 6 portable seismic experiments since
1991.