* 0911725
* NSF Workshop on Interpretive Methodologies in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Peregrine Schwartz-Shea, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2010
* USD 43,707.00

The Workshop is intended for political science scholars who want to develop and
improve their understanding and practice of interpretive research. These forms
of research position the meaning-making practices of human actors at the center
of scientific explanation. Called qualitative research in some disciplines, it
is conducted from an experience-near perspective in that the researcher does not
start with concepts determined a priori but rather seeks to allow these to
emerge from encounters in "the field" (broadly defined here to encompass both
traditional in-country fieldwork, domestic and overseas, and textual-archival
research). Interpretive research focuses on analytically disclosing those
meaning-making practices, while showing how those practices configure to
generate observable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interpretive research
methodologies and methods are not new but are today in a minority position in
political science disciplinary training and mainstream journals. Despite this,
interest in and use of interpretive approaches is growing - in part because of
the recognition that such methods (like all methods) offer unique ways of
framing and analyzing political problems. Whereas the philosophical grounding of
interpretive research has long been clear, empirical issues of research design,
research practice, and appropriate assessment have recently been developed in
ways that can assist doctoral students and junior scholars to make their
research more rigorous and to communicate their findings more
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop connects senior scholars from a
variety of empirical subfields, all experts in some aspect of interpretive
methodology or method, with doctoral students and junior faculty who are
pursuing such studies and who may lack opportunities for training or mentoring
in their home departments. Two plenary presentations will grapple with
interpretive perspectives on explanation and causality; two sets of break-out
sessions will allow participants to interact across ranks, grouped by subfield
and by specific methods; and lunches, coffee/tea breaks, and a workshop dinner
will enable opportunities for more informal engagement. All workshop activities
will enable participants to better understand and articulate what is distinctive
about interpretive methodologies and, specifically, what those methodologies can
bring to the understanding of political issues. Workshop break-out sessions will
engage the rich array of analytic possibilities within interpretive methods,
such that participants will see their research topics and (potential) data in
new ways. The workshop also introduces participants to significant advances in
the methodological components of interpretive research of which they may be
unaware. Finally, critical discussions with other participants and Workshop
presenters/facilitators will support participants in the development of their
own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop will enable all participants to
improve the methodological dialogue in this arena, extending potentially to
curricular development in teaching interpretive methodologies and methods in
their present and future departments. Doctoral students will find intellectual
support that will forestall potential attrition at this critical stage of
intellectual and academic development. Junior faculty will benefit from the
mentoring relationships developed during the Workshop, leading them to better
choices of appropriate publishing outlets, communication with journal editors,
reviewers and their own tenure-granting colleagues, and the development of
course syllabi. Senior scholars will themselves gain from contacts in terms of
their own research agendas, potential co-publishing opportunities, and course
development. Most important, research on politics will be improved as
interpretive scholars add their distinctive voice to the scholarly and
intellectual debates of our time.