* 0911092
* Fluorescent Sensors to Image RNA
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2014
* Kazunori Koide, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Kazunori Koide of the
University of Pittsburgh who proposes to chemically synthesize small molecule-
based cell-permeable RNA sensors that fluoresce when bound to specific RNA.
Chemical synthesis is concise and amenable to tuning sensitivity and
specificity. Previously, it was thought that a library of RNA chemosensor
candidates must be synthesized and screened against specific RNA. However, it is
exceedingly difficult to rationally design specific RNA ligands and strenuous to
chemically synthesize a library of small molecules. The significance of this
proposed research is that one does not need to create RNA ligands to develop RNA
chemosensors; rather, the proposed research will take advantage of well-
established in vitro RNA selection as a means to engineer specific RNA-small
molecule interaction with some help from synthetic organic chemistry. This
reversed paradigm for RNA sensor development is highly innovative and will have
significant impact on how others will design experiments to develop other RNA
sensors. The biology of RNA in live cells is poorly understood due to the lack
of probes. This research focuses on developing chemosensors that fluoresce only
when bound to specific RNA. The approach is based on the combination of rational
design and library-based discovery. The outcome of this study will have broad
impact on bioimaging and the biology of DNA
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by Professor Koide could
significantly impact chemistry, biology, the pharmaceutical industry, and the
general public. This project will train students and postdoctoral fellows to
become scientists who will be able to bridge the gap between chemistry and
biology. Leaders in pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies require knowledge
in both fields to invent drugs or diagnostic tools, for which this project will
produce well-trained scientists. Students trained by this research project will
understand synthetic, analytical, and spectroscopic chemistry as well as
biology, and will be able to be engaged in multidisciplinary efforts that are at
the forefront of science. &lt;br/&gt;