* 0911354
* Design, Synthesis, and Photochemistry of New Ru(II) Complexes as Potential Photo-Cisplatin Analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Claudia Turro, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 690,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports work by Professor Claudia Turro at The
Ohio State University to carry out fundamental/basic studies on ligand-loss
photochemistry of ruthenium complexes. The aim of the research is to design new
metal complexes that can undergo ligand exchange with water molecules with low
energy visible light, such that, when photoactivated, these systems will bind to
DNA. The main goal of the research is to understand the principles that govern
efficient excited state ligand-loss, its kinetics, and how this excited state
process can be enhanced. Understanding how the binding properties of the leaving
ligand and the structural characteristics of the ground state and the lowest
energy excited state affect the photochemistry represents a primary focus of the
work. Other ligands around the metal centered will be systematically varied in
order to induce ligand exchange using low energy light. Once activated with
light, the ruthenium complexes bind to DNA in an oxygen-independent manner. This
work will provide the basic knowledge that can later be applied to the discovery
of new antitumor agents that may circumvent the drawbacks of current drugs.

The PI and both co-PIs are committed to the education of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as members of underrepresented groups. The PI is
the faculty advisor for the student chapter of the National Organization of
Black Chemists and Chem. Engineers at OSU, is a member of the departmental
Diversity Committee, and attended national and regional meetings of societies
geared to promote and retain underrepresented minorities and women in science.
These efforts will aid in the training of highly qualified, diverse scientists
at the undergraduate and graduate levels. An important aspect of the research is
the potential for the new complexes derived from this work to act as antitumor
agents, thus providing a clear benefit to society.