* 0911096
* PGE, Re-Os and Lu-Hf Isotopic Signature of Lithosphere Removal Beneath the North China Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Roberta Rudnick, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2014
* USD 330,330.00

Continents form the platform on which our species has evolved, and nearly all of
our natural resources derive from the continents. Understanding how continents
form and evolve and what makes them stable is, therefore, of importance for
humans. The oldest portions of continents, those regions that formed before 2.5
billion years ago and termed 'cratons', are typically the most stable surface
features on Earth. They experience no active volcanism or earthquakes, and the
presence of a thick and stiff rock layer beneath the continental crust,
extending down to depths of 200-250 km, is generally considered key for the
stability of these ancient regions. The ~3.8 billion year old North China Craton
is an exception to this general picture. Some of the most devastating
earthquakes in human history, as well as relatively recent volcanism and ore
deposit formation have occurred in this craton. There is strong evidence that
the thick rock layer, which was originally present beneath the crust of the
North China Craton, was removed and replaced with a thinner and weaker rock
layer several hundred million years ago, but the timing and process of this
transformation is uncertain. The project outlined in this proposal seeks to
determine when and how the thick rock layer was replaced beneath the North China
Craton by studying pieces of this deep layer sampled by volcanoes that erupted
over the last 400 million years, a time period that spans the replacement event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed involves the use of petrography, Re-
Os and Lu-Hf isotope geochemistry, as well as measuring the abundances of the
platinum group elements (PGE) in mantle xenoliths to unravel the history of the
mantle lithosphere beneath the North China Craton during the Mesozoic and
Cenozoic. Large, statistically significant data sets for Re-Os will be collected
at targeted locations in order to distinguish post-Archean lithospheric ages
from the Re-Os spectrum observed in the convecting upper mantle. Clinopyroxene
from select xenoliths will be measured for Lu and Hf isotopes in order to
compare age systematics between the two systems and evaluate the utility of the
Lu-Hf system for determining lithosphere formation ages. PGE data will be used
to evaluate the veracity of Os model ages for individual samples, and will also
provide information on processes, such as refertilization and melt-rock
interaction, that may have acted on the mantle xenoliths. The results are
expected to clarify the present-day age distribution of lithospheric mantle
beneath different portions of the North China Craton, how the Mesozoic aged
lithosphere compares with older and present-day lithospheric mantle, and how
this information can be linked with available seismological images in order to
deduce the deep architecture of the craton and determine the lateral and
vertical extent of lithospheric mantle replacement. This, in turn, will inform
models for the processes involved in the transformation of a stable craton into
one of the most tectonically active regions of the world today.