* 0911629
* Syntheses and properties of near-IR BODIPY-based fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Maria Vicente, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2013
* USD 490,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)".&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to synthesize and evaluate a
new series of fluorescent dyes for potential applications in bioimaging, in
bioanalyses or in medicine. These new materials offer a number of unique
opportunities compared with currently available dyes; they can be synthesized
from commercially available compounds in a small number of steps, can be
rendered water-soluble, and will have very high fluorescence quantum
efficiencies and photochemical stabilities. Following the total synthesis, the
new materials will be purified, and their chemical and photophysical properties
will be studied. The most promising dyes will be conjugated with a biomolecule,
such as a peptide, protein or antibody, and their potential for application in
bioimaging, bioanalyses or medicine will be investigated. This multi-
disciplinary project will likely lead to the discovery of new fluorescent dyes
for applications as biomarkers or as anti-cancer drugs and will have broad
impacts in the fields of organic and bioconjugate chemistry, cell and molecular
biology, proteomics, biomedical imaging, fluorescence-based detection
technologies, drug discovery, and clinical medicine.&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator, Dr. Vicente, is a minority Latino/Hispanic professor and currently
the only woman full professor in the Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State
University. Dr. Vicente has a strong track record of participation in multi-
disciplinary projects and is highly committed to broaden the participation of
woman and minority students in research at LSU. She is currently leading the
Initiative for Maximizing Student Diversity Program at LSU, which provides to
qualified undergraduates from under-represented groups interdisciplinary
research training while enhancing diversity in chemistry and the basic sciences.
Dr. Vicente and her students will participate in several high impact education
and outreach programs already established at LSU, and will develop
demonstrations based on basic scientific concepts, such as interactions of light
with matter and color, for outreach to Louisiana schools that will be
incorporated into already established service learning activities at LSU.