* 0911593
* THz Studies of Carrier Dynamics in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes and of Optical Activity in Organic Molecular Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Daniel Prober, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Schmuttenmaer of Yale University and his
collaborators and students will pursue two interrelated activities: 1. Terahertz
(THz) emission spectroscopy from individual single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWCNTs), and 2. THz optical activity in organic molecular crystals and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the reasons SWCNTs have received much
attention is because they have well defined electrical properties, unlike multi-
walled CNTs. An individual SWCNT can be either metallic or semiconducting,
depending on the value of its chiral vector (a measure of the manner in which
the tube rolls up). They have been recognized as prime candidates for further
miniaturization of electronics, i.e., carbon-based electronics. In addition,
they are an ideal platform for studying phenomena in one-dimensional (1D)
systems. Systems of reduced dimension have provided special opportunities,
challenges, and fascination for many years. Their study has given us a deeper
understanding of the physics of condensed materials in general. The SWCNT is one
of the most fascinating model 1D systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another area of
the proposed work is to investigate THz optical activity. Optical activity is a
fundamental property of chiral molecules. There has been a great deal of recent
work using THz time-domain spectroscopy to characterize organic molecular
crystals (OMCs). These studies have ranged from amino acid crystals and
carbohydrates, to illicit drugs, to pharmaceuticals, to explosives. However, no
one has ever reported the THz vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) or optical
rotatory dispersion (ORD) spectrum of a molecular system in the THz region. It
is uncharted territory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the characteristics
and mechanisms in high speed conductivity in SWCNTs is a critical step toward
their utilization in an advanced electronic or optoelectronic device. Given the
huge number of scientists studying them, it might seem surprising that no one
has yet characterized their THz emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of THz
optical activity will be transformative much in the same way infrared VCD
transformed studies of optical activity by opening the IR region of the spectrum
to this type of study. THz VCD will obtain information about intermolecular
modes that is inaccessible to IR VCD. It will provide rigorous experimental
constraints on calculated spectra, whether empirical or ab initio methods are
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students involved in this project will benefit by
interacting with investigators from different fields, namely chemistry
(Professor Schmuttenmaer) and physics (Professor Prober). Professors Prober and
Schmuttenmaer have a track record of outreach at a variety of levels, and will
continue these activities and strengthen them wherever possible.