* 0911074
* Impact of Calibration Data on Evaluating Plausibility of Alternative Groundwater Models
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ming Ye, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 105,266.00

Impact of Calibration Data on Evaluating Plausibility of Alternative Groundwater
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrologic
environments are open and complex, rendering them prone to multiple
interpretations and mathematical descriptions regardless of the quantity and
quality of available data. This recognition has led to a growing tendency among
hydrologists to postulate several alternative hydrologic models for a site.
Models here are not limited to governing equations and associated
boundary/initial conditions, but refer to conceptual-mathematical
representations of hydrologic systems (e.g., their processes and interactions).
Facing the alternative models, the scientific question to be answered is how to
evaluate plausibility of the models so that the models can be properly used to
yield optimum predictions. Evaluating model plausibility considers the entire
modeling process (including model formulation, calibration, and validation), and
calibration/validation data play a key role in the evaluation process. Although
calibrating a single model has been studied for decades, impact of calibration
data on evaluating plausibility of multiple models has not been well understood.
Open questions are as follows: What kinds of calibration data can be used to
most effectively discriminate between models? How many data are needed to
reliably evaluate model plausibility? How does data correlation (spatial and
temporal) affect the evaluation? How does biased evaluation of model
plausibility influence predictive performance? These fundamental questions will
be addressed using an interdisciplinary approach combining Bayesian statistical
and computational methods. Model plausibility will be quantified using model
probability, which is estimated, in a Bayesian framework, based on conformity of
model simulations to calibration data, complexity of models, and expert
judgment. Based on the model probability, one can choose a single model (i.e.,
Bayesian model selection) or use multiple models (i.e., Bayesian model
averaging) to make predictions. Predictive performance of the Bayesian model
selection or averaging will be investigated. Hypothesis will be tested using a
two-pronged strategy based on both synthetic and real-world modeling. For the
synthetic case, alternative groundwater models will be developed based on
different representations of site heterogeneity and boundary conditions. The
real-world modeling will be conducted at the Naturita site, Colorado, where a
risk exists that uranium may reach the Colorado River. Alternative models will
be developed based on different ways of formulations of uranium reactive
transport models, such as surface complexation models with different numbers of
functional groups. For the real-world modeling, model predictive performance
will be evaluated using cross-validation methods such as leave-one-out and
K-fold. The synthetic and real-world modeling will be conducted together with
USGS scientists at Boulder and Menlo Park. Scientific insights gained in this
project will be valuable to any environmental modeling through cost-effective
data collection for refining existing models and developing new models for
environmental restoration and protection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;