* 0911805
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Geologic and Temporal Controls on Water and Chemical Exchange between Groundwater and Surface Water in Coastal Estuarine Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Leonard Konikow, U.S. Geological Survey -- Woods Hole
* Interagency Agreement
* Ingrid Padilla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 124,899.00

Collaborative Research: Quantifying Temporal and Geologic Controls on Water and
Chemical Exchange between Groundwater and Surface Water in Coastal Estuarine
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H. Michael, J. Bratton, D. Krantz, L. Konikow, and
A.S. Andres&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuarine ecosystems are increasingly
threatened by excess nutrient loading. Groundwater is an important nutrient
source, but the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of groundwater discharge
makes quantifying fluxes and transformations of nutrient species prior to
discharge challenging. A multi-disciplinary investigation in the well
characterized and representative estuary of Indian River Bay in Delaware will
improve understanding of the interaction of physical and chemical processes
critical to evaluation of the role of groundwater discharge in nitrogen loading
to coastal waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research is to
characterize the controls of geologic heterogeneity and temporally-variable
hydraulic forcing on fluid and nitrogen fluxes between aquifers and coastal
surface waters. We hypothesize that: (1) mixing between fresh and saline water,
driven by transient forcing and geologic heterogeneity, enhances denitrification
of freshwater-derived nitrate before discharge, and (2) saline exchange flux,
driven by hydraulic forcing and dispersion-induced subsurface density gradients,
transports ammonium derived from decay of sedimentary organic matter into
coastal waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will include numerical
modeling, hydrologic and geochemical monitoring, and geophysical investigations
conducted within and surrounding Indian River Bay, DE. Variable-density
numerical models will be developed over multiple spatial and temporal scales to
quantify fluxes, evaluate system controls, synthesize data, and guide data
collection. Direct measurements of groundwater discharge, hydraulic gradients,
and salinities will be obtained over tidal to annual cycles. The complex
subsurface salinity distribution will be mapped using continuous resistivity
profiling, and high-resolution geochemical sampling will be conducted along
flowpaths to determine both source and fate of solutes and to quantify
denitrification. Analyses will include nitrogen species and isotopes, noble
gases to enable calculations of excess N2, and organic matter in saline recharge
zone sediments as a source of ammonium. Geologic features such as paleochannels
will be imaged using CHIRP seismic surveys, and hydrogeologic properties will be
characterized, guided in part by the data needs of the models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have educational impacts, and
results will provide insight to managers who regulate nitrogen loading to
improve coastal ecosystem health. The project will be carried out in
coordination with investigations of carbon-mineral interactions along a salinity
gradient proposed as part of a Critical Zone Observatory in the Christina River
Basin of Delaware and Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;