* 0911582
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Practical and Quantitative Method for Measurement of Metamorphic Porphyroblast Crystallization Kinetics and Strain Rate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ethan Baxter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 104,952.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is a
collaboration between researchers at Western Washington University, the
University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa, and Boston University, is focused on
improving our understanding of what happens when rocks are heated, pressurized,
and deformed deep within the Earth's crust, a process (metamorphism) that is
occurring every day under our feet. The researchers strive to understand the
rates at which rocks are deformed and at which new crystals grow during
metamorphism. These basic parameters of metamorphism are very poorly known. The
researchers will develop and test a new method for determining these rates on
rocks from Townshend Dam, VT, which were metamorphosed about 380 million years
ago during a collision between North America and a micro-continent to the east.
The study will estimate the rates of metamorphism and deformation during this
collision (and by extension, other similar collision events), but more
importantly, the project will develop a new method by which these and related
aspects of metamorphism can be studied in other areas by other researchers in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will focus on garnet, a
commonly formed metamorphic mineral that tends to record details of its
environment as it grows. The research relies on recent advances in Sm-Nd
radiometric dating of tiny volumes of garnet. The investigators will date well-
characterized parts of garnet crystals in a rock to link the garnet chemistry to
the time of garnet growth. The crux of the method is that it will allow numerous
indirect dates to be easily obtained by reference to the arduously obtained
time-chemistry link. The specific questions being studied are: What are
metamorphic nucleation rates and how do they vary with time? What are growth
rates for individual crystals and how do they vary over the course of a
crystal's growth? How fast are rocks deformed during continental collisions, and
is that deformation continuous or episodic? How fast are rocks heated and loaded
during collisions? Finally, the study will provide the first data set of its
kind, against which theoretical models of nucleation and growth can be tested.