* 0911696
* Structure Determination by Computation of 1H NMR Chemical Shifts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Thomas Hoye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2013
* USD 416,456.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
the single most important experimental technique used by chemists to deduce the
structure of new organic compounds. It capitalizes on the fact that certain
types of atomic nuclei, most importantly hydrogen (1H) and carbon (13C), are
highly sensitive to their local chemical and magnetic environments. Thus, subtle
differences in chemical structure at the molecular level are reflected in the
spectroscopic characteristics of these nuclei, most importantly in the position
that each atom absorbs energy in the NMR spectrum of that particular compound.
This parameter is called the chemical shift, and each compound gives rise to a
collection of unique chemical shift values. Advances in theoretical and
computational chemistry have brought experts to the level of being able to
compute NMR chemical shifts, and these theoretical spectral properties can then
be applied to questions of structure. These developments have not yet been
adopted by the broader community of experimentalists-the organic chemists who
make or isolate new chemical substances on a daily basis and who, on occasion,
are faced with challenging structure assignment problems.&lt;br/&gt;The driving
hypothesis statement for the proposed studies is: A reliable (and user-
friendly)protocol for structure determination of small organic
compounds,involving comparison of experimental 1H NMR chemical shift data sets
with those computed for candidate structures, can be developed. Research is
about process as well as product. The educational component of research is an
integral and equally important element. The Hoye group appreciates the role that
undergraduate research plays in sparking the scientific interests of young
students. The group will involve both graduate and undergraduate students in
this project, the latter to include some who will be recruited from one of the
Community Colleges in the Twin Cities. The proposed studies lend themselves well
to this plan. Overall, the group's record of dissemination and engagement is the
best indicator that outcomes&lt;br/&gt;from these studies will have broad
impact.