* 0911301
* The Mantle Melt Column and Melt Migration Revealed by Deglaciation Melting Beneath Iceland's Western Rift Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* John Sinton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2012
* USD 295,743.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magma that feeds volcanic eruptions on
oceanic islands and most of the deep ocean is produced by melting of the
underlying mantle. Current knowledge of the details of magma genesis and
transport are derived from observations of eruption rates and basalt chemistry
coupled to numerical modeling. However, because the products of volcanic
activity usually provide only a time-integrated view of the melt migration
process, it is normally very difficult to constrain the important rates and time
scales of melt transport. This project will exploit the unique situation of
time-varying melting perturbations due to glacial unloading in Iceland to
provide unprecedented constraints on aspects of mantle melting that will be
applicable to mantle melting studies in a wide range of geological settings. The
project has a significant international component involving collaboration with
the University of Iceland. It also has a major educational and training
component for a young scientist who will have recently obtained her PhD at the
University of Hawai'i. With this project she will gain experience in field
mapping and Icelandic geology and volcanology as well as learn new techniques in
a range of geochemical analyses and in sophisticated geodynamic modeling. The
project is intended to involve undergraduate students from the University of
Hawaii in the field work and follow-on research. The proposed research will
enrich teaching and research programs at the University of Hawaii, which is
located in an ethnically diverse community, including people from a range of
Asian and Pacific island countries. It will therefore provide advanced
technological training and mentoring of science students with diverse cultural
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory and preliminary observations indicate
that the removal of ice at the end of the last glacial period profoundly
affected volcanic production and magma chemistry in Iceland. The project
investigators will constrain the timing of glacial retreat using ice core data
and geologic reconstructions for the period between 15 and 11 thousand years
before present. They will use new geologic mapping and sample collections,
geochemical analyses, and 3He exposure age dating of subaerial lavas that
surmount late-glacial table mountains to extend the record of eruption rates and
lava composition back to 15 ka. Numerical models will simulate the updated
glacial unloading history as well as the resulting perturbations to mantle
melting, melt migration, and chemical transport. By modeling the observed
temporal variations in eruption rate and trace-element and isotopic
compositions, they will constrain the rates of melt transport, determine basic
properties of the mantle melt column, and test for the presence of small-scale
mantle heterogeneity.