* 0911533
* Development of Controlled Palladium(0)-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Qiao-Sheng Hu, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2013
* USD 370,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project focuses on the development of controlled palladium-catalyzed cross-
coupling polymerizations. It aims: (a) to develop Pd (0)-catalyzed Suzuki cross-
coupling polymerizations with a controlled degree of polymerization, and (b) to
develop other controlled Pd (0)-catalyzed cross-coupling polymerizations for the
preparation of conjugated polymers and their related conjugated macromolecules.
These aims will be accomplished by narrowing the poly-dispersity index of the
conjugated polymers. The studies on the preparation of conjugated block
copolymers, brush polymers and starburst polymers with a controlled degree of
polymerization in each block/segment will be also performed.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Qiao-Sheng Hu of the Department of Chemistry at CUNY
College of Staten Island. Professor Hu's research efforts revolve around the
development of cross-coupling polymerization methods for the synthesis of
conjugated polymers. The proposed research is expected to reveal new
opportunities for palladium catalysis and to allow access to a variety of
conjugated macromolecules with a controlled degree of polymerization. Successful
development of the methodology will have a positive impact on the fields of
materials science and nanotechnology.