* 0911695
* Spectroscopic and Computational Investigations of Fundamental Characteristics in Non-covalent Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* John Bevan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2012
* USD 322,750.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, John Bevan and Robert Lucchese of Texas A&amp;M University
and their students will continue their research to develop accurate generalized
models for non-covalent interactions based on a combination of experimental
investigation and quantum chemical calculations. Recent technological advances
in the infrared and submillimeter/terahertz spectral regions provide unique
opportunities for comprehensive experimental investigations of selected
prototypical non-covalent interactions. Investigations will focus on studies of
ground state isotopic isomerization which is an anomalous deuterium isotope
effect, development of an ultra-sensitive cavity-enhanced detection method for
investigation of negative ion clusters using high resolution terahertz
spectroscopy, and modeling of coupling of intra- and intermolecular modes
through morphing approaches. The experimental studies will permit
characterization of the selected systems with great precision and provide
benchmark data for generating highly accurate vibrationally complete semi-
empirical morphed potentials. The principle advantage of such methods is that
they generate comprehensive microscopic semi-empirical models for prototypical,
non-bonded interactions that can reveal fundamental new properties associated
with non-covalent interactions as well as predicting properties with
unprecedented accuracy. Ultimately, these approaches should lead to more
generalized applications, including the prediction of the intermolecular
interactions in larger clusters and model systems less amenable to detailed
spectroscopic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will provide benchmarks
for understanding the structure and internal motions of larger species,
including proteins and other biological molecules, as well as contributing to
the solutions of problems in atmospheric chemistry, biochemistry, geochemistry,
and materials engineering. Students supported in this project will receive
training in both state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical techniques
including opportunities for career advancement through international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;