* 0911454
* Quantum chemical investigations of surface chemistry with a hierarchy of cluster models
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Krishnan Raghavachari, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2013
* USD 452,500.00

Krishnan Raghavachari is supported by an award from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry program to develop theoretical methods for studying
surface chemistry by developing and applying a set of hierarchical theoretical
models. The hierarchical concept involves the use of highly accurate methodology
on small systems to validate more approximate and computationally cost effective
methodologies for investigating complex systems. Building on prior work in the
PI's research group, Raghavachari and coworkers are developing more
sophisticated and broadly applicable methods in three areas: (1) accurate
thermochemical models applicable for 3d and 4d transition metal elements and
fourth-row main group elements. These methods are based on the successful
Gaussian-n (Gn) models, but will include many improvements to overcome known
deficiencies; (2) divalent pseudoatom parameters to enable accurate and
efficient calculations for investigating chemistry on (100) surfaces of
tetrahedrally bonded systems; (3) new electronic embedding methods for an
accurate treatment of QM/QM multilayer calculations based on the popular ONIOM
framework. These developments are applied to a range of applications on
semiconductor and metal-oxide surface chemistry, including (1) controlled
functionalization of Si(100) surfaces, (2) alloy growth of compound
semiconductor surfaces, (3) reactions of biomolecules on silica surfaces, and
(4) catalytic mechanisms of titanium oxide and vanadium oxide
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The computer codes developed in this program are
available to the scientific community as part of the Gaussian software package
as well as in a set of freely available codes on the PI's website.