* 0911546
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Understanding of Magmatic and Seismogenic Processes Beneath Quiescently Active Volcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter LaFemina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2013
* USD 217,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

On any given day, approximately 15-30 volcanoes worldwide are either in eruption
or show strong signs of unrest (e.g., anomalously high rates of seismic
activity, ground deformation, or gas emissions). Volcanic activity, including
high-altitude eruptions of ash or emission of large volumes of gas, poses a
significant hazard to people and property in the United States and worldwide.
Although many volcanoes have clearly distinct phases of unrest and quiescence, a
growing number of 'quiescently active' volcanoes are known to exhibit high
background levels of geophysical unrest suggestive of persistent shallow
magmatic activity during non-eruptive periods. An understanding of the processes
that drive quiescent activity and high-background-rate volcanic seismicity (HBS)
is critical for the detection of changes in these systems that signal impending
changes in the volcano's behavior.

The proposed project is for an in-depth study of background magmatic and seismic
activity at Telica Volcano, Nicaragua. The study consists of 1) a retrospective
analysis of a long-term catalog of seismic data to determine the precise nature
of changes in seismicity preceding eruptive episodes, 2) a three-year co-
deployment of broadband seismic and high-rate continuous Global Positioning
System networks on Telica to study the source mechanisms of background long
period seismicity, deformation, and other physical processes (e.g., gravity
changes) occurring within Telica's magma chamber and edifice and 3) integration
of seismic and geodetic data collected from Telica to test and refine models of
quiescent volcanism. The proposed study is transformative as it will result in a
greatly improved understanding of the mechanism of quiescent activity and
associated geophysical unrest at a representative HBS volcano, which will extend
to similar poorly-understood volcanoes worldwide. This study also represents a
new collaboration between two early-career researchers working in volcano
seismology and volcano geodesy, and extends existing collaborative relationships
between their institutions and INETER, the Nicaraguan volcano and earthquake
monitoring agency. A key impact of this proposal is the provision for Ph.D.
student training in the deployment, maintenance, and analysis of data from
broadband seismic and geodetic networks, along with international research
experience. Finally, it is anticipated that the results of the proposed study
will be applicable to other volcanoes showing similar elevated background
activity, including several in Alaska. The resulting context for identification
of significant changes in the character of seismicity in the presence of a high
background rate will greatly improve the ability of monitoring agencies
worldwide to confidently forecast the likelihood of future eruptive activity in
these situations.