* 0911759
* Investigation of source spectral models and scaling for slow slip processes in subduction zones
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Heidi Houston, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 131,868.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Recently, a new mode of coupled deformation and weak seismic radiation has been
discovered in numerous subduction zones globally. Slow slip and weak tremor
occur episodically down-dip from the locked portion of the megathrust interface
at quasi-regular intervals and have been termed Episodic Tremor and Slip (ETS).
The likely interaction of ETS with the locked and hazardous portions of
subduction zones mandate better understanding of this intriguing phenomenon. The
researcher will develop appropriate models to relate the different sizes and
durations of these slow slip processes. The models will facilitate comparison of
different instances of these processes, as well as comparisons of available data
at various frequency ranges. This is an avenue to understanding how the physics
of slow slip processes differs from the better-understood physics of
earthquakes. Broader impacts include furthering the education of one or more
graduate students, and possibly undergraduates. This work will elucidate a new
mode of fault slip, and could have a transformative impact on studies in
seismology, geodesy, friction and rock mechanics. A better understanding of the
relationship between smaller and larger slow slip events in subduction zones may
help forecast the occurrence of large earthquakes there, and thus could be
directly relevant to seismic hazard. As well, episodic tremor and slip events
provide a valuable opportunity to advance public awareness of the regional
seismic hazard.

At present we lack a fundamental understanding of the nature and basic physics
of the ETS source process. Nor do we understand the relationship between the
growing menagerie of recent observations of slow slip processes, which include
tiny low frequency earthquakes, somewhat larger very low frequency earthquakes,
slow slip events, episodic tremor and slip, and large silent earthquakes. These
slow slip processes are characterized by emergent beginnings, weak amplitudes,
and long durations. Their spectra are depleted in high-frequency energy compared
with regular earthquakes of similar moment. One way in which seismologists
understand regular earthquakes is through models of the source spectrum such as
the omega-squared model. For regular earthquakes, a source spectral model
represents our understanding of earthquakes as a scale-invariant process that is
self-similar over a very large range of seismic moments. Such a unifying model
is lacking for slow slip phenomena. I propose to develop appropriate source
scaling models for slow slip processes and compare with available data at
various frequency ranges to constrain possible models of the source spectrum of
slow slip events. Constructing such models involves determining relations among
and constraints on spectral slope, corner frequency, stress drop, and
propagation velocity. Burgeoning numbers of observations of slow slip processes
from subduction zones, particularly Cascadia and Japan render this a timely
proposal. An appropriate spectral model will facilitate comparison of data from
different subduction zones, frequency bands, and magnitudes of ETS events. In
some cases these data should be compared in terms of absolute moment rate
spectra. In other cases only a relative comparison can be made, but that may
still place strong constraints on potential source spectral models. Whereas
regular earthquakes have a roughly constant rupture velocity underpinning their
self-similar nature, for slow slip events there is evidence that rupture
propagation velocity is size-dependent. Similarly, stress drop, although
constant over a very large range of sizes of regular earthquakes, may be size-
dependent for slow slip processes. Constraining valid source spectral models
will reveal relationships between important physical properties such as stress
drop, rupture velocity, and moment. The proposed source spectral model
construction and comparison with various types of data will address many key
questions about slow slip processes and further elucidate the physics of the ETS
process. Understanding whether and how slow slip processes scale with size would
represent a fundamental advance, and as such has the potential to be truly
transformative.