* 0911719
* Measuring Molecular Electric Fields at the Active Site of a Protein using Single Molecule and Hole-Burning Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Peter Geissinger, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 522,800.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professors Geissinger and Woehl of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will
develop methods to determine quantitatively internal electric fields at the
active sites of proteins at molecular and atomic resolution. The approach to
measuring these fields, which are generated by the protein charge distributions
themselves, is based on high-resolution spectroscopic techniques (in particular
single-molecule spectroscopy and hole-burning spectroscopy at cryogenic
temperatures) combined with quantum-mechanical data analysis and electrostatic
model calculations of proteins. Experimental work will focus on two closely
related model systems, myoglobin and hemoglobin. It is expected that the
availability of magnitude and direction of internal electric fields at a
molecular or even at an atomic level will shed new light on the fundamental
issue of ligand discrimination in these systems, because continuum dielectric
approaches are unable to conclusively establish the link between electrostatic
structure and function. &lt;br/&gt;Advancing understanding and discovery of the
factors that are responsible for the physiological functions of myoglobin and
hemoglobin is important for a number of biotechnological applications, such as
the design of efficient blood substitutes or of substances that efficiently
remove oxygen from foods or other oxygen-sensitive products. More generally, the
methods that will be developed for the extraction of internal electric field
values from spectroscopic data are expected to be readily adaptable to any
biological system that contains one or more porphyrin molecules. In addition,
providing experimental access to internal electric fields will allow for
investigating the question whether biological systems were designed by nature
with the goal of optimizing internal electric fields at certain functional sites
of these systems.&lt;br/&gt;The availability of hole-burning and single-molecule
spectra from the same systems will constitute a valuable resource for teaching
and learning. Single molecule studies in particular provide excellent and unique
educational resources for demonstrating how individual, molecular parameters
lead to certain behavior of matter on the macroscopic scale. The pedagogical
benefit is that abstract mathematical formulas such as distribution functions of
statistical thermodynamics can be introduced as a direct consequence of very
concrete and detailed experimental knowledge about properties of individual
molecules, thereby improving student learning. Thus, the results of this project
will form an integral part for the PIs' teaching of Physical Chemistry courses
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Moreover, both PIs will provide
opportunities for undergraduate and visiting high school students to participate
in research activities in these areas, for example, through the state-supported
UROP (Undergraduate Research Opportunities) and the Upward Bound program. These
programs provide research opportunities for undergraduate and high-school
students.