* 0911076
* Hydrometeorology of Flash Flooding Processes and Frequencies in the Northeastern United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Colucci, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,606.00

Project Abstract

Flash flooding is one of the costliest weather hazards, both in economic losses
and in human casualties. Research showing that high intensity rainfall will be
more frequent in our current trend of climate change seems to imply that flash
flooding will also become more frequent. However, because flooding results from
complex interactions of meteorological and hydrological processes, it is not
obvious what will be the true trends in flash flooding. It is well established
that flash flooding results from the combination of the spatio-temporal
distribution of rainfall with antecedent soil moisture and basin-scale
hydrological variables. Our recent work suggests that storm runoff in the
northeastern US is more often a product of total rainfall accumulation
(saturation excess) rather than a product of high instantaneous rainfall rates
(Hortonian runoff). In this project we will evaluate whether this is true for
runoff that contributes specifically to flash floods by exploring the
fundamental processes that link the atmospheric processes with surface-
hydrological processes for the northeast U.S. The primary research questions
are: (Q1) Are northeastern flash-flood-producing storm events substantially
different from those that have been characterized for the midwest and southeast?
(Q2) Are northeastern flash floods more often the result of saturation excess or
Hortonian storm runoff processes? We have identified 186 flash flood events from
2003-2007 throughout the northeastern U.S that we will use as our sample set.
There are fewer gaps in the radar data during this period than in previous years
and the relatively high frequency of flooding events during this period may be
typical under climatic conditions expected during this century. Q1 will be
addressed by characterizing observations of both synoptic-scale (1000s km) and
mesoscale (10-100s km) structures of storm events associated with these flash
flood events, as well as the resultant watershed-scale rainfall amounts and
intensities based on radar (using standard or tropical reflectivity-rainfall
relationships as conditions warrant) and ground station (point-scale) data.
These data will be compared with published information about flash flood storms
in the Midwest and Southeast, which is more plentiful than that for the
Northeast. Because distributed hydrologic information like soil moisture is not
widely measured, to address Q2, we will estimate this information with an
ensemble of four watershed models ranging from fully distributed/fully
mechanistic to semi-distributed/empirical that have been well vetted with
regional hydrologic observations of both discharge and soil moisture. We will
use bias-corrected NEXRAD rainfall data to run our watershed models. Once we
?know? our antecedent conditions (from our watershed model results) and the
flash-flood-causing rainfall (from Q1), we can use bivariate probability
analysis to determine the probability of the coincidence of watershed wetness
and rainfall needed to produce a flash flood. By analyzing how often flash-
flood-generating rain intensities produce Hortonian runoff, i.e., exceed soil
infiltration capacity, which is a function of soil moisture, we can determine
how frequently flash floods are ?Hortonian.? We will use an ensemble of four
watershed models with different mechanistic and empirical underpinnings in order
to bracket our results; note: this approach is taken because there is little
consensus about which approach, mechanistic vs empirical, provides the ?best?
result. This work will foster meaningful collaboration between atmospheric and
hydrologic scientists to help put climate change predictions in context as to
how they are likely to influence flood frequency. Results will be shared with
National Weather Service Forecast Offices ideally resulting in more timely and
spatially precise flash flood warnings. Graduate students will conduct much of
the research, contributing to their training as scientists. We are designing a
Freshman Writing course around society-science-policy interactions in the
context of global climate change that uses the hydrometeorology of flash
flooding as a consistent theme or case study, and will develop course modules to
incorporate the findings and tools from this study into other science and
engineering courses.