* 0911191
* Thermochemistry of Noncovalent Interactions and Metal-Ligand Bonds of Biological Relevance
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mary Rodgers, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 441,126.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program,
Professor Mary T. Rodgers of Wayne State University and her group will carry out
research designed to obtain absolute quantitative thermochemical, dynamical, and
structural information regarding noncovalent interactions between metal ions and
ligands. The systems chosen for study are of either biological relevance or
analytical utility and include: model aromatic ligands, crown ethers, nucleic
acid bases, model phosphate esters, and mono- and dinucleotides interacting with
alkali, alkaline-earth, and transition metal ions. Experimental techniques will
include guided ion-beam tandem mass spectrometry (GIBMS)and threshold collision-
induced dissociation (TCID).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments are designed
to measure directly either the absolute strength of the metal-ligand
interaction, or the activation energy for activated dissociation processes of
the metal-ligand complexes. These studies also provide structural and
mechanistic information regarding such bond activation processes obtained in the
form of concomitant theoretical work and through the analysis of decomposition
pathways. Outcomes are expected to provide accurate thermodynamic information on
a wide variety of metal-ligand complexes; this information is being compiled
into thermochemical databases that will enable the characterization and
understanding of periodic properties and trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological mass spectrometry is a rapidly growing and
evolving technology that has captured the interest of a broad community of
researchers. Outcomes from this research will contribute to the underpinnings of
the methodology, and add to its continuing development.&lt;br/&gt;