* 0911766
* Structure and Dynamics of Radical Intermediates in Biological Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Judy Kim, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Judy E. Kim of the University of California, San
Diego, and her graduate and undergraduate student colleagues will study amino
acid radicals that play important roles in long-range electron transfer and
catalytic reactions. Special focus will be placed on the aromatic residue
tryptophan. A unique aspect of this research is the assembly of a suite of
powerful spectroscopic techniques, including picosecond time-resolved and UV
resonance Raman, transient absorption, and electron paramagnetic resonance, to
probe the structures and kinetics of radical intermediates. Several topics will
be explored, such as the role of the protein microenvironment and pH on radical
stability as well as kinetics associated with radical
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from these studies will not only enhance
our understanding of biological radicals, but may impact the design of protein
mimics and other synthetic systems for critical catalytic reactions. In addition
to providing students with the opportunity to participate in interdisciplinary
research, the current proposal strongly promotes teaching, training and
learning. Undergraduate and graduate education will be bolstered through the
integration of a diverse set of students in these projects. Involvement with the
community and K-12 students will foster the development of a close relationship
between the UCSD Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the local
community. In general, the current research and education activities are poised
to benefit society through (1) critical discoveries in electron transfer
reactions that impact fields in chemistry, biology, and physics, and (2)
educational enhancements for undergraduate and graduate students as well as
community members. &lt;br/&gt;