* 0911224
* Static Compression of CO2-bearing Silicate Liquids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Carl Agee, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2012
* USD 312,619.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the problem
of how carbon dioxide physically interacts with magma when dissolved under very
high pressures in the Earth's deep interior. The main physical property that
will be measured is the density of compressed magma with varying amounts of
carbon dioxide under a wide range of pressure and temperatures. The ultimate
goal is to determine the degree to which carbon dioxide alters the magma
density, thus revealing how readily CO2-bearing magmas will become buoyant
relative to surrounding rock. The experiments will greatly improve our ability
to predict the conditions under which magmas rise to the Earth's surface and
erupt as lavas or form volcanoes that emit carbon dioxide and other gases into
Earth's atmosphere. The experimental data will also provide new insight into the
way in which gases such as carbon dioxide were sequestered deep in the rocky
part of our planet and how much was degassed from the early Earth during its
formation stage. This effort employs experimental techniques that span the
entire range of pressure and temperature conditions that exist for melting and
magma production in the Earth's upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experiments in this project will allow the determination of the partial molar
volume of CO2 in silicate melts as a function of pressure and melt composition
using the sink/float method in piston-cylinder and multi-anvil devices up to 20
GPa. The experiments will reveal any non-ideality in the pressure effect on
silicate melt as a function of alkali metal (K, Na) and alkaline earth metal
(Ca) cation concentration. The experiments will also be designed to provide
information about effects of different synthesis environments on CO2 partial
molar volume in silicate melt and CO2 solubility. It is proposed to refine
quantitative analysis techniques to verify and characterize CO2-total in the
experimental run products using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR),
Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS), and the Electron Microprobe (EMP). In
preparation for this project, the team carried out a pilot study on carbonated
peridotite partial melt to demonstrate that these experimental techniques will
have a high likelihood of success. The results from this project will help
establish an experimental foundation and new database for predictive models used
for calculating the density of any given carbonated silicate melt composition
that could be produced by melting in planetary mantles. The new density data at
high pressure will also be used to evaluate the predictive power of equations of
state, such as the Birch-Murnaghan and Vinet equations, in calculating densities
of volatile bearing silicate liquids at high pressure and temperatures.