* 0911685
* The Effect of Charcoal on Soil Hydrologic Properties Under Natural and Elevated Concentrations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2010,06/30/2015
* Caroline Masiello, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 270,179.00

Soil charcoal has been shown to play a key role in the dynamics of nutrients in
soils [e.g. Liang et al., 2006], but our understanding of the effects of
charcoal on soil physical and chemical properties is quite limited. Particularly
absent are both data and a conceptual framework to explain observed charcoal
alteration of soil hydrologic properties. Understanding the effects of charcoal
on soil is increasingly important because humans are changing soil charcoal
content both unintentionally and intentionally, the first driven by fire
management practices and land use change, and the second by intentional
amendment of soil with charcoal to improve crop performance and sequester
carbon. We hypothesize that charcoal affects soil hydrologic properties through
alteration of soil grain size, charge density, and hydrophobicity. We predict
that grain size will change mechanical interactions (e.g., pore size,
tortuosity), while charge density will change physico-chemical interactions
which impact strength, soil water potential, and flow pathways. Hydrophobicity
is a function of both surface chemistry and surface area (controlled partly by
grain size and porosity), and will respond with changes in these properties.
Charcoal grain size decreases and surface charge density increases with in situ
weathering so the impacts will be vary significantly with time as charcoal is
incorporated into the soil clay fraction, which itself can be altered by the
release of inorganic materials during charcoal weathering. We are conducting a
series of experiments designed to determine the mechanisms through which
charcoal affects hydrologically-relevant physical and chemical properties of
soils. We are performing experiments with natural and laboratory soils mixed
with charcoal, measuring (1) soil hydrophobicity, (2) surface and bulk chemistry
of soils and charcoals, (3) saturated permeability, (4) soil water potential,
and (5) soil tensile strength. Our ultimate goal is to develop a conceptual
model of the soil-charcoal-water system.