* 0911319
* High-resolution mapping of several prominent seismic anomalies in the lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Lianxing Wen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2012
* USD 276,104.00

Seismic evidence indicates the existence of two prominent seismically low-
velocity anomalies in the Earth?s lower mantle, namely the Pacific Anomaly and
the African Anomaly. It is now recognized that these two prominent anomalies may
directly be related to the early differentiation, evolution and dynamics of the
Earth?s mantle. Thus, resolving the detailed structural and velocity features of
these two anomalies is important to further our understanding of the Earth?s
internal processes that lead to the geological events and tectonic activities at
the Earth?s surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal intends to resolve the
outstanding issues related to the Pacific Anomaly based on extensive waveform
modeling and travel time analysis, and to study detailed 3D anisotropy,
structural feature and velocity structure in several particular regions of the
mantle, including a) anisotropic structure near the edge of the African Anomaly,
and b) structural feature and velocity structure of the southeastern edge of the
African Anomaly and the western edge of the high-velocity anomaly beneath the
Cocos plate. The important outstanding issues related to the Pacific Anomaly to
be addressed include: the exact geographic extent of the Anomaly at the core-
mantle boundary; the structural and velocity features of the Anomaly in other
cross sections; the detailed transitional structures from the Pacific Anomaly to
the surrounding mantle in various directions; and the lateral variations of
structural feature, length-scale and velocity reductions of small-scale
anomalies at the base of the Anomaly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approaches include development of a hybrid anisotropic method; collection and
identification of high-quality anomalous seismic data; and waveform and travel
time modeling of the seismic data with a scientific goal of mapping detailed
structural features and velocity structures of the three prominent velocity
anomalies in the lower mantle. Besides training a graduate student and providing
the community computer source code for a hybrid method, the proposal would
further our understanding of the thermal evolution of the Earth, thermal-
chemical convection in the mantle, thermal-chemical mantle plume, and
relationship of mantle seismic heterogeneities to early differentiations of the
Earth, the characteristics of the hotspot motions, and the unique geochemical
signatures including the DUPAL anomaly and the South Pacific Isotopic and
Thermal Anomaly.