* 0911875
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost Natural Graphite Reinforced Copper (Cu-Grp) Composites for Ultra High Thermal Conductivity Electronic Thermal Management Heat Sinks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* James Cornie, Metal Matrix Cast Composites, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is to develop extremely
high thermal conductivity heat sinks that are thermal expansion matched to
advanced semiconductors for high performance electronic and electro-optical
systems. With low cost natural graphite platelet reinforcement, CuGrp composite
heat sinks with thermal conductivities ranging from 750 to 900 W/mK will be
achieved while controlling thermal expansion over the range of 7 to 4 ppm/K
respectively. These properties are a factor of 2 to 2.5 times Cu and exceed any
CTE matched thermal management material available.

This project will result in a family of high performance passive thermal
management materials that will increase the performance of electronic and
electro-optical systems without increasing complexity. These technologies will
service an a $500mm market that is growing at a rate of 8.5%/year. Immediate
applications will be heat spreaders for LED and laser diode manufacturers for
advanced communication, industrial and municipal lighting and flat screen
displays as well as heat spreaders for advanced radar MMIC and T/R modules.
Because of the projected low cost, other expected applications include power
control systems for advanced hybrid and electric powered vehicles as well high
performance IGBT base plates.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).