* 0911181
* Identification and Decision
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Manski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 164,784.00

The investigator plans to continue his research on decision making in settings
with partial identification of relevant population parameters. A major
continuing theme is treatment choice with partial knowledge of treatment
response. He also will continue his longstanding program of research on
identification per se. This research on identification is deliberately
conservative. The traditional way to cope with sampling processes that partially
identify population parameters has been to combine the available data with
assumptions strong enough to yield point identification. Such assumptions often
are not well motivated, and empirical researchers often debate their validity.
Conservative analysis enables researchers to learn from the available data
without imposing untenable assumptions. It enables establishment of a domain of
consensus among researchers who may hold disparate beliefs about what
assumptions are appropriate. It also makes plain the limitations of the
available data. The analysis by the investigator of decision making is similarly
conservative. His research shows how social planners and other decision makers
can cope coherently with difficult problems of choice under ambiguity induced by
identification problems and the necessity of statistical inference from sample
data, without imposing untenable assumptions. This is achieved using well-
established principles of statistical decision theory, particularly through
application of the minimax-regret criterion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Many persistent public policy controversies reflect divergent beliefs
about the effects of government policy on society. Such divergent beliefs are
often manifest in dueling policy studies that use different analytical
approaches or data sources to reach different policy conclusions. Each study may
make sense in its own terms, each combining data with conjectures to draw
logically valid conclusions. However, there may be no way to determine which
study (if either) makes realistic conjectures and which (if either) draws
empirically correct conclusions. The conservative approach by the investigator
to empirical inference and social planning can enable the public to better
evaluate the credibility of existing policy studies, enhance the credibility of
future policy research, and improve the quality of policymaking