* 0911769
* Kinematic and dynamic rupture characterization of the 2008 Ms 8 Wenchuan earthquake sequence
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Chen Ji, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2012
* USD 361,394.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

The 12 May 2008 Mw 7.9 Wenchuan, China earthquake is the largest intraplate
earthquake recorded by modern geophysical observations. It ruptured unilaterally
about 250 km beneath the predominantly northeast-trending Longmen Shan, a steep
high mountain range that bounds the Tibetan Plateau to the northwest and the
Sichuan Basin to the southeast. The strong ground shaking caused over 5 million
buildings to collapse and nearly 70,000 fatalities. The occurrence of this major
earthquake surprised most of the geoscience community because the source region
historically lacks large earthquakes and has a very low slip rate based on
geological and geodetic data. This catastrophic earthquake and its aftershock
sequence will be investigated with seismic, geodetic and geological
observations. The rupture process will be constrained to match the tectonic
background and surface observations, and at the same time be consistent with
rupture dynamics that includes a constitutive friction law. Quantitative
understanding of such giant intraplate earthquakes and their aftershocks can
contribute to hazard analysis that will ultimately be useful for guiding
societal response for the future events. There are many areas in United States
with very low strain rates, e.g., New Madrid, Charleston, where large magnitude
events have occurred. This research provides an excellent opportunity to take a
large step forward in understanding the character and processes of intraplate
earthquakes in areas of low strain rates.

This is an unusual complex earthquake sequence involving multiple faults
beneath steep topography, but with abnormally few large aftershocks. The
approach is to use the newest nonlinear methods for inverting the seismic and
geodetic data to determine a kinematic model. Critical to the analysis will be
an all out effort to assess the uncertainties in the kinematic model and their
relation to uncertainties in earth structure, data distribution and the type of
data being inverted. This kinematic model will serve as the baseline for full
dynamic modeling in 3D that will involve multiple fault planes, topography and
3D structure. This research addresses the following questions: i) Are the
rupture characteristics of this event different from other well studied thrust
earthquakes, such as 1999 Chi-Chi earthquake, perhaps reflecting its abnormal
tectonic loading process? ii) How did the thrust rupture initiate? What effect
did the nucleation have on the subsequent rupture? iii) How did the ruptures on
two faults dynamically interact? iv) What are the characteristics of the ground
motion excited by this earthquake? Are the ground motions unusual compared with
other large thrust events?