* 0911056
* Evaluating Rapa Nui (Easter Island) Prehistoric Resource Degradation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Vitousek, Earthwatch Institute
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 273,170.00

This project National Science Foundation brings together a highly qualified
group of international investigators led by Dr. Christopher M. Stevenson to
conduct archaeological research on Rapa Nui (Easter Island), Chile. Team members
from Rapa Nui New Zealand and the United States will focus on climate change,
environmental degradation, and dramatic subsistence changes to develop an
empirical assessment of how these may, or may not have, influenced pre-European
contact societal collapse on Easter Island. The island is an ideal study area
for documenting the dynamic nature of these processes. It is a relatively small
isolated island where environmental variables (e.g., rainfall, elevation,
temperature, levels of physical erosion, age of volcanic substrates, and soil
nutrients) vary significantly over space and time. The archaeological landscape
is very well preserved due to low modern population densities. The short period
of pre-European contact occupation (ca. AD 1100-1722), and relatively low levels
of inter-island contact, facilitate an understanding of why society might have
changed with time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program of paleo-ecological,
landscape and archaeological investigations will develop a highly resolved
cultural time-line. The team will use geomorphology and geochemistry to assess
the history of Rapa Nui soils and determine the impacts of erosion and sustained
agriculture. The morphological and functional variation of various classes of
gardens will be addressed through an analysis of environmental setting, remotely
sensed satellite data, and precise geographical locations. We will Obsidian
hydration dating in conjunction with radiocarbon dating will be used to
determine the age of agricultural activities. Using a series of GIS and
ecodynamic models these data will be analyzed to achieve a robust and
comprehensive understanding of how, when and why Rapa Nui terrestrial resources
changed through time and the impact that this might have had on prehistoric
societal change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on Rapa Nui, yet the
issues addressed are global. Rapa Nui is often depicted as a model for global
environmental degradation. Relatively simplistic linkages have been made between
agricultural activities and processes of deforestation, physical erosion, and
societal collapse. Utilizing an interdisciplinary team with innovative
theoretical and methodological approaches allows scientists to advance
understanding of change on Rapa Nui and the suitability of this isolated small
island as a model of the world. The research involves empirically measuring a
limited number of variables to facilitate complex modeling of the island
ecology. This effort will establish whether changes in terrestrial resources
were a critical factor in a pre-European contact societal collapse. The Rapa Nui
context provides an excellent comparison to continental, large archipelago, and
small Pacific island settings and fills a critical gap in understanding the
linkages and relationships between social and natural processes. The research
will contribute to the development of the dynamic modeling of past human
activity. These findings will enable social scientists to understand the impact
of people both on the local island level and the wider global scale.