* 0911682
* Achieving Molecular Level Control over the Chemical, Electrochemical, and Electrical Properties of Crystalline Si Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Nathan Lewis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2013
* USD 595,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
(ASC) Program of the Division of Chemistry will support the research project of
Prof. Nathan Lewis of California Institute of Technology (Caltech). Prof. Lewis
and his students will develop a detailed understanding of the chemical
reactivity of well-defined, planar Si surfaces and thereby form the basis for
transferring this chemistry to more complex structures; explore and characterize
mixed-alkyl monolayers on Si(111) to optimize their electrical properties while
retaining the ability to perform further, desirable functionalization reactions;
make well-defined, transparent Si/conductive polymer junctions having a variety
of barrier heights; and study the fundamental aspects of self-assembly, thus
developing methodologies that will enable the spontaneous organization of
isotropic semiconductor rod suspensions into oriented electrode arrays. This
research project involves manipulating the properties of Si and it is therefore
of importance in technologies such as photovoltaics, photoelectrochemical cells,
and to processes such as etching and lithography in which the chemistry of Si
surfaces is heavily exploited. The project will provide excellent training
opportunities to undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows who wish to specialize in a cutting edge research area of great
relevance to national competitiveness in the renewable energy, information, and
optical communications industries.