* 0911044
* Laboratory Support Award: Optical Emission Spectrometer for the Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* James Burton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 127,590.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Drs. T. Douglas Price and James H. Burton will use support from the National
Science Foundation to replace the primary scientific instrument in the
Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
The lab will purchase a new, state-of-the-art Inductively Coupled Plasma
Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES). ICP spectroscopy has been highly productive in
the laboratory and responsible for the research activities of many established,
as well as promising, scientists. An in-house analytical instrument is essential
in basic research and the training of new scientists. In addition to the
instrument, the award will provide for some remodeling of the laboratory to
accommodate the installation of the new instrument and upgrade the facility.

Since its acquisition in 1988, the Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry has
produced instrumental data that has resulted in hundreds of publications by
laboratory staff and students in edited volumes, scientific literature, and as
books, theses, and dissertations. Numerous other secondary publications have
been generated by these results as well as presentations by students and staff
at local, national, and international venues.

The scientific instruments in the lab have also been the principal tools for
instructional activity in archaeological chemistry, both for classroom use and
for many independent studies by students at the University of Wisconsin,
students from other universities, high-school students, and various scholars and
professional colleagues from other institutions both here and abroad. The
previous ICP spectrometer in the lab was essential for the establishment of the
facility as an internationally recognized center for the study of archaeological
chemistry. The new instrument should allow the center to maintain and expand the
efforts of the Laboratory for Archaeological Chemistry.

The National Science Foundation support will allow continued investigation of a
wide variety of archaeological materials and anthropological remains and to
develop new methods of inquiry. Archaeological chemistry is an exceptionally
exciting field where new methods and new discoveries are opening windows and
doors on the human past by producing information thought unknowable until
recently. Most of the major future discoveries in archaeology will come from
laboratories. Studies of trace elements in food chains, and subsequent isotope
studies, for example, have generated new approaches of study of both modern and
prehistoric animal mobility and diet, approaches that have proven useful in
other fields such as animal ecology. In addition to traditional research, the
team will explore and develop new analytical methods of inquiry, the fruits of
which cannot be assessed a priori, but the track record of the past two decades
indicates that their value is inestimable. Scientific instrumentation is the key
to success in such investigations. Basic research in laboratories and the
training of future scientists are primary goals in the growth and development of
this field.