* 0911163
* Jurassic-Early Cretaceous Tectonism, Orogenesis, and Basin Formation in Nevada:  An Integrated Test of Models for Growth of the U.S. Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* James Wright, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 335,498.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research seeks to investigate and resolve an important controversy in the
Mesozoic geologic evolution of the western U.S. Cordillera. Mesozoic processes,
including deformation, metamorphism, magmatism, and sedimentation transformed
the western U.S. from a largely marine province to an elevated continental
landmass. These processes also created a crustal architecture that is critical
to the location and character of natural resources (including oil, ore deposits,
hydrothermal, and groundwater) and therefore of considerable importance to
understand. The controversy addressed by this project concerns two major
questions: (1) Did Mesozoic mountain-building occur in a single long-lived
episode that started at 160 Ma in western Nevada and propagated eastward into
Utah through 65 Ma, or did the region grow during two distinct and unrelated
mountain-building episodes (200-160 Ma, and about 120-65 Ma) that were separated
by a lengthy period of erosion? (2) Did pre-160 Ma sedimentary basins in Nevada,
Utah and Idaho form in response to flexural loading by growing mountains, or did
these basins form by other mechanisms during a time when there were no mountain
loading the crust?

This project will focus on answering these questions by targeted studies in
localities affected by deformation, metamorphism, magmatism and basin formation
in northern Nevada, NW Utah and SE Idaho. The main objectives and methods are as
follows. (1) Generate tight age constraints for Jurassic deformation. This will
be done by U-Pb zircon dating of pre-, syn- and post-tectonic igneous rocks. If
the single phase model is correct, deformation should be Late Jurassic (about
160-145 Ma); if the two phase model is correct, deformation will be older than
about 160 Ma. (2) Determine the structural and stratigraphic evolution of
locations in Nevada where critical relations have been described and disputed,
with no current consensus. The goal is to establish a detailed sequence of
events that can be linked directly to geochronologic and provenance studies. (3)
Constrain the provenance of Jurassic sandstone units by U-Pb dating of detrital
zircons. Provenance of sands provides information about paleogeography. If the
single phase model is correct, Late Jurassic sediments should be derived from
erosion of orogenic highlands to the west. If the two phase model is correct,
this should be true for Middle Jurassic sediments instead.



