* 0911465
* Electrical conductivity of synthetic pyrolite under deep upper mantle and transition zone conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 409,466.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this projects is to
provide a new set of laboratory data &lt;br/&gt;to understand the deep mantle
water cycling. Possible melting near the &lt;br/&gt;410-km and its consequence
on geochemical cycling have been speculated. &lt;br/&gt;However, there have been
no definitive studies on the conditions for &lt;br/&gt;partial melting under the
deep upper mantle conditions. Consequently &lt;br/&gt;there have been large
uncertainties on the critical water content. In &lt;br/&gt;this proposal, our
efforts are focused on determining the critical &lt;br/&gt;water content for
partial melting near 410-km depth. The critical water &lt;br/&gt;content for
partial melting is a critical parameter to understand the &lt;br/&gt;deep water
cycling including the origin and evolution of the ocean mass &lt;br/&gt;and the
processes to control the water content in the upper mantle. In &lt;br/&gt;this
project, we will use electrical conductivity to determine the &lt;br/&gt;onset
of partial melting and consequently, the results of this work &lt;br/&gt;will
also provide a critical new data set to interpret the distribution &lt;br/&gt;of
electrical conductivity in terms of temperature and water content in
&lt;br/&gt;the mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conditions for
partial melting involving water are difficult to &lt;br/&gt;determine
experimentally. We will investigate the phase diagram of &lt;br/&gt;water +
peridotite system by measuring electrical conductivity. we &lt;br/&gt;anticipate
that the onset of partial melting will dramatically change &lt;br/&gt;the
conductivity and consequently, by measuring the electrical
&lt;br/&gt;conductivity, we should be able to detect a small degree of partial
&lt;br/&gt;melting. Experiments will be conducted using an impedance
spectroscopy &lt;br/&gt;with a multianvil apparatus under the conditions of P
(pressure) =4-16 &lt;br/&gt;GPa, and T (temperature) = 1000-1900 K. The partial
melting will be &lt;br/&gt;detected by a jump in conductivity as well as the
change in the trace &lt;br/&gt;element concentrations. The results have an
important implication for &lt;br/&gt;the deep mantle water cycling as well as
the interpretation of &lt;br/&gt;electrical conductivity.