* 0911234
* GOALI: The use of logging and surface NMR measurements to estimate hydraulic conductivity in unconsolidated aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2014
* Rosemary Knight, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 761,000.00

THE USE OF LOGGING AND SURFACE NMR MEASUREMENTS&lt;br/&gt;TO ESTIMATE HYDRAULIC
CONDUCTIVITY IN UNCONSOLIDATED AQUIFERS&lt;br/&gt;Rosemary Knight (PI), Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;Yi-Qiao Song (Co-PI), Schlumberger-Doll
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are growing concerns, worldwide, about the
sustainability of our groundwater resources. The critical decisions that must be
made, in order to manage and protect our water resources, require accurate
characterization of the properties of groundwater aquifers that govern both the
storage and movement of water. The focus of this research project is the use of
NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) logging and surface-based NMR as a means of
determining hydraulic conductivity (K) in the saturated zone of an
unconsolidated aquifer from measurement of NMR relaxation times. &lt;br/&gt;NMR
logging involves lowering an instrument into a borehole to measure the NMR
relaxation times of hydrogen protons in the pore water of the surrounding
geological material. NMR logging has been used for many years for petroleum
applications to estimate the properties of petroleum reservoirs such as water-
filled porosity, pore-size distribution, and permeability. There is now a
growing interest in the use of NMR logging for groundwater applications to
obtain estimates of K in unconsolidated or weakly consolidated aquifer
materials. A key question to be addressed in our research: How can we obtain
reliable estimates of K from NMR logging measurements in unconsolidated
aquifers?&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, there has been great interest in a
new, and very different way of making NMR measurements using Earth?s magnetic
field and a system located at the surface. A non-invasive, surface-based NMR
method, referred to as magnetic resonance sounding (MRS), has been developed and
used to measure the NMR response of groundwater aquifers and obtain estimates of
K. There are two outstanding questions related to this technology that will be
addressed in this research: What is actually measured as the parameter currently
taken to represent the NMR relaxation time in the MRS measurement? How can we
obtain reliable estimates of K from MRS measurements in unconsolidated
materials? &lt;br/&gt;Our vision, and the motivation for the research, is the
development of a new approach to NMR-based aquifer characterization that 1) is
grounded in an improved understanding of the relationship between the NMR
response and K of unconsolidated materials and 2) builds on the best of both
technologies in an integrated way. Our approach will allow us to explore new
ways of integrating the two forms of NMR measurement to obtain improved
subsurface models of NMR properties, and of K. Our proposed research includes
laboratory experiments and numerical modeling. In addition, we will conduct a
field experiment near Lexington, Nebraska where both logging and surface-based
NMR measurements will be made over the 90 to 120 m thick Ogallala aquifer. This
proposal represents a unique opportunity for collaboration by bringing together
a research group at Stanford, with expertise in NMR laboratory measurements,
theory and modeling; a research group at the U.S. Geological Survey with an
ongoing project to study MRS; and key industrial partners, Schlumberger-Doll
Research (SDR) and Schlumberger Water Services (SWS), with expertise in the
acquisition and interpretation of NMR logging, and Vista Clara, Inc., with
expertise in the acquisition and interpretation of MRS data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;