* 0911599
* Probing the Sources and Early Evolution of Kimberlite: A Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf Isotopic Study of Megacrysts From Southern Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* David Bell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2012
* USD 114,351.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Kimberlites are
the most deeply derived terrestrial magmas and have brought diamonds to the
surface that contain minerals believed to originate in the transition zone or
lower mantle. The causes and sources of kimberlite magmatism remain hotly
debated, as does the nature of interaction of protokimberlite melts with the
lithosphere through which it erupts. Protokimberlite melts are those generated
beneath or near the base of thick continental lithosphere, presumably in
response to local or regional mantle upwelling, which, upon reaction with and
assimilation of lithospheric peridotite, erupt as kimberlite. We propose to
better characterize the sources and early evolution of protokimberlite magmas
through the measurement of Pb-Sr-Nd-Hf isotopic and trace element compositions
of kimberlite-hosted megacrysts from five localities in southern Africa.
Megacrysts from kimberlite are thought to represent products of melt-rock
reaction between ascending protokimberlite melts and the deep continental
lithospheric mantle. As such, they provide information on both the deep
source(s) of kimberlites and the nature of lithospheric mantle wallrock with
which they react and assimilate. Isotope data that best constrain this
interaction are rare and no megacrysts have yet been characterized for Sr, Nd,
Pb and Hf isotope ratios. We will analyze megacrysts from five kimberlite
localities, chosen on the basis of tectonic setting, kimberlite type, and
megacryst compositional range representing localities on both Archean (Kaapvaal
and Zimbabwe cratons) and Proterozoic lithosphere. Analysis will focus on
clinopyroxene because it crystallizes across a wide range of megacryst formation
conditions and contains significant quantities of Sr, Nd, Pb and Hf. We also
intend to measure lithophile trace elements to aid in selecting samples for
isotopic analysis. All trace element and isotope measurements and parent-
daughter element concentration measurements (via isotope dilution) will be
performed using SIMS and multicollector ICPMS facilities at Arizona State
University. Through these analyses, we will compile the largest isotopic data
set yet available for southern African megacrysts, which will be used to test
quantitative models of protokimberlite melt evolution and melt-lithosphere
interaction, resolve outstanding questions of megacryst-kimberlite
relationships, and constrain the possible sources of protokimberlite
melts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts; Kimberlites are very important
economically, especially to some developing countries, as the primary source of
economic diamond deposits. Models of kimberlite-lithosphere interaction, and the
interpretations of lithospheric structure derived from them can impact the
search for such deposits. Scientifically, kimberlites are important for the
unique direct information that their xenoliths provide on the composition of the
upper mantle, for the clues to behavior of mantle volatiles that can impact
global climate, and for their potential connection to large scale features in
global mantle dynamics (e.g., the African "superplume"). The results generated
in this proposal will improve our understanding of these connections, because
they will be integrated in a broad collaborative international research program
("TopoAfrica" funded by ANR France) on the connection between deep mantle
dynamics and the evolution of surface topography, sedimentary basins, climate
and biodiversity on the African continent. It will also be integrated with our
ongoing international research collaboration on connections between diamonds and
early kimberlite evolution (funded by US-Israel BSF). At ASU the work will
contribute to interaction between research laboratories, building capacity for
interactive research and education. The results of this work will be
disseminated to K-12 science educators as part of on-site (at ASU) and distance
learning presentations on volcanism and the Earth's mantle, as well as a one-day
field experience for science educators, run under the auspices of ASU's Mars
Education program. The field trip will take 24 educators on a guided exploration
of the world-class mantle xenolith locality at San Carlos, in southeastern
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;