* 0911378
* Theoretical earthquake nucleation, with applications to creep fronts, tremor, and slow slip
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 271,351.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law&lt;br/&gt;111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, faults were thought to
accommodate slip in one of two ways: Stick-slip motion,&lt;br/&gt;in which long
periods where the fault is essentially locked are punctuated by brief episodes
of&lt;br/&gt;rapid slip (earthquakes), and steady creep at plate tectonic rates
(centimeters per year) or less. The&lt;br/&gt;discoveries within the last decade
of episodic slow slip and associated tremor within numerous&lt;br/&gt;subduction
zones, and tremor along the San Andreas fault, show that fault behavior is much
more&lt;br/&gt;varied. In episodic slow slip, faults slip at rates 1 to 2 orders
of magnitude larger than plate tectonic&lt;br/&gt;rates at quasi-regular
intervals on the order of 1 year. Because the slip episodes last for
several&lt;br/&gt;weeks and extend over areas tens to hundreds of kilometers
across, they release energy equivalent&lt;br/&gt;to earthquakes of magnitude 6
or more. Tremor is a quasi-continuous seismic signal thought to&lt;br/&gt;be
made up of myriad small events similar to regular earthquakes of magnitude 1.5
or less except&lt;br/&gt;in being more sluggish. Because slow slip events
increase the stressing rate on the shallower&lt;br/&gt;locked portion of faults
that can slip in magnitude 9 earthquakes, understanding them may
prove&lt;br/&gt;to be useful for earthquake hazards reduction. In addition, the
increased understanding of slip&lt;br/&gt;localization that arises from this
work can be used to interpret ongoing experiments
monitoring&lt;br/&gt;earthquake nucleation at several kilometers depth in
California and South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past several years
the PI has worked with Jean-Paul Ampuero to understand the
implications&lt;br/&gt;of the standard rate-and-state friction equations for
earthquake nucleation on deformable&lt;br/&gt;faults. They derived analytic
solutions that have been very useful for understanding complex
numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulations. This proposal is to extend this work to the
interpretation of slow slip and&lt;br/&gt;tremor in subduction zones and along
the San Andreas fault, using both numerical and
analytical&lt;br/&gt;techniques.&lt;br/&gt;A consensus is emerging that slow
slip and tremor are just different manifestations of slip on&lt;br/&gt;a
heterogeneous interface. Propagating creep fronts seem to be a ubiquitous
feature of slow slip&lt;br/&gt;on heterogeneous faults, and are very effective
at generating seismic slip speeds when they collide.&lt;br/&gt;Both properties
make creep fronts attractive as tremor sources. The first goal of this study is
to&lt;br/&gt;address how far such creep fronts might propagate in isolation, and
the necessary conditions for&lt;br/&gt;two colliding fronts to generate seismic
slip. This will be carried out both for standard rate-
andstate&lt;br/&gt;friction and for other constitutive laws that have been
proposed for slow slip. Once the creep&lt;br/&gt;fronts collide, they can
generate seismic events with moment rate histories that, depending upon
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying constitutive law, are quite different from those that
seismologists have come to expect.&lt;br/&gt;This will be studied initially
using the ?radiation damping? approximation to elastodynamics
and&lt;br/&gt;ultimately full elastodynamics. Because much information is
currently coming from observations&lt;br/&gt;of tidally- and teleseismically-
triggered tremor, both forms of triggering will be modeled.