* 0911699
* Synthesis of Highly Modified Porphyrinoid Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Timothy Lash, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2013
* USD 275,000.00

This project will continue work on the synthesis, characterization, and
reactivity of porphyrin-like macrocycles, including carbaporphyrins. In previous
studies, a '3 + 1' methodology was developed for the preparation of
carbaporphyrinoid systems, and this approach will be applied to the synthesis of
new porphyrin analogues with pyrazole, isoxazole or related subunits. Further
investigations will be conducted on the chemistry of known carbaporphyrinoid
systems, including metalation reactions. A new '2 + 2' methodology for
synthesizing adj-dicarbaporphyrinoids from fulvenes will also be developed and
the same strategy will be used to prepare further modified porphyrinoid
structures. In addition, diindenylmethane will be used as a precursor to novel
conjugated macrocycles, and dipyrrylmethanes with two inverted pyrrole rings
will be used to prepare a new class of doubly N-confused porphyrins. Pyrroles
with acrylaldehyde substituents will be used to synthesize new examples of
vinylogous porphyrins and sapphyrins, and McMurry coupling of bisacrylaldehydes
will be used to generate dideazaporphyrins. The new porphyrin-type structures
have great theoretical significance and will provide insights into the aromatic
character of oligopyrrolic macrocycles. These structures will also allow the
preparation of novel organometallic derivatives with interesting and potentially
useful catalytic properties. Porphyrin analogues of this type are also being
investigated as potential agents for photodynamic therapy and in the treatment
of leishmaniasis, and the new porphyrinoids are likely to show significant
biological activity. The new macrocycles will be thoroughly characterized by
spectroscopic methods and, where possible, X-ray crystal structures will be
obtained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program supports Professor Timothy D. Lash of Illinois State
University whose research has important implications for the fields of
heterocyclic and organometallic chemistry, and may lead to applications as
diverse as catalysis and medicine. Hence, these projects not only provide an
excellent environment for training undergraduates and MS level graduate students
in the field of organic synthesis, but they also expose them to the
multidisciplinary nature of modern scientific research.