* 0911464
* Deformation within the Salton Trough as imaged with InSAR time series analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Rowena Lohman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2013
* USD 255,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Project Significance: In recent years, there has been an explosion in the
availability of geodetic data including continuous GPS, strainmeters and
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR), opening up new possibilities
for exploration of many diverse avenues of ground motion research, including
subsidence, volcanic processes, tectonic deformation and landslide activity.
Current barriers to full utilization of these data include the difficulty
involved with assimilating observations from diverse sets of instruments, as
well as extension of the data coverage to geographical areas that have
traditionally posed challenges to geodetic studies. The proposed work would
increase the accessibility of InSAR data by developing improved time series
analysis tools and training students and researchers to apply them. We will
apply our methods to the specific example of deformation across the Imperial
Fault in Southern California, which experienced two large (Mw 6.6 and Mw 7.1)
earthquake in the past century, and which is situated in close proximity to the
southern San Andreas Fault, numerous geothermal power plants, and population
centers within Southern California.

Technical Description: We propose improvements to InSAR time series analysis
that combine strengths of traditional, whole-interferogram methods with point
target analysis (also known as permanent, or persistent scatterers). We will
test these methods on problems around the world spanning a wide range of signal
sizes and noise characteristics, with particular emphasis on interseismic and
transient fault slip for the Imperial fault in California. We will focus on the
characterization of noise and sensitivity thresholds that apply to this sort of
time series analysis, with the goal of improving the ease with which such
methods can be applied by other researchers to new target problems. We will make
all time series analysis codes and synthetic examples available to the general
community, including tutorials and course materials that address how inverse
methods can be applied to studying problems in active tectonics with geodetic
data. We expect that the impact of our characterization of the impact of
atmospheric noise on our inversions will also be relevant to research aimed at
modeling and/or correcting the effects of tropospheric water vapor in
interferograms.