* 0911485
* The Dynamics of UHP Tectonism: Does the Western Gneiss Region Consist of Multiple (U)HP Blocks With Different Histories?
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Andrew Kylander-Clark, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2012
* USD 391,382.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The margins of continents have been subducted to profound depths (more than 100
km) deep within Earths interior many times throughout the last 500 million
years; this process has likely had a major influence on the composition and
evolution of the continents and underlying mantle. Understanding how such rocks
form and are returned to Earths surface continues to be one of the outstanding
questions about plate tectonics. This research uses an enormous region of high-
pressure rocks in Norway to understand whether such regions form from one large
piece or from many smaller pieces. The impact of this research should be
considerable within the earth sciences community because the Norwegian terrane
is an archetypal example of continental subduction.

The research approach is two-pronged: U-Pb zircon dating of eclogite to assess
whether crustal blocks with different ages exist, and structural petrology to
characterize shear zones between the blocks. Following careful petrology,
eclogite-facies zircon genesis will be assessed by optical and back-scattered
electron petrography, cathodoluminescence, trace-element abundances, and Raman
spectroscopy. After reconnaissance secondary-ion mass spectrometry and laser-
ablation multi-collector inductively coupled-plasma mass spectrometry dating,
single zircon grains and grain fragments will be analyzed by high-precision U-Pb
thermal-ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) and chemical-abrasion thermal-
ionization mass spectrometry. The strength of this approach lies in its use of
state-of-the-art zircon geochronology and petrology, collaboration with
researchers at cutting-edge facilities, and our familiarity with other
ultrahigh-pressure orogens.