* 0911414
* Geodynamically relevant anisotropic tomography
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mark Panning, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2012
* USD 148,786.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Seismic tomography is one of the best tools for imaging the interior structure
of the Earth, which is inaccessible by other means. Expanding these models to
include anisotropy (i.e. directional dependence) of seismic velocities can more
directly image the dynamic processes of the deep Earth. While many tomographic
models including seismic anisotropy have been developed, there are few that
invert for both strength and orientation of anisotropy in order to allow for
direct comparison with geodynamic models, which make predictions about the
patterns of mantle convection based upon assumptions of the mantle's viscosity
and other rheological properties. The long term goal of this research is to
develop global as well as more detailed regional models of seismic anisotropy
that can both illuminate the dynamic processes of the mantle, as well as
allowing for direct comparison with geodynamically predicted models. The
objective of this application, which is the next step towards this long-term
goal, is to test and apply a new approach of utilizing 3D finite-frequency
modeling of surface wave data to model both the strength and best-fitting
orientation of anisotropic seismic structure. We expect that this approach, when
combined with finite-frequency modeling of shear wave splitting intensity data,
will produce models which allow for direct comparison with geodynamical flow
models, as well as allowing for anisotropic modeling of relatively sparse
regional data. We plan to demonstrate the potential of this approach by pursuing
the following specific aims. (1) Verify that the surface wave modeling method
can accurately reproduce known models when applied to a large synthetic dataset
calculated with known models of anisotropy. (2) Incorporate shear splitting
intensity measurements into the model, expected to be complementary in terms of
spatial sensitivity and relative sensitivity to different model parameters. (3)
Apply the approach to a dataset from the Chile Ridge Subduction Project. This
temporary deployment of broadband seismic instruments sampled a region of
tectonic interest between 2004 and 2007, and the modeling of this relatively
sparsely sampled region presents both a challenge and an opportunity to
demonstrate the strengths of the proposed approach. The proposed work is
innovative because it takes advantage of a new method of modeling surface wave
data that has just been developed by the PI. This method is expected to allow
for direct modeling of the strength and orientation of anisotropy beyond what
has been traditionally obtained in anisotropic modeling. This approach is
ideally suited for direct comparison with geodynamic predictions, allowing for a
unique method of imaging the flow patterns of the Earth's mantle.

This work will contribute to advancement of discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training and learning through the training of at least one
Ph.D. student, as well as potentially one or more Masters and undergraduate
students, and the incorporation of such projects into class work. It will also
supply for the enhancement of infrastructure for research and education, through
the optimization of a new HPC cluster that will be used by other research
groups. Finally, we expect the broad dissemination of results through
presentation at international meetings and peer-reviewed journals. Computer
codes developed in this research will be made available through the PI's
website.