* 0911633
* Dating Metamorphism with Accessory Minerals - Integrated In-situ Geochronology and Trace Element Budgeting of Metamorphic Reactions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Andreas Moeller, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2015
* USD 187,842.00

This proposal seeks funding to investigate two fundamental aspects of
petrological research, namely an improved understanding of dating metamorphic
processes by accessory minerals and the "granulite enigma". One of the remaining
challenges to geochronology is to understand when and by which reactions
accessory minerals used for U-Th-Pb dating grow and are modified during
metamorphism. The question is: which part of a metamorphic P-T path are we
dating with a particular accessory mineral? State-of-the-art imaging and laser-
ablation ICP-MS techniques will be used to carry out in-situ geochronology,
trace element thermometry and fingerprinting, trace element budgeting, all in a
detailed textural context. The "granulite enigma" concerns how granulite facies
conditions (high T at moderate P) are attained in the continental crust.
Intellectual merit. The proposed research will address three fundamental
questions in metamorphic petrology and geochronology: 1) Which part of the
metamorphic path can be dated by different accessory phases? 2) Are inclusion
textures reliable relative time markers for accessory phases? 3) What is the
likely heat source responsible for granulite metamorphism in an alpine style
orogen? The target area to be investigated is a young (30 Ma) occurrence of high
temperature granulite facies rocks in orogenic belts, the Gruf complex in the
Central Alps. Ages can determined with 1-2 % precision by laser ablation ICP-MS
dating of U-Th-rich accessory minerals (xenotime, monazite, zircon), enabling
correlation of the transient metamorphic event with the regional geological
history. Previous studies of the PI have identified accessory mineral textures
in the Gruf complex granulites that have the potential to combine mineral
textures and inclusion relationships with trace element budgeting of metamorphic
reactions and balancing reactions of accessory phase growth, e.g. xenotime found
in breakdown-textures of garnet may be produced from HREE and Y stored in high
temperature garnet, with or without involvement of monazite and/or apatite.
Garnet- or rutile-breakdown may contribute Zr to metamorphic zircon growth.

Broader impacts. This study will contribute to the very fundamental scientific
questions outlined above. In addition, the project will support one PhD student
and provides that student an opportunity for international collaboration with an
expert in the field of metamorphic petrological modeling, which enhances the
expertise at KU. This will provide the graduate student with important
international experience for a future career either in industry or academia. The
project also involves undergraduate students in activities that will develop
their teaching and leadership skills and provide insight into research, state-
of-the-art analytical facilities and international collaborative science. Work
with the PI and other academics in the KU laboratories will extend learning
beyond the classroom.