* 0911031
* The Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* John Stegeman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2012
* USD 1,824,997.00

The Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health (WHCOHH) is a multi-
institutional (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Marine Biological
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology) initiative that combines
population biology, genomics and physical oceanography to study harmful algal
blooms (HABs), pathogenic microorganisms, and potential pathogens. The Center's
goal is to improve the public health through enhanced understanding of how
oceanic processes affect the distribution and persistence of biological agents
with potential human health consequences. WHCOHH researchers have interacted
extensively with other OHH centers and scientists, as well as government
officials responsible for public health. WHCOHH has supported 13 competitively
awarded pilot projects and leveraged its resources by attracting new awards for
related research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding through this
Accomplishment-based Renewal, the WHCOHH will continue to build upon recent
discoveries and ongoing research activity in two major
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. HAB Theme: A recent major accomplishment at the
Center was the identification and characterization of the massive bloom of
Alexandrium fundyense in the Gulf of Maine in 2005. This resulted in decisive
management action that protected the public health in much of coastal New
England. Models incorporating hydrodynamics and biological aspects of A.
fundyense gave an accurate prediction of another severe bloom in New England in
2008. Apparently, this was the first-ever successful seasonal forecast of a red
tide anywhere in the world. Genetic and physiological analysis of A. fundyense
populations sampled during 2005-2008 yielded a unique dataset for testing
hypotheses about how toxic dinoflagellate blooms form and change. Based on these
results, the HAB research team will formulate a suite of population dynamics
models for the multiple genotypes of A. fundyense, which differ dramatically in
terms of growth rates and cellular toxin content. They hypothesize that the
aggregate distribution of A. fundyense is composed of a mosaic of genetically
distinct subpopulations, each with different physiological and/or behavioral
responses to environmental conditions. The goal is to understand the
hydrodynamic and biological controls on these populations, their toxin
production, and how these factors ultimately determine fluctuations in shellfish
toxicity. This HAB research will be augmented by additional field observations
in a nearby salt marsh (Nauset) which has hydrodynamic connections to the
regional HAB outbreaks. Instrumentation will be deployed for automated detection
of A. fundyense, further advancing the technologies that can be used to manage
these dangerous phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Pathogen theme: Recent
research on pathogens at the Center has included studies of Vibrio species,
studies on marine refuges of a variety of other human pathogens, and
groundbreaking studies on the rare biosphere. Investigators uncovered
microevolutionary dynamics of populations of potentially pathogenic bacteria in
the environment by establishing a population genomic framework. This enabled
them to determine the mechanisms of genome differentiation and their effect on
population structure on different temporal and spatial scales. Such information
permits differentiation of the effects of selection and demographics on
bacterial populations and the pathogenic variants that are embedded within those
populations. Building on accomplishments pertaining to Vibrio species, the
pathogen team will now (1) determine the relationship between population
structure and origin of the recently isolated coastal Vibrios and related human
pathogens; (2) explore diversity, horizontal gene transfer, and the ecological
role of virulence genes; and (3) determine host range, genetic diversity, and
potential for gene transfer of vibriophages. As follow-up research in microbial
community structure and low-abundance human pathogens, the team will (1)
determine the temporal and spatial distribution of indicator organisms and
pathogens in beach sands and (2) identify assemblages of potential indicator
organisms as proxies for the occurrence of human pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will also be conducting a cross-cutting
activity that will link HAB and pathogen studies in the Nauset Marsh System.
High-resolution microbial population profiles will be compared with A. fundyense
population data to assess potential correlations. A subset of these same samples
will be analyzed for routine indicator organisms as well as other human
pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of the Center's previously
funded and new research activities span all five categories defined by NSF.
Teaching, training, and learning have been promoted via entrainment of more than
80 students and postdoctoral fellows thus far, with underrepresented groups
participating in all levels of center activities. The WHCOHH genomics core
facility and Alexandrium culture collection constitute significant investments
in infrastructure for research and education. Extensive outreach efforts lead to
broad dissemination of our results, and close connection with public health
officials have had demonstrable benefits to society. These benefits are expected
to continue to develop during the next two years.of renewal funding.