* 0911564
* EXCITED STATE DYNAMICS OF DNA BASE PAIRS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Mattanjah de Vries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 08/31/2012
* USD 555,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Mattanjah S. de Vries of the University of
California Santa Barbara, together with his undergraduate, graduate and high
school student researchers, will investigate the photochemistry and in
particular the excited state dynamics of isolated nucleobases and their clusters
with each other and with water. Following absorption of UV light, DNA bases can
avoid chemical transformation by very rapidly diffusing the excitation energy to
heat, in a process called internal conversion, which can safely be transferred
to the environment. Thus a short lived excited state provides photochemical
stability. This process strongly depends on molecular structure and is
remarkably prevalent in the specific forms in which nucleobases occur in
biological contexts. These short lived states have been difficult to study
experimentally and therefore most evidence for these processes is still
indirect. This project will employ novel gas phase techniques for these studies
in collaboration with Professor Pavel Hobza in Prague, whose group will apply
the newest computational modeling techniques for analysis. Professor de Vries
will engage students in his efforts and contribute to the Bay Area Museum-School
Online Science Learning Collaboratory Pilot Projec.

How DNA responds to radiation is relevant to human health because radiation
damage can affect genetic propagation and lead to cancer. DNA photochemistry is
also important for our understanding of how life on earth developed, because
prebiotic chemistry presumably occurred before formation of an oxygen rich
atmosphere and thus under more energetic UV irradiation than what reaches the
earth?s surface today. To understand this photochemistry in detail and at the
molecular level we need to study it in isolated nucleobases and base pairs and
compare the results with quantum chemical modeling. This approach allows
Professor de Vries and his collaborators to observe intrinsic molecular
properties and understand how those shape the bulk behavior of biological
systems. Therefore, this research will contribute to the most basic
understanding of fundamental processes that govern the molecular building blocks
of life. These topics, in combination with cutting-edge laser and computational
techniques, lend themselves extraordinary well to outreach activities, which
this group traditionally undertakes. These activities include mentoring
undergraduates, K-12 outreach activities, participation in the Bay Area Museum-
School Online Science Learning Collaboratory Pilot Project, and collaboration
with the students at Jackson State University, a historically black college in
Mississippi.