* 0911568
* Collaborative Research:  Probing the Earth System in Patagonia: Crustal motion in relation to tectonics, earth structure, the hydrological cycle and climate change
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Smalley, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2013
* USD 312,506.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this work we explore the elastic and viscoelastic responses of the solid
earth related to climate induced surface load changes. The climate changes and
associated loads occur at time scales ranging from annual hydrological cycles at
one extreme to ice sheet evolution (over the past 20,000 years) at the other.
Our geographical focus is Patagonia, which currently possesses the largest body
of ice in the southern hemisphere outside of Antarctica. The Patagonian Ice
Fields are known to be rapidly wasting, e.g. faster than those in Alaska in
percentage terms, and there is growing evidence this ice loss is accelerating.
Our primary approach to this earth system science project is through crustal
motion geodesy and regional geophysics, including elastic and viscoelastic
modeling of several overlapping phenomena. One task in our study is using the
earth as a ?bathroom scale? to weigh annual and inter-annual changes in ice mass
using Earth?s instantaneous elastic response to surface load changes. This
approach will be calibrated and validated by relating annual or seasonal
patterns of loading (the cause) with in-phase seasonal oscillations of adjacent
bedrock (the effect). Having calibrated our ?weighing machine? in this way, we
will be able to very quickly detect and analyze any abrupt changes in long term
rates of ice gain or loss. We will use our results to test all predictions for
postglacial rebound (PGR) in Patagonia. The results obtained here will also
provide essential ?PGR correction? calibration information to scientists using
gravity data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) satellite
project, and enable GRACE to make the first direct observations of mass transfer
between the ice sheets and the oceans. The results from Patagonia will also
provide useful input to the POLENET project?s measurements of the effects of
climate change, which is a project of tremendous societal importance. It is
widely understood that there is serious danger that the W. Antarctic or
Greenland ice sheets could collapse, or break up, and become icebergs in the
ocean. This would raise sea level over the short time, much shorter than that
necessary to melt the ice, during which this break up occurred. The rise in sea
level associated with such a collapse would seriously damage the global economy
and degrade the social infrastructure supporting hundreds of millions of people
by inundating large swaths of densely inhabited coastal areas worldwide. While
it may be too late to reverse global warming before sea level rise becomes
seriously problematic, it is crucial to assess both the possible severity of sea
level rise, and the amount of time that governments have to respond to, or
mitigate developments they may be powerless to prevent. This project
demonstrates the role in which solid earth sciences can contribute to modern
climate change research; its broadest impact is likely to be a better metrology
of mass transfer between ice sheets and the oceans at the global scale.

In this work we explore relations between the solid earth and climate. These
earth processes include tectonics, subsurface rheological structure, and elastic
and viscoelastic loading responses. The climate contribution ranges over time
scales encompassing annual hydrological cycles at one extreme to ice sheet
evolution and Holocene climate change (at a minimum) at the other. Our
geographical focus is Patagonia, which possesses the largest body of ice
currently found in the southern hemisphere outside of Antarctica. These ice
bodies are rapidly wasting, e.g. faster than the Alaskan ice fields in
percentage terms, and there is growing evidence this ice loss is accelerating.
Our primary approach to this earth system science project is through crustal
motion geodesy (using both campaign and continuous GPS measurements and precise,
scientific, GPS processing tools) and regional geophysics, including elastic and
viscoelastic modeling of various physical phenomena overlapping in time and
space. One task in our study for example is to ?weigh? annual and inter-annual
changes in ice mass using Earth?s instantaneous elastic response to surface load
changes. This approach will be calibrated and validated by relating annual or
seasonal patterns of loading (the cause) with in-phase seasonal oscillations of
adjacent bedrock (the effect). Having calibrated our ?weighing machine? in this
way, we will be able to very quickly detect and analyze any abrupt changes in
long term rates of ice gain or loss that may occur. We will use our results and
all available information about ice mass oscillations and secular trends from
glaciology to test all available predictions for postglacial rebound (PGR) in
Patagonia. The results obtained here will also provide essential ?PGR
correction? calibration information for proper analysis of gravity data from the
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE). The PGR correction will enable
GRACE to make the first direct observations of mass transfer between the ice
sheets and the oceans. The advantages of pursuing this agenda in Patagonia, over
Antarctica and Greenland, include: the ?convenient? scale of the ice fields, the
very pronounced tectonic gradients already documented there, the far easier
access to bedrock surrounding the ice fields, the less expensive logistics, and
a far denser and far more easily managed geodetic infrastructure. The results
from Patagonia will also provide useful input to the POLENET project?s
measurements of the effects of climate change, which is of tremendous societal
importance. It is widely understood there is serious danger the W. Antarctic or
Greenland ice sheets could collapse. This would seriously damage the global
economy and degrade the social infrastructure supporting hundreds of millions of
people by inundating large swaths of densely inhabited coastal areas worldwide.
While it may be too late to reverse global warming before sea level rise becomes
seriously problematic, it is crucial to assess both the possible severity of sea
level rise, and the amount of time that governments have to respond to, or
mitigate developments that they may be powerless to prevent. This project
demonstrates the role in which solid earth sciences can contribute to modern
climate change research; its broadest impact is likely to be a better metrology
of mass transfer between ice sheets and the oceans at the global scale.