* 0911461
* Collaborative research:   Linking Heterogeneity of Above-Ground and Subsurface Processes at the Gap-Canopy Patch Scales to Ecosystem Level Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gil Bohrer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,718.00

Trees control soil moisture by drawing water through the roots and transpiring
them to the air. They also lead to an opposite effect of reducing evaporation
from the soil to the air by shading the ground and reducing the wind speed near
the surface. Current watershed models simulate soil moisture at regional scales
(tens to hundreds of km) and use extremely simplified representations of the
interactions between vegetation and soil moisture. The differences between
individual crowns and the effects of the canopy structure are not represented in
these models. This project aims to improve understanding of the relationships
between evaporation, transpiration and soil moisture in heterogeneous forest
canopies, and how these relationships affect soil moisture heterogeneity from
the tree scale to the ecosystem and regional scales. The project will capitalize
on the existing wealth of data and on-going diverse observations at the
University of Michigan Biological Station. A combination of detailed
observations and state-of-the-art high-resolution modeling tools will be used.
Novel radar-based volumetric observation of soil moisture, and in and above
canopy micrometeorological measurements will be used, along with a novel
integrated modeling approach.

The project will advance our capability to predict the effects of ecosystem
structure at multiple scales on the exchanges of energy water and CO2 with the
atmosphere, and on the functioning of the regional watershed. Such advancement
is particularly important in conditions of changing climate and increased human
disturbance to forests, which are expected to increase the spatial heterogeneity
of forests and other important natural resources. It will also create a modeling
tool that will have a truly transformative value in the hydrological and
ecological sciences. Graduate students at Ohio State University and the
University of Michigan will be supported through this collaborative project.
Undergraduate students will be engaged in the proposed research. "Plant and
Water", an educational K-12 community-outreach program will be developed to
illustrate the underlying principles of water flow in soil-plant-atmosphere
continuum and will train and employ undergraduate students as instructors at
Big-Brothers Big-Sisters of Central Ohio Residental Camp Oty'Okwa, as part of
the USDA Forest Service's "More Kids in the Woods" initiative, a program for
underserved elementary-aged children within central Ohio.