* 0911277
* ADT: Sparse Blind Separation Algorithms of Spectral Mixtures and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 705,786.00

Spectral sensing of chemical and biological agents is both a critical area of
national security and a vibrant scientific area. Though modern imaging and
spectroscopy technology have made it possible to classify pure chemicals by
spectra, realistic field data often contain mixtures of chemicals, subject to
changing background and environmental noise. In this project, the investigator
and his colleagues develop signal processing algorithms and their mathematical
analysis for blind separation of spectral mixtures in noisy
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Blind source separation (BSS) methods aim to extract the
information of source signals from their mixtures without knowledge of the
mixing environment.&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge is that the spectral data are
correlated and the conventional ``statistical independence'' fails to be a good
separation criterion. Instead, a local spectral sparseness condition weaker than
independence will be utilized. The alternative criterion leads to an
optimization problem solvable by convex programming. Recent advances in
compressive sensing (CS) algorithms are also brought into play. The resulting
BSS-CS algorithms are promising for blindly separating more chemicals than the
number of spectral measurements. The BSS-CS algorithm will also serve as a
preprocessing tool to initialize and improve the convergence of nonconvex
optimization methods such as the nonnegative matrix factorization methods for
general spectral conditions of
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemicals are often too small to be
identified by human eyes. They are captured by sensing equipment in terms of
their frequency contents (spectra). Though spectra of pure chemicals can be
identified by visual inspection, the spectra of chemical mixtures take a variety
of complicated forms and pose a serious challenge for analysis. Chemical
mixtures are quite common in the environment. The goal of the project is to
develop a new suite of robust separation algorithms for chemical and biological
mixtures measured in realistic conditions. A critical issue is to recover the
spectra of the individual components of chemical mixtures, and analyze the level
of their potential harm and damage. The computation and related technology will
be essential for identifying potentially dangerous chemicals released in the
environment and for providing valuable information for decision makers to act
timely. The investigator and his colleagues shall employ new mathematical
techniques and signal processing methods to enhance the computational capability
of chemical sensing and identification based on spectral
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;