* 0911150
* Kinematic Vorticity Gauges and the Rheology of Mylonitic Shear Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 143,093.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Many hazards encountered by humans, including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions
and tsunamis, result from plate tectonics. How tectonic plates move and interact
with one another, and how deformation that occurs at their interacting
boundaries is localized into structures like the San Andreas fault in
California, are first-order questions in the Earth Sciences. At active tectonic
plate boundaries, GPS data have allowed a much clearer understanding of plate
interactions, localization of deformation, and relations to seismic and volcanic
hazards. However, such data provide little information about plate interaction
and deformation at great depth. The most direct way to study these deeper
processes is to work in ancient plate boundary zones that have been exhumed by
uplift and erosion. Geologists use a range of tools to evaluate the histories of
deformation in these exhumed rocks, but the validity of some of these tools
still needs to be tested. The primary goal of this project is to test some
microstructural tools used to extract from exhumed, deformed rocks an important
quantity known as kinematic vorticity. Through this study the investigators hope
to clarify under what conditions these tools can be reliably used to measure
kinematic vorticity. The work will be conducted in the Norumbega Fault System,
which cuts across the entire State of Maine, and is one of the very few ancient
analogs for the San Andreas Fault in California. Thus, our results will have
applicability to a well-known seismically active fault.

More specifically, these researchers will investigate the oblique quartz shape
preferred orientation and rigid clast rotation methods for determining kinematic
vorticity in a well-characterized mylonitic shear zone with approximately
monoclinic strain symmetry. They will provide a detailed analysis of the
microstructural factors that may compromise clast methods of kinematic vorticity
analysis, and determine if one of the other methods gives consistent results
even where clast methods are compromised. In addition, they will develop
criteria for estimating the degree of strain localization at clast/matrix
boundaries and conduct numerical sensitivity analyses to better understand the
effects of clast lubrication on the bulk shear strength of mylonitic shear zones
that form the roots of seismically active faults. Detailed microstructural
investigations will utilize optical, scanning electron microscopy and electron
backscatter diffraction techniques. 2D and 3D parametric numerical sensitivity
analyses will be used to investigate a range of parameters that may affect clast
kinematics, and assess how the evolution of clast lubrication with increasing
strain may contribute to long-lived weakening of shear zones. The preliminary
results are novel, and suggest caution when using clast rotation methods for
determining the kinematic vorticity number, but they open exciting new
possibilities for investigating strain-dependent changes in rock strength that
arise from feedbacks among chemical and mechanical processes during deformation.