* 0911553
* Tailoring Enantiospecific Properties of Chiral Metal Nanoclusters on Chiral Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jason Weaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 354,300.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Aravind R.
Asthagiri and Jason Weaver of the University of Florida are supported by the ASC
Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop a new approach to grow chiral
metal nanostructures on chiral metal oxide surfaces that can be tailored for
optimal enantioselectivity. The central hypothesis is that metals can be
deposited on chiral metal oxide surfaces to obtain chiral metal nanostructures
with enhanced enantioselectivity over comparable chiral metal surfaces. The
research plan will integrate ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) experiments, using scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM), temperature programmed desorption (TPD), and other
surface analytical methods, with DFT calculations to study variations in the
metal nanostructure morphology, reactivity, and enantiospecificity as a function
of metal oxide substrate type and orientation. Changes in reactivity and
enantioselectivity will be probed with small molecules using temperature
programmed desorption. The proposed work, if successful, will be the first
demonstration of the growth of high surface area chiral metal nanostructures.
Such materials would be more viable than existing chiral metal surfaces for
enantiopurification of chiral drugs and other chiral applications, since they
would offer enhanced performance with more efficient use of the metal. Graduate
students will be trained in theoretical and experimental surface techniques, and
undergraduate and high school students will be exposed to advanced research
methodologies through the University of Florida's REU Program.