* 0911734
* Trace Element Transport in the Continental Crust During Anatexis: The Role of Accessory Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nigel Kelly, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2013
* USD 228,306.00

INTELLECTUAL MERITS. The extraction of melts from the lower crust and their
subsequent emplacement at higher structural levels is possibly the most
important crustal differentiation mechanism. A significant control on the trace
element composition of melts generated in the crust and the residues left
behind, hence the distribution of important trace and heat producing elements in
the continental crust, is the melting behavior of key trace element-bearing
minerals. However, the physico-chemical behavior of these accessory minerals
during melting, melt segregation, and melt extraction remains to be quantified.
Using a natural laboratory approach this project will target metasedimentary and
leucogneiss samples from two high-grade migmatite terrains in Prydz Bay, east
Antarctica, where excellent exposures preserve evidence for in situ partial
melting and melt mobilization. The study will determine where, when and how
accessory minerals grow and decompose during key partial melting reactions and,
using trace element signatures and equilibrium partitioning criteria, establish
the reaction relationships that exist between accessory and major minerals
involved in the process of melt generation and extraction. Trace element budgets
determined by texturally constrained micro-analysis of the key trace element
bearing major and accessory minerals will be integrated with P-T modeling of
reaction and melting histories to predict where major periods of mineral growth
and breakdown will occur in P-T space. Research results will provide a robust
means with which to directly characterize the reaction processes and involvement
of key accessory minerals that control liberation and retention of trace
elements in the continental crust. An improved understanding of accessory
mineral behavior in melts will be used to refine forward model mineral
dissolution and growth during anatexis to ultimately predict trace element
fluxes in different P-T or tectonic settings. Research outcomes will likely
improve our understanding the behavior of dateable accessory and major minerals
during high-temperature crustal events, leading to better understanding of the
significance of radiometric ages with respect to tectonic processes and crustal
evolution.

BROADER IMPACTS. Central to this research is student participation. A
significant component will be completed by PhD candidate Ms. Jessica Matthews, a
promising young female scientist who will not only gain training in cutting edge
analytical geochemistry in first class facilities, but interact with and learn
from world leaders in microanalysis. Coupled with integrated thermodynamic
modeling, and mentoring of two undergraduate students, this project provides a
unique opportunity and important step in Ms. Matthews' academic career. The two
undergraduate positions will provide practical training in applied geochemistry,
preparing these students for a future career in academic or applied geoscience,
or other industrial applications such as ceramics or crystal optics. In
addition, analytical collaborations will establish closer ties with two national
laboratories - including the development of synergies for further local USGS
support for student research - and allow development of approaches to in situ
microanalysis for trace elements and isotopes.