* 0911004
* The Precessionally-Driven Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Paul Roberts, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Magnetism is everywhere, in planets, stars and galaxies. Usually it is the by-
product of electric currents created in the same way as in a commercial power
plant, i.e., by dynamo action. This is the name given to the process through
which the motion of an electrical conductor across a magnetic field creates
electric currents that can maintain that magnetic field against energy losses
through electrical resistance. Dynamos require an energy source to offset those
losses. For the geodynamo operating in the Earth's liquid core there are two
main possibilities: buoyancy and the luni-solar precession.

Buoyancy is created by the release of latent heat and light constituents as core
fluid solidifies onto the surface of the solid inner core in the general cooling
of the Earth, the buoyant power release being proportional to the rate of
solidification and therefore to the rate of growth of the solid core. Precession
is the name given to the motion of the Earth's polar axis round a cone with a
semi-angle of about 23.5 degrees; it sweeps out the complete cone approximately
every 26,000 years. Precession is caused by the gravitational torques that the
Sun, Moon and planets exert on the equatorial bulge of the Earth. The Earth's
mantle and core are coupled by viscosity and topography, the topographic torque
existing because of the slight oblateness of the core-mantle interface. Through
this coupling, precession creates fluid motions in the core. Of the two
mechanisms, the buoyancy explanation is the better studied and the more widely
accepted. Nevertheless, there is a difficulty: the power requirements of the
geodynamo imply such a rapid growth of the inner core that it is, on current
estimates, at most about 2 billion years old. Paleomagnetism has established
however that the geomagnetic field has existed at about its present strength for
more than 3.4 billion years. The precessional explanation does not encounter
this particular difficulty but it may face others. This will not be known until
the precessional dynamo has been studied in greater detail than has so far been
attempted. This is the main objective of this project.

There is a subsidiary objective too, that of understanding better the flows
generated in planets such as Mercury and satellites such as Europa by their
libration. This is the term used when a body does not keep the same face towards
another body about which it orbits. For example, the Moon does not present
exactly the same face towards the Earth as it orbits about it. Librationally-
driven motions are being actively studied experimentally at UCLA, and our
techniques for solving precessionally-driven flows can be easily modified to
apply to these experiments and to librating bodies in the solar system.

Most studies of dynamo action in large naturally-occurring bodies have had to
assume that those bodies are spherical. A radically new method is required to
study precessionally-driven flows in non-spherical bodies. We have recently
developed and tested a numerical technique for solving the equations of
magnetohydrodynamics, governing fluid flow and magnetic field, in an oblate
spheroidal container. The computer code advances the flow in time using finite
differences on overlapping grids; in this way the grids map the spheroidal
container and the numerical difficulty known as the pole problem is completely
avoided. Already some unexpected, and so far inexplicable, results have been
obtained. We intend to carry out many exploratory studies to try to elucidate
these flows in order to determine how important precession is in driving motions
in Earth's core and in creating the main magnetic field of the Earth.