* 0911338
* The Design and Syntheses of Tubular Polymers and Supramolecular Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Frank Fowler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2013
* USD 495,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation
supports Professors Joseph W. Lauher and Frank W. Fowler of the State University
of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook. Their research focuses on the synthesis of
polymeric compounds unobtainable by using other synthetic methods. Networks of
molecules will be synthesized with precise control of certain supramolecular
features where the products are formed in a perfectly ordered crystalline
environment, something that may be important for an application or specific
function. The poly(diacetylenes) and poly(triacetylenes) synthesized are
conjugated polymers with potential applications as electronic and optical
materials. The current national emphasis on new energy sources, particularly
solar energy, highlights the national need for such refined materials. At a
molecular level, the proposed new materials are analogous to the known single-
walled carbon nanotubes whose properties have shown great promise for the
construction of optical and electrical devices, as molecular containers, and
delivery devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a broader impact of the proposed
research, synthetic nanotubes could offer considerable advantages over the well
known carbon nanotubes. With all the functionality of organic chemistry
available, tubes can be fine tuned for applications such as water purification,
molecular sensors and storage, molecular electronics and photonics. Students
will be trained in organic synthesis and solid-state characterization methods.
SUNY at Stony Brook has made a major commitment to undergraduate research, as a
natural complement to its well recognized strength at the graduate level. As
part of this commitment, the PIs have made a major effort to bring aspects of
their proposed research into undergraduate courses. An excellent website
(http://www.ic.sunysb.edu/class/orgchem/) has been developed that is a directory
to organic chemistry resources. The web page highlights recent literature and
has links to journals, chemistry search websites, problems of the day, as well
as tools for calculations.&lt;br/&gt;