* 0911265
* Synthesis and Study of Cationic Gold pi-Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Ross Widenhoefer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2012
* USD 435,000.00

This project is directed toward the syntheses and study of cationic, 14-electron
gold(I) pi-alkene, pi-allene, and pi-alkyne complexes. Cationic gold(I)
complexes have recently emerged as effective catalysts for the functionalization
of C-C multiple bonds with carbon and heteroatom nucleophiles. However, the
cationic, two-coordinate gold(I) pi-complexes germane to catalysis remain scarce
and, as a result, little is known about the structure and reactivity of these
important complexes. Execution of the proposed research activities will fill
this gap in our understanding. Studies directed toward realizing this objective
include analysis of 1) the ground-state structure and fluxional behavior of
cationic gold(I) pi-complexes, 2) the relative binding ability pi-hydrocarbyl
ligands to a cationic gold fragment, 3) the kinetics of degenerative ligand
exchange of cationic gold(I) pi-complexes, and 4) the reactivity of gold pi-
complexes toward nucleophiles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Professor Ross Widenhoefer of the Department of Chemistry at Duke University.
Professor Widenhoefer's research efforts are directed, in large part, to the
mechanistic analysis of the gold(I)-catalyzed addition of carbon and heteroatom
nucleophiles to alkenes and allenes. Realization of the proposed activities will
provide mechanistic information valuable to the ever-growing global community of
researchers working toward the development of new and more efficient gold(I)
catalyzed transformations for application in organic synthesis and
pharmaceutical development.