* 0911078
* THE TAKALIK ABAJ MONUMENTAL STONE SCULPTURE PROJECT: HIGH DEFINITION DIGITAL DOCUMENTATION AND ANALYSIS
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Travis Doering, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2012
* USD 127,810.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National Science
Foundation, Drs. Travis Doering and Lori Collins will organize a team of
international researchers to conduct an archaeological project at the site of
Takalik Abaj on the Pacific piedmont of Guatemala. Interdisciplinary scholars
will include specialists in archaeology, epigraphy, iconography, and art history
who will record, document, and analyze this pivotal Preclassic period
socioeconomic and political center (c. 900 BC to AD 150). A corpus of carved
monuments and architectural features at Takalik Abaj presents a record of
increasing social complexity, interaction, and ideological practices. The
extensive collection of monuments is the most eclectic in all of Mesoamerica,
containing examples of Pacific coastal and piedmont styles as well as Southern
Gulf Coast Olmec, Izapan, and early Maya styles. This assemblage constitutes the
portrayal of a dynamic developmental sequence that began with early symbolic
elements; evolved into elite ideological expressions of rulership, power, and
authority; and culminated with the appearance of initial glyphic inscriptions
and dates that were foundational to Classic Maya script. Yet, this unique record
has not been fully assembled or documented, nor has it been the subject of a
coordinated, comprehensive study to determine the specific progression of
narrative communication and the internal and external influences exerted in
early Mesoamerica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A suite of high-definition, three-
dimensional, digital technologies will be used to record iconographic,
epigraphic, and morphologic information contained in the sculptures and
architectural features. Earlier work by the project directors has demonstrated
how these innovative methods provide analytical information and perspectives
that have not previously been attainable in Mesoamerican research. The new
insights generated from the acquired data will be combined with earlier,
conventional images and commentary regarding Takalik Abaj. The intellectual
merit of the research includes compilation, examination, and development of
requisite theoretical and substantive information that will allow analysis at
multiple scales (e.g., artifact, feature, architectural, and regional). The
resultant data will provide the ability to test models of local and long-
distance sociopolitical interaction in early
Mesoamerica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan of work consists of the: 1) recording
of monuments and architectural features at the site using a variety of three-
dimensional documentation techniques, 2) iconographic, epigraphic, and
morphologic analyses of these data, 3) assembly and interpretation of the
analytical findings into an evolutionary sequence of ideological and political
presentational narratives, and 4) worldwide dissemination of the project
results. Broader impacts also include the use of the developed workflow for the
continuation of long-term management and research at the site, while at the same
time offering a mechanism for future cross-comparative examination of
interregional monuments from this transitional period. The synergistic
analytical approach increases international collaboration and contributes
significant information regarding a poorly understood but dynamic period in the
development of Mesoamerican societies. Guatemalan and U.S. students will
participate in all segments of the project enabling them to expand their field
training and technical skills, and providing thesis projects for graduate
students of both countries to increase their knowledge of Guatemala's
prehistory.