* 0911540
* One-Dimensional Conjugated Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2009,10/31/2013
* Nancy Goroff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2013
* USD 414,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation supports Professor Nancy Goroff of SUNY Stony
Brook who will seek effective routes from one-dimensional conjugated materials
(e.g., polyynes) to graphitic nanostructures. The first experiments will center
on the pseudo-1-dimensional polymer poly(diiododiacetylene), or PIDA. PIDA,
recently prepared in the Goroff lab, is the first reported ordered
polydiacetylene with only single-atom side groups. The simplicity of the PIDA
structure allows the individual polymer strands to aggregate in much greater
proximity than other well studied conjugated materials. The proposed research
will include studies of PIDA co-crystals and aggregates, including conductivity,
magnetoresistivity, optical absorptions and the chemistry that transforms PIDA
into new materials. In addition, preliminary results suggest that aggregates of
one-dimensional conjugated systems with limited side groups may be uniquely
facile graphitization substrates. Professor Goroff will therefore examine
aggregates of polyyne rods themselves, as sources of graphitic nano-wires.
Polyynes containing 3-6 adjacent triple bonds and a diverse selection of side
groups will be synthesized. The aggregation behavior of each of these polyynes
will be examined, as well as their polymerization behavior. Methods will be
sought for making well-defined ordered materials, with complete characterization
of the products' structural, optical, electronic, and chemical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by Professor Goroff offers new methods
for preparing conjugated materials with unique structures. Because of their
electronic and optical properties, these materials will have applications as
semi-conductors and as non-linear optical absorbers. In addition to the direct
impact of the research, the proposed work will offer other benefits. A major
component of this proposal involves collaborative research. The proposed
projects bring together scientists from many different fields, each with
different expertise and research focus, increasing communication across
disciplinary boundaries. The proposed research also offers significant
educational benefits. The graduate students and undergraduates supported by this
grant will gain experience in modern organic synthesis, computational modeling,
spectroscopy, and polymer characterization methods. Professor Goroff also
participates in outreach activities, including activities in the local
elementary and junior high schools. For example, she recently created, with a
colleague, a hands-on workshop on the Chemistry of Perfumes, which was held for
three classes of 21 students each as part of a local elementary school Career
Lab Day, and will be repeated in the coming years. In addition, she has
developed a freshman seminar course for 20 students on the Chemistry of Cooking.
These activities are designed to attract students to chemistry who might
otherwise not consider chemistry as a career.