* 0911808
* Partial Support for Students and Junior Faculty to Attend the 5th International Workshop on Microplasmas
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jose Lopez, Engineering Conferences International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreyae Atreya
* 06/30/2010
* USD 7,600.00

&lt;br/&gt;Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Partial Support
for Students and Junior Faculty to Attend the 5th&lt;br/&gt;International
Workshop on Microplasmas&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Lopez, Jose L.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Engineering Conferences International,
Inc.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: CBET- 0911808 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides partial support for students and junior faculty to attend the
5th&lt;br/&gt;International Workshop on Microplasmas, held in San Diego CA on
1-5 March 2009. NSF funds are targeted to increase the participation of graduate
students from traditionally underrepresented groups in the STEM (Science,
Technology,&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, and Mathematics) disciplines, as well as of
junior faculty at the beginning stages of their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplasmas at atmospheric and higher pressures
have properties that enable diverse applications, including remediation of
gaseous pollutants, medical sterilization and biological decontamination, novel
plasma processing, high-power lasers, and excimer lamps and other non-coherent
vacuum-ultraviolet light sources. This workshop is the only forum devoted
exclusively to the advancement of the scientific challenges and technological
opportunities afforded by microplasmas. It covers experimental, theoretical, and
modeling of the basic plasma physics as well as technological applications.
Special emphasis is given to biological and medical applications, and one
session is dedicated to industrial and commercial applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of this activity arises from the
participation of microplasma experts from across the United States and from
various countries, dissemination of their technical findings, their
communications with students, and their visions of future research directions.
Broader impacts include the consequent educational impact as well as the
advancement of technologies for the betterment of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;