* 0911061
* RUI: Precursor Design and Atomic Layer Deposition of High-k Dielectric Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bradley Fahlman, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 255,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry program supports chemistry by Professor Bradley D.
Fahlman at Central Michigan University to develop new materials for next-
generation nonvolatile memory devices (e.g., portable hard drives, memory
sticks, etc.). Hafnium oxide (HfO2), a high-k dielectric material, is of
increasing importance for the microelectronics industry, in order to continue
Moore's Law - doubling the number of transistors on an integrated circuit every
1.5 - 2 years. This project greatly expands the largely unexplored chemistry of
hafnium through the design of novel hafnium complexes for vapor deposition
applications. Our work also explores the direct incorporation of nanocrystals
into high-k dielectric thin films via atomic layer deposition (ALD).
Undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience in a variety of
inorganic/organic and nanomaterials synthesis, as well as a suite of surface
characterization techniques - rather atypical for a traditional undergraduate
experience. This project also entails undergraduate student mentoring
opportunities for postdoctoral and graduate students - of utmost importance for
their future careers. Undergraduate students from the local Chippewa Native-
American tribe participate in the project; this represents part of an important
objective for Central Michigan University; namely, increasing the number of
majors in the sciences within this underrepresented group. The results of this
fundamental research project will directly influence the future of commercial
microelectronic devices, ensuring that improvements in computational speeds
continue to be realized.