* 0911527
* RUI: In situ spectroscopic and thermodynamic characterization of the molecular organization that leads to supramolecular structures, nanomachines, and thermochromic materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Douglas Vander Griend, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 09/30/2012
* USD 126,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports the research of Professor Douglas Vander Griend of Calvin
College for the in situ characterization of multi-component chemical solutions.
Equilibrium Restricted Factor Analysis, a mathematical technique for modeling
such complex solutions, allows information to be ascertained about the number
and nature of specific chemical species without the need to chemically isolate
them. This approach employs spectrophotometric titrations in the study of: 1)
step-by-step assembly processes for supramolecular cubes based on 1st row
transition metals, 2) precise thermodynamic interactions between the parts of a
pseudo-rotaxane nanomachine, and 3) nickel complexes which demonstrate
thermochromic properties. Like many potential applications in chemistry today,
these systems showcase different types of molecular organization that can be
difficult to characterize by conventional means. The proposed thermochromic
windows that tint in response to sunlight are expected to lead to substantial
energy savings. Undergraduates at all levels will work with Professor Vander
Griend to learn a plethora of laboratory skills and develop chemical intuition
through comprehensive involvement in the project. These students also regularly
interact with collaborators at graduate and industrial laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;