* 0911421
* Origin of Granite and Mafic-felsic Magma Interaction in the Lower Crust: Athabasca Granulite Terrane, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2012
* USD 191,602.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The Athabasca
granulite terrane, Saskatchewan, Canada is one of Earth's largest exposures of
intact lower continental crust, and offers the opportunity to see first-hand the
complexity of magmatic processes that contributed to formation of the deep
crust. In this terrane are unique exposures of heterogeneous lower crust
comprising igneous rocks ranging from mafic to felsic compositions. Contrary to
common belief that the lower crust is very poor in H2O, many of these rocks host
abundant hydrous phases. The eastern part of the terrane is dominated by the 3.3
Ga Chipman tonalite and the 2.6 Ga Fehr granite/granodiorite. Prior to 1.9 Ga,
these rocks made up the stable deep crust of the Rae Province. At 1.9 Ga, the
Chipman mafic dike swarm intruded both the tonalite and the granite. The
tonalite and some of the already crystallized mafic dikes were melted to a small
extent. The Fehr granite underwent extensive partial melting, producing true
granitic magmas. Over an area of tens of km2, brush-fired cleaned pavement
exposures record the partial melting process and a stunning array of mixing and
mingling textures between partial melt of Fehr granite and the Chipman dike
mafic magma. It is hypothesized that the heterogeneity of the deep crust makes
it a fertile source for a variety of melt compositions and that magma
interaction processes so well documented in shallow crustal exposures elsewhere
are also common at near-mantle depths as well. Funds are requested to carry out
comprehensive petrologic characterization of these rocks. Field relationships,
textures, and fabrics will be described along a north to south gradient/transect
from minimal to extensive partial melting. Major, trace and isotopic analyses
will establish the origin of end-member and hybrid rocks as well as source rocks
and mid-crustal equivalents of melts identified in the lower
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This grant will support the
training of a Ph.D. student and the enrichment of the undergraduate mineralogy,
petrology, and structural geology courses. In addition, the field work will
provide an opportunity for outreach, through presentations and discussions, to a
people who live in a very remote area, but whose livelihoods are generally based
on the natural resources of the area. The work will help to lay the groundwork
for a planned field forum for geologists and geophysicists to discuss the
implications of the heterogeneous lower crust, and finally the project will
involve the development of web resources for teachers and researchers about this
special exposure of deep continental crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;