* 0911743
* Passive seismic study of a magma-dominated rift: the Salton Trough
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 263,319.00

Non-technical explanation&lt;br/&gt;A well-accepted paradigm explains the
architecture of structurally dominated continental rifts (that is, regions of
the continents that are stretching or have been stretched, by extension on
earthquake-faults) in terms of crustal thickness and heat flow. No equivalent
paradigm explains the evolution of magmatically dominated rifts (stretched
provinces in which volcanoes and their underlying igneous intrusions force the
amount of extension), largely because we lack the observational data-sets to
test numerical models. Understanding the formation and evolution of such rift
basins is societally important because they contain much of Earth?s hydrocarbon
reserve. NSF?s Geophysics program through this project is teaming with NSF?s
MARGINS and Earthscope-Science programs to provide a detailed set of such
observations for a rift in which the key features in the crust and upper mantle
are buried beneath a deep basin, the Salton Trough in southernmost California.
The Salton Trough is located across the southern end of the San Andreas
transform system that has high risk of producing a devastating earthquake, and
all new information obtained in this project will become a part of the community
Southern California velocity model that is the basis for assessing strong ground
motion and earthquake hazard throughout that area&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The Salton Trough is a magma-dominated rift linking the
Gulf of California to the San Andreas fault system. Because the rift is buried
beneath a thick pile of Colorado River sediments, surprisingly little is
currently known about the total volume of intrusion into the crust and the magma
distribution within and beyond the rift margins. We are determining these
distributions and volumes with velocity measurements in the lower lithosphere.
Wavespeeds are largely controlled within the crust by composition, and within
the uppermost mantle by temperature (and fluid content). Lithology of the lower
crust is best determined by combining P-wave velocities that are most reliably
obtained from controlled-source refraction profiles with S-wave velocities that
are typically better constrained by the joint surface-wave/receiver-function
inversions that we are carrying out. We are deploying 40 passive seismometers
across the Salton Trough, at nominal 5-km spacing, collinear with the
NSF(MARGINS-Earthscope)-USGS controlled-source seismic profile. The NSF-USGS
refraction/reflection profile is providing structural constraints, including
Moho travel-time, and a vastly improved P-wave velocity model. Previous surface-
wave studies carried out using permanent broadband stations across southernmost
California will provide the phase-velocities for joint inversions with new
receiver functions calculated from the data acquired here. Additional structural
constraints (based on the P-wave reflection and refraction profiling) can be
imposed on the joint inversions to obtain one of the best-determined Vp-Vs-
lithologic profiles across a magmatic rift. The combination of dense receiver
functions and well-determined velocity profiles allow a new test of whether the
plate-bounding (San Andreas) strike-slip faults offset the Moho or disappear
into a ductile middle crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Salton Trough is the
northernmost part of the Gulf of California extensional province that rifted the
North American continent and transferred Baja California and the Peninsular
Ranges to the Pacific plate. Despite similar total extension along the province,
very different extensional structures have been produced, from seafloor
spreading in the southern Gulf to 14-20 km thick continental or transitional
crust in the northern Gulf and Salton Trough. The new profile across the Salton
Trough provide a comparative section to those recently determined across the
Gulf, to enhance our knowledge of early ocean rifting and its propagation into a
continent, and to understand the causes of along-strike variation in magmatic
activity.