* 0911644
* Geodynamic constraints on the nature of the asthenosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Paul Hall, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2012
* USD 178,548.00

The Earth's rigid outer shell (the lithosphere) is broken into discrete units
known as tectonic plates. These plates move about on the surface of the Earth in
response to convection in the Earth's deep interior (the mantle). The motions of
the plates ultimately give rise to phenomena such as earthquakes at the Earth's
surface. The movement of the plates is made possible in part by a layer of
relatively weak, easily deformable rock, known as the asthenosphere, which
underlies the plates. While we have some appreciation of the important role the
asthenosphere plays in accommodating the motion of tectonic plates, we do not
yet understand what makes the rocks within the asthenosphere weak. A number of
factors can influence the strength of rock, including its temperature, its
composition (in particular the presence of volatile elements like water), and
the presence of small amounts of magma within the rock. We will use computer
simulations of convection in the asthenosphere beneath oceanic plates to
determine which of these three mechanisms is responsible for the low viscosities
in the asthenosphere. Distinguishing between these different mechanisms will
improve our understanding of how and why plate tectonics developed on Earth but
not on other terrestrial planets in the solar system such as Mars and Venus. It
will also contribute to our understanding of how the Earth has evolved through
time.

The oceanic upper mantle is characterized by low seismic velocities, high
seismic attenuation and high electrical conductivity at depths of ~80-200km.
This corresponds roughly with the layer of relatively low viscosity within the
upper mantle known as the asthenosphere. The close spatial correlation between
these features suggests that a single mechanism may be responsible for all of
them, and three competing explanations have been hypothesized: 1) variations in
the physical properties of dry, melt-free peridotite with temperature and
pressure; 2) the presence of volatiles (chiefly water); and 3) the presence of
small degrees of partial melt. To date, geophysical observations alone have been
unable to definitively identify which of these hypotheses is correct. However,
it may be possible to gain further insight by considering their geodynamic
implications. In particular, each proposed mechanism invokes a characteristic
distribution of both volatiles and melts, which themselves influence the
viscosity and density of the mantle, in addition to its seismic and electrical
properties. Differences in viscosity and density structure will lead to
differences in the development of convective instabilities at the base of the
lithosphere, and thereby heat flow, bathymetry and seismic structure. We propose
to test the three hypotheses regarding the nature of the asthenospheric mantle
by developing regional-scale 3-D numerical models of mantle flow beneath oceanic
plates that explicitly incorporate the effects of volatiles and melting. Results
from the numerical experiments will be compared to a variety of geophysical and
seismic observations to constrain the viability of each of the hypothesized
mechanisms. In particular, model predicted temperature, composition and porosity
will be mapped to seismic velocity and attenuation using empirical relationships
derived from laboratory measurements, allowing direct comparison between the
numerical experiments and global and regional seismic models. Ultimately the
successful hypothesis will be identified as the one that best matches the
constraints.