* 0911089
* How do Molecules Self-Assemble into One-Dimensional Structures?
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,150,120.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)". &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate why many small
molecules self-assemble in dilute solution to form very long "1-dimensional"
(1D) objects, thinner than a human hair, that organize into 3-dimensional (3D)
networks. Events starting from the earliest moments when a few molecules come
together to start the growth process and continuing until the 1D objects are
fully formed will be probed experimentally, and models consistent with the
results will be developed. Structural and dynamic changes during the assembly
process will be characterized using techniques that correlate the temporal
evolution of molecular and more macro (i.e., fiber) structures, as well as
growth patterns. Appropriate theoretical calculations will be used to model the
packing of molecules within fibers and will cover the large space and time
scales involved in the growth of fibers. Although focusing on specific systems,
the thrust of the research will be to generate global models with predictive
powers. Learning how and why small organic molecules assemble into 1D objects
and in 3D fibrillar networks will enable the inexpensive design and construction
of new high-tech nanodevices. It will indicate how to promote beneficial
biological functions (e.g., cytoskeletal filament formation) and how to impede
neurodegenerative diseases that rely on fibrillar growth (e.g., Alzheimer's).
Also, an outreach project will bring practical examples of fiber and gel
formation to students at a Washington, D.C. high school. The modules will be
placed on the web for general use.