* 0911750
* Collaborative Research:  DDDAS-SMRP:  Optimizing Signal and Image Processing in a Dynamic, Data-Driven Application System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Mary Hall, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 11/30/2009
* USD 17,247.00

This project will develop a dynamic, data-driven application system for signal
and image processing under resource constraints. This system would lay a
foundation for highly optimized implementations of fundamental signal and
imaging processing computations that arise in many science and engineering
problems, including image recognition, communications analysis, speech
processing, querying, indexing, and retrieval from multimedia databases, and
image segmentation of aerial, satellite, and astronomical images. The proposed
multidisciplinary approach optimizes from algorithm specification, to
mathematical representation, to software and hardware (FPGA) implementation,
based on properties of data and unique requirements of &lt;br/&gt;the
environment and the target hardware device. &lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the system
is twofold: (1) it performs joint optimization&lt;br/&gt;across mathematical,
software and hardware (system-on-a-chip FPGA) domains; and, (2) it is a dynamic,
data-driven system in that signal-processing transforms are tailored to
algorithm requirements and input signals, for reduced distortion and increased
compression, and the system can be queried and steered during execution.
Implementations are based on the best mathematical formulation of the problem
coupled with automated selection of the best implementation among a space of
alternatives, through the integration of models relating mathematical properties
to implementation&lt;br/&gt;behavior. Both hardware and software optimization
are treated in a unified way. It is anticipated that with these methods the
design-time will be decreased by two orders of magnitude or more, compared to
implementations derived in a traditional way. Because the proposed system can
explore a broad range of implementations that exceed the capabilities of a human
designer, the implementations derived by the approach pursued in the project may
even exhibit lower resource costs and higher performance. This research will
provide a foundation for signal processing at all scales, providing key building
blocks for engineers to build complex, distributed networks of adaptive signal
processing sensors.&lt;br/&gt;