* 0911456
* The electronic structure and dynamics of clean and adsorbate modified graphene
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2013
* USD 495,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project supported by
the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professors Hrvoje Petek and Jin
Zhao will study the electronic structure of graphene, a single atom thick,
sheet-like allotrope of the element carbon. The study will focus on electronic
states of graphene above the sp2 network that engender nearly free-electron
(metallic) behavior. The experimental strategy is to perturb the majority
carrier concentration in these states chemically or through optical excitation
and measure the changes in electronic structure and dynamic processes such as
electron-phonon and screening interactions. The experimental work will involve
two interferometric time-resolved electron emission techniques, namely two
photon photoemission (ITR-2PP) and photoelectron emission microscopy (ITR-PEEM)
and transient electro-optic reflectivity (TEOR) measurements. Calculations of
the graphene structure using Density Functional Theory (DFT) will also be done
in parallel with the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene is an
interesting material that may have important applications in future electronics
and sustainable energy technologies. The research of Professors Petek and Zhao
will provide important information on the structure and electronic properties of
graphene that will be critical in establishing its applicability and performance
in these technologies. The research will also provide a rich vehicle for
graduate student training in both experiment and theory. The Petek and Zhao
groups will also participate in outreach activities to promote an understanding
of science and research in the Pittsburgh area public schools.&lt;br/&gt;