* 0911621
* In situ Spectroscopic Studies of the Electrochemistry of Nitrogen and Sulfur Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Daniel Scherson, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Daniel A. Scherson of Case Western Reserve University is supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry to
investigate the mechanism of heterogeneous redox reactions associated with the
reduction and oxidation of nitrogen and sulfur oxides and their oxyanions in
aqueous electrolytes, as well as other redox active species of relevance to
energy conversion and electrosynthesis. Special focus is on the in situ static
and dynamic characterization of irreversibly adsorbed electrocatalysts for these
reactions, as well as the effect of the microtopography of selected bare and
atom-modified single crystal metal surfaces on the nature of adsorbed
intermediates and other interfacial properties. Insight into these issues will
be gained from coupling of microelectrodes, charge injection, and an array of
complementary microscope-based spectroscopic techniques, including UV visible
reflection spectroscopy, resonance and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopies and
second harmonic generation. The success of this work would provide a means for
extending in situ spectroelectrochemical techniques into the nanosecond range,
allowing the study of the dynamic aspects of electron transfer events of
relevance to a variety of other fields, including electrocatalysis,
heterogeneous catalysis, corrosion, sensors, and environmental science. Students
involved in this research will be trained in a broad range of fundamental and
applied disciplines, and will be exposed to an international research experience
at the Central Electrochemical Research Institute in India.