* 0911100
* Tracing Evidence of Fluid Flow in Eclogite, Blueschist and Amphibolite Blocks in Subduction Zone Melanges
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2012
* USD 249,676.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit - Fluid flow in
subduction zones has broad affects the generation of arc magmas, the formation
of continental crust, the geochemical evolution of the mantle, and the
generation of Benioff zone seismicity. Yet many outstanding questions remain
regarding the nature of fluid release and mass transfer during subduction,
including how fluid compositions change and fluid fluxes from dehydrating slabs
vary with increasing depth. Fluid-rock interactions in ancient subduction zones
have left behind chemical and mineralogic signatures on a variety of scales in
high-grade blocks found in mélanges. Detailed petrologic and geochemical
investigations of such rocks from the Franciscan Complex, CA demonstrate a
relationship between retrograde fluid infiltration, lower Li concentration and
higher _7Li (Penniston-Dorland et al., 2008) in block rinds and blueschist
layers. Li isotope variations record variable degrees of fluid infiltration on
short spatial scales. As an extension of that work, this project aims to
establish comprehensive geochemical characterization (e.g., trace element
concentrations, and Sr, Nd and Li isotopic compositions) of prograde and
retrograde portions of high-grade blocks from three Caribbean subduction zone
complexes: the Samana Complex, Dominican Republic, Puerto Cabello, Cordillera de
la Costa Belt, Venezuela, and Isla Margarita, Venezuela. According to the
subduction-channel model, high-grade rocks form at great depth along the slab-
mantle wedge contact and then are subsequently exhumed in an argillaceous or
serpentinitic mélange matrix backflow up this interface. The proposed study will
test the hypothesis that high-grade mélange blocks from Pacific-Caribbean-type
subduction zones record retrograde channelized infiltration by fluids derived
from the underlying slab during the retrograde portion of the rocks' histories.
If correct, it is predicted that the retrograde rocks will record lower Li
concentrations and higher _7Li relative to prograde rocks due to late
infiltration of fluids emanating from shallow portions of the subducting slabs.
In addition, the data obtained will allow assessment of [1] fluid sources (e.g.,
sediments vs. basaltic slab) at various evolutionary stages, [2] length scales
of fluid infiltration within blocks, and [3 styles of fluid infiltration (e.g.
diffusion, advection). Overall, this work will provide new constraints on the
nature of fluid-rock interaction in subduction zones, hence, better
understanding of the role of subduction fluids in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts - A major portion of the research
proposed will be done by graduate and undergraduate students under the direction
of the PI. Thus, the project includes a strong component of training in
petrology and geochemistry, as well as in scientific writing and communication.
This work will likely include underrepresented groups in the Earth Sciences. The
PI currently advises two women in her research group: one graduate student and
one undergraduate student. In addition, an African-American undergraduate woman
worked in the PI's research group last year through the NSF-funded LSAMP program
at UMd. Further, the Department of Geology at UMd requires all its undergraduate
majors to complete a senior thesis, and it is anticipated that the project will
result in the completion of two senior theses. In addition, the PI is a woman
who has recently begun her professorial career. Provision of funding for the
proposed research will advance her research career and assist her in building a
strong research group