* 0911761
* Initiation of the Pacific-North America Plate Boundary in NW Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Joann Stock, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2013
* USD 337,007.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is studying the early
history of the geological boundary zone between the Pacific and North America
plates in northwestern Mexico. The peninsula of Baja California lies on the
Pacific plate, and the rest of Mexico belongs to the North America plate. Twelve
million years ago, before the San Andreas Fault and the Gulf of California
formed, the Baja California peninsula and the islands in the Gulf of California
were all connected together as a single land mass. A large volcanic eruption in
this region produced pyroclastic flows that deposited volcanic rocks up to at
least 150 kilometers from the vent in different directions. These rocks have now
been faulted and separated into different mountain ranges on the two plates, due
to plate boundary faulting. Students and faculty from the California Institute
of Technology will work in collaboration with Mexican scientists to map these
rocks in a transect from the Central Baja California peninsula to the Coast of
the Gulf of California, and from the Sonoran coast a distance 150 kilometers
eastward into Mexico, as well as targeted locations on Isla Tiburon and Isla
Angel de la Guarda. The objective is to verify the correlation of these
12-million-year-old volcanic rocks, to check whether they originated in one
mega-eruption or in several eruptions, and to study the rocks underneath them in
order to understand the landscape upon which they were deposited. From these
data, the original extent and depositional pattern of these volcanic rocks can
be reconstructed. This allows measurement of the amount of offset by faulting
and determination if they are only displaced 300 km (the amount of displacement
on the San Andreas fault) or as much as 600 km (which is the amount of
displacement implied by some models of fault slip in the southern Gulf of
California). The techniques to be used include geological mapping and sampling
in the field, and magnetic studies (paleomagnetics and anisotropy of magnetic
susceptibility) of the rocks in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will give a better understanding of the initiation of a major plate
boundary that affects the western side of North America - the boundary between
the Pacific and North America plates. The history of motion along this boundary
between twelve million years ago and six million years ago and solve a
controversy regarding how much plate boundary faulting took place in this
region. The results of this study will help understand how new plate boundaries
form in continents, and how long it can take for a broad zone of faulting to
turn into a mid-ocean ridge system, such as the one that is now present beneath
the basins of the Gulf of California.