* 0911742
* Geologic and Paleomagnetic Study of the Basal Belt Supergroup, Little Belt Mountains, Montana: Testing the Siberian Connection to Rodinia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* James Sears, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2011
* USD 55,466.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The passing of enormous amounts of time
obscures Earths tectonic history much as it does human history. The ancient
tectonic connections of continents are of great interest to society because they
control critical aspects of, for example, the distribution of energy and mineral
resources. Geologists have proposed that the tectonic breakup of the
hypothetical supercontinent, Rodinia, separated Siberia and North America and
triggered significant geologic events, including global ice-ages, sea-level
changes, and the origin and dispersal of animal life. This project will test the
magnetic memory of ancient sedimentary rock formations in central Montana for
comparison with previous results from similar sediments in Siberia to evaluate
whether these now distant landmasses were adjacent parts of a single
supercontinent about 1.5 billion years ago. If so, they should converge on a
common magnetic pole position when they are restored through time using the
magnetic memory of the rocks. In addition to revealing the ancient connections
of the continents, results from this study will improve our basic understanding
of the nature and history of the ancient magnetic field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geoscientists have proposed several configurations for the
hypothetical Precambrian supercontinent Rodinia. The investigators will evaluate
these models by deriving North American paleopole positions for the interval
1.6-1.5 billion years ago from undisturbed sedimentary rocks of the basal Belt
Supergroup in the Little Belt Mountains of central Montana. The results will be
compared with previous paleomagnetic positions that the PIs derived from similar
and correlative strata on the Siberian craton, to test the relative locations of
North America and Siberia within Rodinia. Geologists generally consider that
Siberia and North America were already adjacent parts of a single large
continent well before Rodinia formed, and became separated only when Rodinia
broke apart. Successful paleomagnetic modeling in this project will fill in a
critical time gap for the North American apparent polar wander path. The PI will
collect oriented samples as part of ongoing collaborations and the group will
use demagnetization methods to analyze the samples at leading international
laboratories. The goal is to compare the results with those already obtained
from Siberian samples. Using the same lab, techniques, and personnel to analyze
the Montana samples will yield data directly comparable with the Siberian
results, and ensure the veracity of the model wander paths.