* 0911009
* RI: Large: An Integrated Approach to Creating Context Enriched Speech Translation Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,08/31/2017
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,200,000.00

The project creates robust, widely-deployable and cost-effective technologies
for supporting cross-lingual spoken interaction between people who do not share
a common language. The target application supports communication between
healthcare personnel who speak English only and patients with limited-English
proficiency. The state-of-the-art technologies that enable such cross-lingual
interactions are characterized by a pipelined architecture of speech
recognition, machine translation and speech synthesis, that largely ignore the
rich information present in spoken language beyond those conveyed by words. They
also do not take advantage of the humans in the loop for collaboratively
managing the interaction. Overcoming these limitations requires improving robust
intelligence at all levels ? signal, system, and human ? and set the research
goals for this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project?s intellectual merit
comes from the unique combination of theoretical, computational model-ing and
empirical elements: The theoretical framework is centered on notions of social
co-presence to de-velop new models for translation-mediated communication. The
computational modeling focuses on capturing prosody, dialog and user state from
spoken language for enriching the technology components. The empirical work
relies on a participatory approach to iterative design and evaluation of the
system, working directly with the stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact can be seen in the potential for facilitating multilingual efforts
ranging from disaster relief and global business operations to servicing diverse
immigrant populations notably in health care. The effort brings together
engineers, linguists, human communication experts, and medical professionals to
tackle a broad range of problems, and offers integrated interdisciplinary
research training and mentor-ing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;