* 0911395
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Experimental Investigation into Dissolution Characteristics and Reactivity of Mineral Fibers with Implications for Toxicity
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2011
* Tamara Diedrich, Diedrich                Tamara         R
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2011
* USD 185,300.00

0911395&lt;br/&gt;Diedrich&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellowship Program
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of
research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,
and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four-
month research fellowship by Dr. Tamara R. Diedrich to work with Dr. Jacques
Schott at the University of Toulouse in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
critical need to quantify parameters related to toxicity in earth materials.
Dissolution characteristics can determine the fate of respirable mineral fibers
after they are deposited in the human lung by influencing: biodurability in lung
fluid; surface area available for reaction; translocation and other clearance
mechanisms controlled by particle dimension; and metal availability. This
research project tests the hypothesis that the dissolution characteristics of
either: crushed minnesotaite (a non-asbestos mineral that can form fibers)
alone; minnesotaite crystals displaying growth faces; and/or minnesotaite in the
presence of quartz are consistent with those of a mineral fiber that is known to
cause asbestos-related disease (for example, fibrous grunerite). It consists of
dissolution experiments in simulated lung fluid using a mixed flow reactor on
multiple samples of minnesotaite displaying either growth or cleavage surfaces.
Samples are fully characterized prior to and following partial dissolution.
Fluid chemistry is monitored to derive steady-state dissolution rates. Kinetic
parameters with thermodynamic data are used in geochemical models to model
dissolution under a variety of scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;This research is resulting
in: dissolution rates as a function of pH and surface area for crushed
minnesotaite crystals displaying cleavage surfaces; dissolution rates as a
function of pH and surface area for synthetic minnesotaite crystals displaying
growth surfaces; models of dissolution in extracellular lung fluid and
intracellular lung fluid for both of the above crystals alone and in the
presence of quartz; comparison of minnesotaite dissolution with fibrous
grunerite; and observations on dissolution mechanisms for all above scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, these results will build toward a better model
for dissolution of mineral fibers, and more broadly, mineral dust, in lung
fluid, and, therefore, a better understanding of one of the determinants of
mineral toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;