* 0911758
* Synthetic Approaches to Endohedral Complexes and Highly Functional Derivatives of Fullerene C60
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Yves Rubin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2011
* USD 294,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue work on the
development of a designed, rational chemical functionalization approach for
breaking bonds within fullerene cages. Insertion of atoms or small molecules
inside these open fullerenes will be followed by re-closure reactions to
regenerate the integral fullerenes with their entrapped species. These methods
are ultimately aimed at the large scale preparation of endohedral
metallofullerenes, species that are already having a strong impact on the field
of fullerene chemistry and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Professor Yves Rubin of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of California, Los Angeles. Professor Rubin's research efforts are
focused on the development of organic synthetic approaches to functionalized
fullerenes to take advantage of the numerous ideal physical properties of this
molecular form of carbon. The synthesis of these fullerene derivatives will have
an impact on the development and future application of fullerenes in
technological fields like photovoltaic devices or magnetic resonance imaging,
among others.