* 0911462
* Phase Transitions and the Properties of Liquid Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Martin Jarrold, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 07/31/2013
* USD 560,880.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
program, Professor Martin Jarrold and his students will study melting and
freezing transitions in isolated metal nanoclusters with 10-1000 atoms. Phase
transitions like melting and freezing are normally associated with bulk objects.
This work will examine what happens when the size of an object is reduced into
the nanometer size regime, where the properties depend on how many atoms are
present, and adding or subtracting a single atom can make a big difference. The
melting and freezing transitions will be investigated using heat capacity
measurements, ion mobility measurements, and trapped ion electron diffraction.
The work will address three main topics: at what size do bulk-like melting and
freezing transitions occur, whether superheating and supercooling occurs for
specific sizes of nanoclusters, and the properties of the liquid nanoclusters. A
liquid metal cluster with say 100 atoms is expected to have properties that are
very different from a bulk liquid. Two international collaborations will
contribute to the project. Prof. Andres Aguado (Universidad de Valladolid,
Spain) will perform theoretical calculations that are critical to understanding
the experimental meaurements. Prof. Manfred Kappes (Universität Karlsruhe,
Germany) will collaborate on using trapped ion electron diffraction to
investigate the melting of medium-sized metal
nanoclusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work improves our knowledge of the
statistical thermodynamics of small systems, and provides excellent training for
graduate and postdoctoral researchers in experimental and computational physical
chemistry.