* 0911373
* CSTORMS: The Center for Oceans and Human Health Research in Marine Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Larry Brand, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 05/31/2013
* USD 1,850,495.00

The establishment of a national network of Oceans and Human Health (OHH) centers
five years ago created an opportunity for the University of Miami to consolidate
and redirect its ongoing collaborations between the Medical School (Miller
School of Medicine) and the Marine School (Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Science, RSMAS). Focusing research efforts on issues of harmful
algal blooms (HABs) and microbial pollution of recreational marine waters, the
University of Miami strategy has been to build upon existing cooperative efforts
and seek out new researchers, blending strengths from those activities in
oceanography and biomedical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the course of the
last five years, we have expanded the original breadth of our Oceans and Human
Health Center substantially through leveraged funding and involving new
researchers. In particular, in the area of microbial pollution, we have
performed human health and exposure studies with predictive mathematical
modeling in the microbe component and added methacillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureas to the microbe component; and in the area of HABs, we have demonstrated
that the neurotoxic amino acid, beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), may be an
important toxin in the food web, and we have developed diagnostic and prognostic
modeling showing a new source for Florida red tide blooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this Accomplishment-based Renewal,
research at the University of Miami OHH Center over the next two years will
build and expand on two important ongoing areas of Center research: 1) the
modeling of the transport of microbes from the shoreline of a nonpoint source
beach within a sub/tropical environment as well as pathogen behavior in this
beach and near-shore environment; and 2) further exploration of HAB organisms
and their toxins in the marine food chain, focusing on the water soluble
neurotoxin, BMAA, associated with blue green algae (cyanobacteria) and the
lipophilic neurotoxin, brevetoxin, associated with the Florida red tide
organism, Karenia brevis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research for
the next two years of the UM OHH Center will provide: a) a real-time predictive
modeling tool for water quality conditions at beach sites as well as important
data on pathogens and sand; b) the exploration of the extent of toxin transfer
within the marine food chain of two important but different HAB toxins. These
research activities will be supported by training and outreach in oceans and
human health. Graduate students will be supported in both research projects.
There will be an OHH Program to provide undergraduates with the opportunity to
work with the Research Projects and their investigators. Opportunities will also
be made available for OHH Center investigators and students to travel nationally
and internationally to present the results of their OHH research and interact
with the other OHH Centers in scientific conferences (including participation in
the Second OHH Gordon Research Conference and Graduate Research Seminar in June
2010), as well as interact with visiting OHH Scientists sponsored by the Center.
The Center will continue to support the 24/7, 365 day/yr toll-free Aquatic
Toxins Hotline (888-232-8635) at the Florida Poison Information Center to
provide information on harmful algal bloom exposures and health effects to
healthcare providers, patients and the general public, as well as expand the
uses and dissemination of the Center Website (www.rsmas.miami.edu/groups/ohh/).
Finally, the Center researchers are involved in expanding and disseminating an
ongoing graduate and upper level undergraduate course in Oceans and Human
Health, and the development of a new Textbook on the Socio-Economic Impacts and
Human Wellbeing in Oceans and Human Health.