* 0911983
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Role of Chert in Paleoarchaic Landuse Strategies in the Central Great Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* John Speth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,994.00

Under the guidance of Dr. John Speth, Khori Newlander will explore mobility and
intergroup interaction by studying the geologic source and technological
organization of Paleoindian stone tool assemblages in eastern Nevada. These
foragers used obsidian to make stemmed points (hunting gear) and flint for other
tools (resource-processing gear). By determining where they obtained both
obsidian and flint, and their use of these materials, Mr. Newlander expects to
distinguish different scales of mobility and modes of resource
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Great Basin archaeologists rely on obsidian
artifacts to reconstruct Paleoindian mobility patterns because their sources can
easily be identified geochemically. Previous research shows that a single site
often includes obsidian from sources 200-250 km away, defining obsidian
conveyance zones (OCZ). Yet archaeologists disagree over what these zones
represent. Some Great Basinists propose that Paleoindian foragers employed a
division of labor in which male hunting parties procured distant resources,
including obsidian, which they brought back to fixed base camps. In this model
OCZ represent the spatial extent of male hunting forays. Other Great Basinists
propose that Paleoindian foragers moved their base camps frequently. In this
model OCZ delineate annual foraging territories of entire bands. However, both
models are inconsistent with ethnographic data. The spatial extent of assumed
male hunting forays and annual foraging territories greatly exceed historically
documented values. Mr. Newlander's research proposes instead that OCZ reflect
patterns of exchange among multiple forager groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to test these models, knowledge of obsidian source use must be
contextualized within an understanding of the geologic landscape that also
includes flint. Yet, flint sources are poorly documented, making current
obsidian-based models tenuous. Mr. Newlander plans, therefore, to test
hypotheses about flint acquisition through analysis of geologic source use and
technological organization of flint artifacts from Paleoindian assemblages in
eastern Nevada. Three hypotheses are offered regarding mode of flint
procurement: (1) local (&lt;10 km from a base camp), reflecting daily foraging
needs; (2) long-distance task-group forays, reflecting greater levels of
mobility than generally assumed; (3) intergroup exchange, an explanation seldom
considered in Paleoindian studies. The archaeological data will be derived from
collections already available from Butte, Jakes, and Long valleys, augmented by
survey within Coal Valley, which previous research has shown to contain
Paleoindian sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate students
from the University of Michigan and Hamilton College, providing experience in
field methods, Great Basin archaeology, and stone tool analysis. The proposed
research includes the first systematic analysis of flint sources for Great Basin
Paleoindian assemblages. By testing hypotheses about the acquisition and
distribution of flint, this research contributes to larger debates about
Paleoindian mobility, economy, and intergroup interaction. It will also generate
a comparative dataset useful in future regional studies, and which can be
brought to bear on other long-standing debates in the Great Basin-the Numic
expansion and whether Great Basin foragers were territorial, a question relevant
to ongoing land-ownership disputes.