* 0911261
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost High Quality Nonlinear Optical Crystals for Laser Light Sources for Miniature Projectors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Gisele Maxwell, Shasta Crystals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of growing high-quality fibers of periodically poled Mg-doped
LiNbO3 for visible light generation, by a modified version of the laser heated
pedestal growth (LHPG) method. Other methods used to grow these crystals have
proven to be very expensive and to lead to unreliable results with a very long
cycle time, making the use of nonlinear crystals non viable for many
applications. Periodically poled crystals poled with the conventional LHPG
method exhibit curved ferroelectric domains, which results in a loss of
nonlinear optical conversion efficiency, making the technology unpractical for
miniature display applications where maximum brightness is required. The company
will commercialize LHPG-grown frequency doubling crystals of periodically poled
Mg-doped LiNbO3 with higher quality, lower price, faster delivery, and longer
lifetimes than the Czochralski-grown crystals available today. In order to
accomplish this, the technical approach will be to create and engineer a novel
optical after heater which can generate high enough temperatures to enable LHPG
to grow high quality thicker fibers, with straight ferroelectric domains thus
enabling high nonlinear optical conversion efficiency at 532nm in a very
reliable and reproducible way.

If successful the proposed LHPG method will produce single-crystal fibers of
many compounds with low defect density and low internal strain. Its main
limitation had been the inability to grow fibers with diameters larger than 0.8
to 1.2 millimeters and also with straight domains for periodically poled
crystals, limiting the optical efficiency of the devices. The team will
demonstrate a novel technique for growing LHPG fibers with bigger diameters and
ferroelectric domains exhibiting no curvature. This work will enable high-volume
manufacturing of frequency doubling chips by LHPG and thereby facilitate the
commercialization of miniature projectors (especially the ones to be embedded in
cell phones or other handheld devices) and other consumer electronics devices,
which will rely on frequency-doubled lasers. The project will contribute to the
theory of crystal growth. It will help materials scientists in research
institutions to make further discoveries because thicker fibers are easier to
study.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."