* 0911036
* III: Large: Causal Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Christoph Koch, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,353,128.00

The commercial success of data mining, and the great research
interest&lt;br/&gt;that this area attracts, prove that there is a need for
analyzing and&lt;br/&gt;understanding data that goes well beyond classical
database queries.&lt;br/&gt;Users are often particularly interested in
understanding the causal&lt;br/&gt;relationship between data items and the
reasons for observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current database systems cannot
explicitly model the causal structure&lt;br/&gt;within data (although it is
often implicit in the data), and thus offer&lt;br/&gt;no specific support for
causal queries. In the absence of information&lt;br/&gt;about causal
relationships, users have to rely on techniques for mining&lt;br/&gt;for
statistically significant patterns in data. Causal relationships&lt;br/&gt;are
often simply concluded from statistical dependencies. This can lead&lt;br/&gt;to
inaccurate conclusions; correlation does not necessarily
imply&lt;br/&gt;causation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates the
foundations for a new breed of databases&lt;br/&gt;called causal databases.
Causal databases can model causal information,&lt;br/&gt;and allow for queries
regarding causality and explanations, which are&lt;br/&gt;beyond the scope of
current databases. They can also take advantage of&lt;br/&gt;causal information
that is implicit, but unexploited, in some current&lt;br/&gt;databases, such as
those for large engineering projects. In the&lt;br/&gt;project, new database
models and query languages for representing and&lt;br/&gt;transforming causal
information are developed, with particular focus on&lt;br/&gt;large engineering
databases and scientific databases. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;efficient and
scalable techniques for processing causality and&lt;br/&gt;computing
explanations in large causal databases are developed. This&lt;br/&gt;involves
both work on integrating causality processing into
traditional&lt;br/&gt;database query processing architectures and the
development of special&lt;br/&gt;datastream techniques for scaling up to the
most data-intensive&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Further
information on the project can be found at the project web&lt;br/&gt;page:
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/databases/causality/&lt;br/&gt;