* 0911726
* Collaborative Research: "SUPERERUPTIONS," MAGMA CHAMBERS, &amp; PLUTONIC RESIDUE: Insights from Peach Spring Tuff, Significance of Sphene
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Guilherme Gualda, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2013
* USD 347,475.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: "Super-eruptions"
- explosive eruptions that produce &gt;450 km3 of magma -arguably are the most
catastrophic of all natural processes on Earth. They play a central role in
ongoing debates about the nature of crustal magmatism. Study of super-eruptions
may illuminate [1] the processes by which large quantities of magma accumulate
in the upper crust, are stored and modified, and erupt; [2] the relations
between intrusive and extrusive igneous rocks; and [3] the construction of
plutons and batholiths. We propose a multi-faceted approach to investigate the
generation and eruption of the &gt;600 km3 Peach Spring Tuff (PST: Miocene,
Arizona-California-Nevada). Exposure of the extensive outflow sheet as well as a
thick intracaldera tuff section and related granite makes this a particularly
appealing target for study. The PST phenocryst assemblage comprises a diverse
array of accessory minerals, notably including abundant sphene (titanite), which
plays a vital role in both recording evolving conditions and driving trace
element variation. Critical questions to be addressed include: [1] What
environmental factors control occurrence of key accessory minerals - especially
sphene? [2] How does growth of accessories influence geochemical signatures of
magmas - and how can these signatures be used to characterize evolution of
magmatic environments? [3] What are the conditions in giant chambers immediately
prior to super-eruptions? [4] How much do conditions fluctuate, and are they a
direct response to replenishment, eruption, or wholesale contamination? [5] How
long do large systems last, and during how much of their lifetime is there a
large chamber? [6] Are chambers containing super-volumes of eruptible magma
inherently unstable, or is triggering suppressed for unusual lengths of time to
permit accumulation of enormous quantities of magma? [7] How, and how
efficiently, are large volumes of melt-rich magma extracted from crystal-rich
residue? [8] How and where are highly-evolved, high-silica rhyolites generated?
[9] What is the significance of similarities and differences between felsic
intrusive and extrusive rocks? [10] Why are highly evolved plutonic rocks less
voluminous than volcanic equivalents? [11] Do giant eruptions have a different
relation to their residual plutonic equivalents than 'normal'-sized eruptions?
Are their chambers far larger, or do they more efficiently extract the eruptible
material?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will entail an integrated, multi-
disciplinary approach involving PIs and collaborators with diverse expertise and
perspectives. The project will combine extensive field work, elemental and
isotopic analyses of rock, glass, mineral, and melt inclusion samples, dating
using several complementary geochronological methods, quantitative textural
investigations, and experimental studies aimed at elucidating the stability and
saturation behavior of sphene. We will employ, among other methods, high-
resolution SIMS, CA-TIMS, LA-ICPMS, imaging by X-ray tomography as well as CL
and BSE, and piston cylinder and cold seal experimental
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will provide
research training for 5 graduate students (one PhD, 4 MS) and 7-8 undergraduate
students leading to publishable contributions in petrology, geochemistry, and
tectonics. A large proportion of these students will be female (and possibly
minority students, especially at San Jose State). The proposed collaboration
involves junior and senior faculty PIs at private and public universities
(Vanderbilt, SJSU) and collaborators affiliated with government-university
partnerships (AZ Geological Survey- UAZ; USGS-Stanford; NM Bureau of Geology-NM
Tech). Other less formal participants include undergraduate and graduate
students and faculty from a wide range of institutions who will provide valuable
perspectives on the diverse problems that are to be addressed. Scientific
results will be incorporated into teaching modules at the respective
universities. Although this is principally a basic science project, the results
will bear upon two issues of societal importance: behavior of giant systems that
may produce catastrophic eruptions, and possible relationship between such
systems and major gold deposits