* 0911215
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Dynamics of  ultralow-velocity zones at the core-mantle boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Justin Revenaugh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2013
* USD 162,335.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boundary between Earth's rocky
mantle and metallic core is home to a patchwork collection of partially molten
structures. These structures, characterized by sharp peaks and valleys, are
relatively thin (10s of km in thickness), dense (up to 10% denser than the
surrounding rocks), and are spatially correlated with regions of upwelling flow
in the lower mantle. Seismic waves slow down as they pass through these
structures. Consequently, the fingerprint of these structures appear as UltraLow
Velocity Zones (ULVZ) in seismic signals traveling through Earth's deep
interior. Besides their unique seismic signature, ULVZ are also likely to be
chemically distinct from the surrounding mantle rock. Far from being passive,
ULVZ are strongly coupled with the vigorous motion in the overlying mantle that
dissipates Earth's internal heat, drives plate tectonics, and causes volcanism
on the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study seismic signals to
unravel the fine scale structure within the ULVZ, simulate the structure arising
from vigorous motion of the partially molten material within the ULVZ using
principles of fluid mechanics, and create synthetic seismic signals traveling
through the simulated ULVZ structure. The result of these investigations will
answer a number of fundamental questions on heat and matter transport across
Earth's core-mantle boundary and the chemical nature and physical properties of
the ULVZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High resolution seismic ScP and PcP waveform data
provides a wealth of information regarding the local structure of the ULVZ. Such
thin, high density layers at the base of Earth's mantle are likely to play a
major role in determining the location and stability of mantle plumes generating
from the core-mantle boundary. In addition, this region is also likely to serve
as an extremely important stage in any ongoing mass transfer between Earth's
outer core and the mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we propose to
develop a combined geodynamic-seismic investigation of the internal structure
and dynamics of the ULVZ. We employ existing and new high resolution migration
and modeling of ScP and PcP waveforms to better constrain wave velocities, layer
topography, and density contrasts within ULVZ at the base of the core mantle
boundary. We will develop a two-stage geodynamic model, beginning by modeling
the ULVZ as a thin, self gravitating layer spreading at the bottom of the
mantle. Using this gravity current model and the observed topography, we can
predict the viscosity of the ULVZ and also infer the extent of melting within
the ULVZ. In the second stage, we will develop a multiphase, multicomponent
model of magma mixing and small scale convection within the ULVZ. The resulting
model provides constraints on melt storage and mass transfer within the ULVZ
both with the outer core and lower mantle. The resulting models will be built
into 2D and 3D forward synthetic seismogram simulations to test consistency with
observed data and to better guide future seismic investigation of ULVZ by
identifying diagnostic waveform effects visible at the surface.