* 0911145
* Molecular Plasmonics: Single Molecules, Single Nanoparticles and Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2013
* USD 596,985.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Analytical and Surface Chemistry
(ASC) program of the Division of Chemistry supports the research program of
Professor Richard P. Van Duyne at Northwestern University. Professor Van Duyne
and his coworkers are developing new concepts and experimental tools to study
four topics. First, molecular generality of single molecule surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy will be explored. At present single molecule SERS is the only
experimental method to chemically identify the structure of single molecules and
represents the ultimate limit in analytical sensitivity. Second, the structures
of the nanoparticles required for the implementation of single molecule SERS
will be obtained using spatially correlated high resolution transmission
electron microscopy. Third, the project will explore the use of aluminum as a
new plasmonic material for ultraviolet surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy.
Finally, several new experimental methods will be employed to more deeply probe
the fundamentals of molecular plasmonics. These include single nanoparticle
spectroscopy and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. This project will lead to
fundamentally new understanding of the chemistry of single molecules adsorbed on
surfaces and will impact many areas of science and technology such as molecular
electronics, ultrasensitive bioassays for medical diagnostics, and dye
sensitized solar cells. The graduates student and postdoctoral fellow who will
work on this project will be trained to become independent and innovative
research leaders. Prof. Van Duyne and his coworkers will continue their
collaborative research with Dr. Francesca Casadio at the Art Institute of
Chicago on the applications of surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy and tip-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy to problems in art conservation science.