* 0911683
* Linking Rock Magnetic Properties to the Performance of Paleointensity Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Joshua Feinberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 253,597.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direction and intensity of the
Earth's magnetic field varies in both time and space. As volcanic rocks cool
they record a snapshot of the field and through careful laboratory experiments
the evolution of the magnetic field during Earth's approximately 4.5 billion
year history can be unravelled. Determining the Earth's magnetic field across
critical periods of time will allow a greater understanding of convection in the
Earth's liquid outer core, the growth of the solid inner core, interactions
between the Earth's outer core and solid mantle, and the relationship between
the rate of plate-tectonics and heat flow across the core-mantle boundary.
Although the direction of the magnetic field is straightforwardly determined
experimentally, its magnitude (also called paleointensity) is more problematic.
Without accurate paleointensity measurements the Earth's magnetic field cannot
be defined fully and the important processes outlined above will never be fully
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although progress has been made in the
theoretical understanding of paleointensity and the methodologies used to obtain
more accurate results, there has not been a comprehensive study linking the
success of paleointensity experiments to the specific magnetic properties of the
materials being studied. The research outlined in this proposal aims to identify
rock magnetic characteristics that when combined with specific paleointensity
procedures will lead to more accurate estimates of the strength of the Earth's
magnetic field. Most paleointensity techniques are time and labor intensive and
have low success rates (25 to 35%). A small number of innovative studies have
proposed methods for screening samples to improve the accuracy of the estimates
determined using a specific paleointensity technique. We aim to build on this
approach by fully characterizing the rock magnetic properties of our samples and
then matching their properties with the best suited paleointensity technique.
The samples that will be used to address these problems are lavas from the
volcanic island of Fogo, Cape Verde, and were erupted during the last sixty
years when the intensity of the geomagnetic field is known from observatory
data. Samples will be examined using a meticulous suite of rock magnetic
analyses and Mossbauer spectroscopy. Electron microscopes will be used to image
mineralogic microstructures and determine elemental compositions. Multiple
paleointensity methods will be assessed, including variations on the most
commonly used techniques as well as newer approaches needing further validation.
No previous study has applied this variety of paleointensity techniques on such
well-characterized samples. Results of this research will guide future workers
in choosing the most appropriate paleointensity technique based on a sample's
rock magnetic properties, increasing efficiency and accuracy. This research will
ultimately benefit geophysicists and planetary scientists investigating and
modeling deep Earth processes. In addition to the research goals of this
project, the award is supporting three early career researchers, is broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups in the earth sciences, and is
providing training for undergraduate students.