* 0911253
* Geochemical Investigation of Xenoliths From the Central Rio Grande Rift and Colorado Plateau: Constraints on Lithosphere Evolution and Possible Delamination
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* John Lassiter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2013
* USD 214,053.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This proposal
seeks funding to study the evolution of the lithospheric mantle beneath the
central Rio Grande Rift and Colorado Plateau margin. The project will provide
insights into a variety of questions related to the tectonic and volcanic
evolution of this province, including the role of Farallon plate subduction and
dehydration in generation of "enriched" mantle sources of Rio Grande Rift lavas.
However, this proposal seeks primarily to answer one simple question: Has the
original Proterozoic-age lithospheric mantle beneath the central Rio Grande Rift
and Colorado Plateau margin been actively removed by delamination or convective
erosion, as suggested by several recent geophysical studies? If correct, these
studies suggest that lithosphere delamination, previously recorded beneath the
Sierra Nevada, may be more prevalent than currently recognized and may be
triggered by extensional as well as compressional tectonic regimes. Correlation
of Hf- and Os-isotope variations in peridotite xenoliths with mineralogic
constraints on degree of melt depletion will allow constraints on the timing of
melt depletion recorded in xenoliths from the Rio Grande Rift and Colorado
Plateau. Also, peridotite clinopyroxene trace element abundances combined with
Sm-Nd isotope compositions will constrain the age of metasomatic overprints
observed in portions of the Colorado Plateau and Rio Grande Rift. Together,
these data will allow us to distinguish between Proterozoic, melt-depleted and
possibly metasomatized lithospheric mantle and young, fertile asthenosphere.
This study will thus provide a direct test of the lithosphere delamination model
proposed by Gao et al. (2004) and Song &amp; Helmberger (2007) to explain the
presence of anomalously low seismic velocities in the shallow mantle beneath the
central rift and plateau margin and complementary, anomalously high velocities
within a slab-like structure dipping beneath the Central Plains lithosphere.
Identification of asthenosphere-derived peridotite at the relatively shallow
depths (~40-60 km) represented by peridotite xenolith suites throughout the
region would support the proposed delamination models, and would be inconsistent
with simple passive thinning of the lithosphere in response to extension. In
contrast, identification of ancient lithosphere at these depths would suggest
significantly less lithosphere removal and would require reevaluation of current
interpretations of the available seismic tomographic data. Insights gained from
this study on the chemical and physical evolution of lithospheric mantle prior
to and during continental rifting will expand our understanding of the triggers
and mechanisms involved in continental rifting and continental break-up. This
remains a fundamental question in plate tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Students at the graduate and undergraduate level will participate in
all aspects of this project, from data acquisition to interpretation and
dissemination of results at national conferences and through peer-reviewed
publications. Undergraduate student involvement in fieldwork and analytical
aspects of the proposed research will allow the selected student to discover the
excitement of scientific research outside the classroom. One undergraduate has
already completed an honors thesis examining the petrology of xenoliths from our
study area. We plan to extend the success of this initial pilot project by
incorporating additional undergraduates into all aspects of the research
program. This proposal will foster cross-discipline collaboration and
partnerships through organization of interdisciplinary workshops focused on the
evolution of the Rio Grande Rift and Colorado Plateau.&lt;br/&gt;