* 0911467
* Estimating Frictional Properties of Faults from Geodetic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,976.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large faults that generate earthquakes
exhibit a wide range of slip behaviors including stick-slip motion resulting in
episodic earthquakes, stable and steady sliding without fast earthquake slip,
and oscillatory or non-steady slip sliding without earthquakes. This range in
slip behaviors can be understood and modeled through the application of friction
laws derived from laboratory sliding experiments with natural or synthetic rock
samples. The friction parameters obtained from these experiments are implemented
in numerical models of faults imbedded in the earth in order to predict the slip
behavior of faults. Small changes in the friction parameters implemented in
these models can lead to dramatically different sliding behaviors. For example,
small changes in parameters can change from stick-slip, earthquake producing
slip behavior to steady, stable sliding behavior without earthquakes. Knowledge
of the distribution of these parameters on faults is therefore essential for
earthquake hazard assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The object of this work is
to use measurements of motions of the Earth?s surface near faults to infer
friction parameters on faults. Measurements from the Hayward fault in the
eastern San Francisco Bay Area and from the San Andreas fault near San Juan
Bautista will be compared with numerical models of fault slip. Data from these
locations recorded transient slip episodes on the faults triggered by distant
earthquakes. Also, various existing methodologies for modeling fault creep will
be systematically examined to assess the influence of simplifying assumptions on
model inferences and therefore provider a clearer understanding of how well the
frictional properties of faults can be resolved using such
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models incorporating rate-state friction have
been remarkably successful in explaining a wide range of observations reflecting
the nature of fault slip including afterslip, decay rates of aftershocks,
episodic slip at subduction zones, spontaneous silent earthquakes, as well as
general features of the earthquake cycle. Numerical studies invoking rate-state
friction employ laboratory-derived friction parameters which are often assumed,
for simplicity, to vary only with depth. It remains unclear to what extent the
laboratory friction values are relevant to real faults.