* 0911728
* Collaborative Research: "SUPERERUPTIONS," MAGMA CHAMBERS, & PLUTONIC RESIDUE: Insights from Peach Spring Tuff, Significance of Sphene
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jonathan Miller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,913.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." Intellectual merit: "Super-eruptions" - explosive eruptions
that produce >450 km3 of magma -arguably are the most catastrophic of all
natural processes on Earth. They play a central role in ongoing debates about
the nature of crustal magmatism. Study of super-eruptions may illuminate [1] the
processes by which large quantities of magma accumulate in the upper crust, are
stored and modified, and erupt; [2] the relations between intrusive and
extrusive igneous rocks; and [3] the construction of plutons and batholiths. We
propose a multi-faceted approach to investigate the generation and eruption of
the >600 km3 Peach Spring Tuff (PST: Miocene, Arizona-California-Nevada).
Exposure of the extensive outflow sheet as well as a thick intracaldera tuff
section and related granite makes this a particularly appealing target for
study. The PST phenocryst assemblage comprises a diverse array of accessory
minerals, notably including abundant sphene (titanite), which plays a vital role
in both recording evolving conditions and driving trace element variation.
Critical questions to be addressed include: [1] What environmental factors
control occurrence of key accessory minerals - especially sphene? [2] How does
growth of accessories influence geochemical signatures of magmas - and how can
these signatures be used to characterize evolution of magmatic environments? [3]
What are the conditions in giant chambers immediately prior to super-eruptions?
[4] How much do conditions fluctuate, and are they a direct response to
replenishment, eruption, or wholesale contamination? [5] How long do large
systems last, and during how much of their lifetime is there a large chamber?
[6] Are chambers containing super-volumes of eruptible magma inherently
unstable, or is triggering suppressed for unusual lengths of time to permit
accumulation of enormous quantities of magma? [7] How, and how efficiently, are
large volumes of melt-rich magma extracted from crystal-rich residue? [8] How
and where are highly-evolved, high-silica rhyolites generated? [9] What is the
significance of similarities and differences between felsic intrusive and
extrusive rocks? [10] Why are highly evolved plutonic rocks less voluminous than
volcanic equivalents? [11] Do giant eruptions have a different relation to their
residual plutonic equivalents than 'normal'-sized eruptions? Are their chambers
far larger, or do they more efficiently extract the eruptible material? This
project will entail an integrated, multi-disciplinary approach involving PIs and
collaborators with diverse expertise and perspectives. The project will combine
extensive field work, elemental and isotopic analyses of rock, glass, mineral,
and melt inclusion samples, dating using several complementary geochronological
methods, quantitative textural investigations, and experimental studies aimed at
elucidating the stability and saturation behavior of sphene. We will employ,
among other methods, NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract
Proposal:0911726 PI Name:Miller, Calvin Printed from