* 0911425
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Chemotaxis in Porous Media -- Visualization Experiments and Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Markus Hilpert, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 202,399.00

Collaborative Research: Investigation of Chemotaxis in Porous Media ?
Visualization Experiments and Modeling

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Understanding bacterial transport in the subsurface is critical both in
preventing microbial contamination of drinking-water supplies and in successful
implementation of bioremediation schemes. Much of the subsurface microbial
community is motile and can actively swim due to their flagella. Many motile
bacterial species exhibit chemotaxis to chemoattractants, however, chemotaxis is
often excluded from bacterial transport models. Our hypotheses address two
scenarios in which chemotaxis has been theoretically predicted to be relevant,
but not proven experimentally: (a) Theoretically predicted traveling bands of
chemotactic bacteria can be observed experimentally, and correspond to chemical
gradients created by bacterial consumption of substrate. (b) Chemotactic
bacteria migrate into regions of low permeability in response to chemical
gradients created in the freely-flowing media. Our specific objectives are: 1.
To optimize a novel visualization system for simultaneously observing bacterial
transport and aqueous chemical concentrations in 2D micromodels whose surfaces
are labeled with sensor molecules. 2. To experimentally investigate Hypotheses a
and b with the visualization system in the following scenarios: (a) a
homogeneous porous medium where the consumable chemoattractant concentration is
initially uniform and where traveling bacterial bands should occur; and (b) a
dual permeability porous medium in which chemoattractant diffuses from the low
permeability region. 3. To develop a pore-scale numerical model to describe the
observed transport phenomena. Specifically, a Lattice-Boltzmann model will be
generalized to account for cell attachment and Knudsen diffusion. 4. To develop
Darcy-scale analytical solutions for chemotaxis and to evaluate the Darcy-scale
mobile-immobile zone concept. We will use the visually appealing imaging
techniques employed in this proposal to improve undergraduate education and
community outreach, including a science fair for middle school girls and
research experience for high school teachers. We will also offer a research
opportunity for a mathematics major to work on modeling tasks.