* 0911690
* Metalloaromatic Multinuclear Complexes of Monovalent Coinage Metals: Novel Chemistry Driving Applications in Molecular Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Mohammad Omary, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2013
* USD 1,300,000.00

In this multi-investigator project funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division and cofunded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials
Research, Mohammad Omary, Thomas Cundari, and Jincheng Du of the University
North Texas and Bruce Gnade of the University of Texas at Dallas will synthesize
new multinuclear Au, Ag, and Cu complexes, study their photophysical properties,
and explore their efficacy in metal-organic field effect transistor (MOFET)
devices. The four investigators will collaborate on the synthesis, theoretical
calculations/modeling, and device testing of the title complexes. The film
forming properties and solid state device behavior of these compounds will be
examined, and information gained from these studies will be fed back to develop
new design parameters for the materials. It is suggested that the stability of
some of these materials towards light, heat and moisture are encouraging factors
for stable film and device fabrication. These cyclotrimer complexes also have
the potential to perform better than purely organic field effect transistor
(OFET) devices. Any or all of these improvements to the state-of-the-art would
significantly impact the optoeletronic device field. . The investigators will
also work with two University of North Texas research centers of excellence in
nanophotonics (BNPC) and advanced computing (MMRC) to enhance graduate and post-
doctoral interdisciplinary training as well as to involve local undergraduate
institutions in the research.