* 0911886
* Federal Cyber Service Scholarships
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2017
* Patrick Traynor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,593,567.00

Computer Science (31)

The Georgia Tech Information Security Center (GTISC), a designated Center of
Academic Excellence, is the umbrella organization covering research and
education in information security, information assurance, critical information
infrastructure protection (IS/IA/CIIP) and related subjects across the
Institute. Participating faculty and relevant degree programs exist in the
College of Computing, which has a curriculum that supports a fully dedicated
Master of Science in IS and about 30 PhD students in IS/IA; the School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE); and the Sam Nunn School (SNS),
including the Center for International Strategy, Technology and Policy (CISTP)
that coverers technology-related homeland, national, and international security
studies. In addition to about 10 courses that are wholly or largely dedicated to
IS/IA/CIIP, these and other units offer a rich selection of graduate courses on
networks, operating systems, software engineering, wireless communications,
sensors, fault tolerance, risk and cost-benefit analyses, e-government, Human
Computer Interaction, security analysis and policy, and telecommunications
policy. The GTISC core has about a dozen faculty members, and approximately 30
additional faculty and research staff have serious interests in IS/IA/CIIP.

During the current SFS program, several lessons have been learned that shape and
focus the present proposal towards educating high quality, technically educated
students in one of two Master's programs. One is in IS, and the other
concentrates on policy and homeland/national/international security. The latter
includes such areas as CIIP, criminal and terrorist use of cyberspace,
international cooperation in dealing with cyber security problems, critical
information systems for dealing with epidemics and other biologically-oriented
threats, and IT-related security policies at several levels. Among students in
the SNS, there is a pool of high achieving students, more than half women, with
good communications skills, and a high percentage of clearable US citizens. They
are particularly sensitive to people and policy issues in cyber security, and
have no trouble taking a core of 3-4 technical IS/IA courses. Measured by
academic performance and placement, they have proven to be the most successful
contingent of SFS students we have had. All of them became interested in
IS/IA/CIIP and government service because of the SFS program.