* 0911687
* Petrofacies and Detrital Geochronologic Evolution of the Lower Pennsylvanian Pottsville Sequences from the Black Warrior and Cahaba Basins, Alabama
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Willis Hames, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2015
* USD 290,278.00

&lt;br/&gt;This geological investigation will produce critical new data on
sediment composition and provenance of the Pottsville formation in northern
Alabama and Mississippi in order to document the origin and history of the
Appalachian and Ouachita mountain belts. Previous studies suggest that the upper
Paleozoic Pottsville sediments of the Black Warrior and Cahaba basins were
derived partly from the Ouachitas. Our preliminary work, however, suggests
primary derivation of Pottsville sediment from all three mountain building
events of the Appalachians. The study region encompasses large segments of
Alabama where Auburn University has ongoing outreach activities. This study
seeks to promote scientific exchange and research activities between a number of
colleges, K-12 schools, state agencies, and private companies. Many of the
fossil fuel resources in this region (coal, natural gas, coalbed methane) are
found in the sediments targeted in this study, potentially engendering
considerable public interest in exciting science. The principal investigators
will seek to broaden the experiences of graduate and undergraduate students,
both female and male, with a goal of having active participation from minority-
rich Lee and Macon counties of Alabama. Results from this project may contribute
significantly to the development of a global model of erosion from mountain
belts and deposition in adjacent sedimentary basins. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Black Warrior and Cahaba basins are important late Paleozoic depocenters of
clastic wedges in eastern North America, and they potentially hold critical
information on tectonic history, including that of the Appalachian and the
Ouachita mountain belts. Large sections of these orogenic sedimentary wedges
have been drilled, and marginal uplifts expose stratigraphic sequences
appropriate for detailed provenance studies, including sandstone petrography,
heavy mineral analysis, mineral chemistry, and 40Ar/39Ar single-crystal
muscovite age dates. In several ways, the Himalayan-Assam-Bengal depositional
system provides an intriguing modern analog for the Paleozoic Appalachian-
Ouachita-Black Warrior and Cahaba system of eastern North America. Our work with
cutting-edge techniques on Cenozoic clastic wedges from the foreland basins of
the Himalayas has helped us develop a model for orogenic sedimentation, basin
subsidence, depocenter shifting and sediment transport paths. Here we propose to
apply our model of denudation and sedimentation based on a Cenozoic detrital
system to a Paleozoic orogenic dispersal repository. This study involving
detrital geochronology and detailed sediment composition of the Black Warrior
and Cahaba basins of Alabama and Mississippi has a high probability of new
discovery of source terranes that once existed in the southern Appalachians.
This study also has the high potential of providing a new tectonic scenario of
terrane convergence, clastic dispersal network, basinal configuration, petroleum
potential, and tectonic geomorphology for the upper Paleozoic of eastern North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;