* 0911264
* RUI: Synthesis of N-Alkyl Pyridones: Mechanism, Methodology and Application to Organic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Carolyn Anderson, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2013
* USD 170,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project will focus on the development of methods for
the formation of N-alkyl pyridone containing structures, including amino acid
homologues. N-Alkyl pyridones are interesting motifs due to their prevalence in
natural products as well as their ability to serve as biological mimics in
pharmaceutical targets. Recent disclosure of a lithium iodide promoted alkyl
migration for the synthesis of N-alkyl pyridones has appeared and will be
studied further. The synthesis of beta- and gamma-amino acids containing an
N-alkyl pyridone moiety will also be pursued. Incorporation of such amino acids
into peptides is expected to provide protein mimics with unique folding
tendencies for application to both medicinal and material
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor Carolyn
Anderson of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Calvin College.
Professor Anderson's research efforts revolve around the development of facile
methods for the synthesis and application of structures containing N-alkyl
pyridones. Such chemistry will contribute a unique class of amino acid
homologues, which will subsequently be used to expand our understanding of the
helical structure of peptides containing these subunits. Successful development
of this methodology will have an impact on the synthetic community as well as
those involved in the development of organic materials and medicinal targets.