* 0911146
* Polymerization and Growth Mechanisms of Volatile Organics in the Gas Phase and on Supported Nanocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2013
* USD 590,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, supported by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor M.
Samy El-Shall of the Virginia Commonwealth University will study the kinetics of
polymer-forming ion-molecule reactions, investigate the structures of these
organic products in the gas phase and in preformed clusters, and develop new
methods for studying the structural properties and chemistry of organic
molecules produced by catalytic polymerization of molecular vapors on
nanoparticle catalyst supports. The experimental aspects of the project will
involve mass spectrometry, mass-selected ion mobility (MSIM), and thermochemical
equilibrium (in collaboration with Prof. Michael Mautner) techniques.
Theoretical calculations of molecular collision cross-sections, which support
the interpretation of MSIM results, will be done in collaboration with Professor
Sam Abrash at the University of Richmond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of
this research are expected to have significant impact on a number of areas
beyond physical chemistry such as organic aerosols, flames and combustion
chemistry, nanocatalysis and polymerization processes as well as on several
other disciplines, most notably astrophysics, atmospheric and materials
sciences. Advancing the current understanding of the formation and growth
mechanisms of complex organics in flames, combustion and organic aerosols could
lead to better protection strategies and potential human health benefits. The
proposed project will also serve as a training platform for undergraduate and
graduate students in highly interdisciplinary activities. The project will also
focus on expanding the participation of undergraduates in research through the
joint research partnership with the University of Richmond and the existing REU
program at VCU, and on developing outreach programs to high school students and
teachers to convey the content and excitement of science. &lt;br/&gt;