* 0911248
* Toward Fundamental Understanding of Plasma Processing Mechanisms: In Situ Studies of the Gas-Surface Interface During Materials Deposition and Modification
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Ellen Ellen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietra√ü
* 02/28/2013
* USD 464,159.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Chemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Fisher from Colorado State University will investigate the
effect of plasma modification processes on surfaces. Plasma processing has
become indispensable in a wide range of applications where high performance
materials with tailored surface properties are employed. Moreover, development
of new plasma surface modification processes and deposition chemistries is a
burgeoning area of significant impact to biomaterials, coatings, and sensor
applications. A more complete understanding of the underlying chemistry in these
systems could lead to manufacturing improvements with economic impact across
many industries. Thus, the goal of the proposed work is to improve understanding
of the fundamental chemical processes that occur at surfaces during plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition and surface modification of polymers.
Professor Fisher and her students will achieve this goal through an integrated,
comprehensive approach to understanding the molecular-level chemistry in these
systems. The primary experimental tools to be employed are in situ sum frequency
generation (SFG) spectroscopy and the laser-based imaging of radicals
interacting with surfaces (IRIS) technique, which provides steady-state surface
interaction data for plasma species. The SFG experiments are designed to examine
the evolution of plasma modified films upon exposure to atmospheric gases to
study labile intermediates formed in plasma modification, thereby elucidating
mechanisms involved in aging and hydrophobic recovery processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic interdisciplinary nature of this research
will afford students a broad exposure to and education in chemistry,
engineering, and materials science, beyond the traditional boundaries in
chemistry. Professor Fisher will continue her efforts in broadening
participation of underrepresented groups and use the proposed experiments to
develop demonstrations of plasmas and lasers for visitors, high school groups
and K-12 teachers.