* 0911231
* National Energy and Environmental Security: Research Opportunities and Challenges for Chemical Engineers
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Virendra Mathur, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2010
* USD 5,270.00

&lt;br/&gt;0911231&lt;br/&gt;Mathur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a
request for a grant to travel to India to help plan and develop a workshop in
Chandigarh, India. The planned US/India workshop is being considered with India
that is facing issues in energy and pollution areas due its fast growing
chemical industry and energy needs. In January of 2007, a trip was made to New
Delhi, India and a contact was established with Dr. S. Basu, Professor of
Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology- Delhi who agreed to
organize the Indian side of a similar workshop. The PI and Dr. Basu met Dr. A.
Mitra, Director, India - US Science and Technology Forum, New Delhi who asked
for a proposal to fund the Indian side. Though emails have been exchanged
between Dr. Basu and the PI discussing various aspects of the workshop, there is
a strong need to visit India and workout the details (discussed later) in a
meeting between Dr. Mitra, Dr. Basu and PI of this proposal. This proposal is a
request for a grant to travel to India to help develop the planned
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop would cover a
variety of topics relevant to fundamentals of transport, environment, and energy
processes. These include interfacial processes, thermodynamics, mass transfer,
separations, catalysis, combustion and particle mechanics, energy and
environmental sustainability. Researchers in these areas will be invited who
would have a strong interest&lt;br/&gt;in developing research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The major impact of this
workshop would be to start an endeavor towards collaborative R&amp;D effort
between faculty members of the USA and India to undertake fundamental research
that was started by the three recent workshops with China. This would help in
achieving pollution prevention and control in industries involved in energy
conversion and chemical production. For example, new joint discoveries in the
field of carbon dioxide sequestration and fuel cells for vehicular
transportation could limit global warming faced by both nations as well as the
entire world. International collaboration and contacts with India and the USA
will result in many beneficial effects to USA researchers participating in this
planned international workshop-including joint research projects and exchange of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All government approved international
travel expenses of the PI would be covered by this proposed grant.