* 0911772
* Structural and Thermal Analysis of an Upper Crustal Low-angle Normal Fault in the Sevier Orogen, Southern Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Brian Wernicke, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2011
* USD 204,364.00

The Miocene Mormon Peak detachment is a low-angle normal fault along the Sevier
orogenic front in the Basin and Range province in southern Nevada. It is often
cited as one of the best examples in the world of a large-displacement (greater
than 20 kilometers) normal fault that both formed and slipped at dips of less
than 25 degrees, and therefore its origin is relevant to the problem of how
brittle fracture and slip can occur on planes oriented at a high angle to the
maximum principal stress. In recent years, the detachment has alternatively been
interpreted as a system of catastrophically emplaced gravity slide blocks or a
zone of large-scale dissolution with limited tectonic slip. These hypotheses
challenge the notion that large-displacement extensional detachments are
important tectonic elements in the earth's crust. The objective of this project
is to use geological mapping, stratigraphy and state-of-the-art low-temperature
thermometric methods to provide critical tests for these competing hypotheses.
The initial large-slip hypothesis for the Mormon Peak detachment is based on
reconstruction of Cretaceous structural markers, and predicts that the
structural relief and slope of the frontal Sevier thrust ramp, now exposed in
the footwall of the detachment, has the same structural relief and slope as a
large monoclinal structure preserved in the hanging wall. The research team will
conduct geological mapping and stratigraphic thickness measurements in the
poorly understood hanging wall part of the system for quantitative comparison
with the footwall. Predictions of the detachment, landslide and dissolution
models will be tested with low-temperature thermometry using two independent
approaches: (1) (U-Th)/He thermochronometry on apatite-zircon pairs to constrain
the time-temperature history of the detachment footwall, and (2) the new clumped
isotope carbonate thermometer to distinguish between predictions of the
landslide model (cold footwall vein systems, hot gouge on the fault surface) and
detachment model (warm footwall veins and warm gouge). Regardless of the outcome
of these and other tests for various structural hypotheses, low-temperature
carbonate thermometry of fault rocks and vein systems is a new field, and the
proposed work accordingly has the potential for transformative
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary obstacles to our understanding
of the mechanics of earthquakes and faulting is informally referred to as the
stress paradox. The stress paradox is simply that the forces in the earth along
fault planes are too low to permit either fracture or continued frictional
sliding, yet obviously the faults move and generate earthquakes. There is at
present no consensus as to why this is the case, and hence the problem is a
major research focus area in geology and geophysics. The stress paradox is most
acute for a class of faults known as low-angle normal faults, which accommodate
horizontal extension of the earth's crust. This project is designed to test
competing hypotheses for the origin of one of the best-exposed low-angle normal
faults in the world known as the Mormon Peak detachment, located in southern
Nevada. Several research teams have presented evidence they claim demonstrate
that the Mormon Peak detachment is not a low-angle normal fault at all, and
thereby question the notion that any such faults even exist. The research team
will use standard geological techniques and state-of-the-art geochemical
techniques to investigate the timing, depth and temperature of deformation along
the detachment, which is expected to falsify one or more of the proposed
hypotheses.