* 0911694
* Experiment Versus Nature: Testing Models of Magma Storage and Movement from the 2006 Eruption of Augustine Volcano, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2013
* USD 302,651.00

Intellectual Merit: Recent, well-monitored volcanic eruptions serve as excellent
"natural laboratories",&lt;br/&gt;allowing diverse researchers to collaborate in
resolving questions about how to use geophysical precursors to predict eruptive
activity. The 2006 eruption of Augustine Volcano, Alaska represents an excellent
target for experimental petrology studies to constrain magma storage and ascent
dynamics, within a framework of robust geodetic and seismic observations of
precursory and syn-eruptive activity and eruptive timescales. Details about the
2006 eruption activity and its deposits will be augmented by experimental
studies to develop a petrology- and geochemistry-based model for storage of a
largely crystalline, high-silica andesite "mush" body at 4-6 km depth beneath
the volcano. Basaltic replenishment and limited hybridization (i.e., magma
mixing) produced a low-silica andesite magma, and re-mobilization of the "mush"
apparently triggered the eruption. The early explosive phase of the eruption
mainly involved the low-silica andesite, which shows petrologic evidence for
stalling or storage at ~25 MPa prior to the onset of the eruption. Starting in
mid-November, 2005, geodetic data show evidence for dike injection into the
shallow crust beneath Augustine, with the eruption ensuing in mid-January. This
timescale is also constrained to first order by the widths of amphibole reaction
rims found in the low-silica andesite, indicating that ascent to depths
shallower than amphibole stability in that magma coincided with the onset of the
dike injection. The proposed project would provide experimental constraints on
magma storage and ascent rates for the low and high-silica andesite end member
magmas: 1. Phase equilibria constraints on magma storage conditions of the high-
silica andesite. 2. Continuous rate decompression experiments to constrain
plagioclase crystallization kinetics in the low-silica andesite, to decipher the
timing of early dike injection leading to the onset of the eruption. 3.
Experimentally constrain amphibole breakdown reaction rates, to estimate both
magma ascent rates and heating timescales related to magma mixing and
hybridization. These tasks will be combined to formulate a model that links the
experimental with the geophysical observations, and ultimately to enhance
volcano monitoring using precursor geophysical
indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project support the
research activities of one PhD student (Sarah Henton), Ms. Henton's experience
with the Montserrat Volcano Observatory and Soufriere Hills Volcano will be
beneficial to the project. The project will also support and enhance the
research of three females in the geosciences. Through the connections of the PI
and collaborator with the Alaska Volcano Observatory, the results will be
disseminated to the public living near Augustine, in the Kenai Peninsula. The
results will also be used to cross-link with geophysical data from monitoring
activities in 2006, to decipher the source mechanisms of geodetic and seismic
signals related to specific phases of the eruption.&lt;br/&gt;