* 0911290
* Engaging Undergraduate Students in Petrologic Research to Test Hypotheses on the Genesis and Evolution of Mantle Magmas of the Navajo Volcanic Field
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,10/31/2012
* David Gonzales, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2012
* USD 138,818.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Diatreme-dike
centers in the Oligocene Navajo volcanic field (NVF) are&lt;br/&gt;an important
part of the geologic history and evolution of the Colorado Plateau. Although
previous studies have focused on the generation and evolution of magmas
associated with the NVF, some fundamental issues are poorly understood. The most
in-depth hypothesis (Nowell, 1993; Carlson and Nowell, 2001) on mantle-magma
genesis and evolution for NVF rocks argues that silica-undersaturated magmas
were created by 0.5% to 1% melting of a carbonate-rich phlogopite-garnet
peridotite whereas more "silica-saturated" magmas (source of minette) were
generated by higher degrees of melting of hydrous-lithospheric mantle. This
model is founded on the idea that asthenospheric melts were injected into the
lithospheric mantle creating proximal CO2 and distal H2O metasomatism. Insight
into the composition and genesis of primary mantle magmas, and an understanding
of the volatile species involved, currently are not adequately constrained to
fully test this model. Chemical and volatile signatures of primary silicate-melt
inclusions and mineral phases in NVF rocks can contribute to an understanding of
compositions and formation conditions of parent mantle melts. In this proposed
research, petrologic and geochemical data on bulk-rock samples combined with
information gained from micro-analytical techniques (electron and ion
microprobe, and laser-ablation ICP-MS) on primary silicate-melt inclusions and
mineral phases will be employed to reconstruct parental source compositions and
gain insight into magmatic-volatile processes. Major and trace element data from
melt inclusions and early-formed olivine (Â± pyroxene) will serve to assess
variations in primary melt compositions. Constraints on the concentration and
variation of volatile species (C, H, Cl, F) in melt inclusions and zoned-mineral
phases (e.g., phlogopite and apatite) will allow insight into the involvement
and evolution of volatiles in magmatic processes (e.g., metasomatism,
degassing). The combined data from this research will permit a robust test of
existing hypotheses on NVF magmatism, and dissemination of the results into the
broader geologic community will give greater knowledge of magmatic processes.
This is important in understanding regional Cenozoic magmatic events on the
Colorado Plateau, and perhaps the connection of this magmatic pulse with other
contemporaneous regional geologic events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Igneous petrology at the undergraduate level has historically played an
important role in the education of geology students, serving as a bridge to
other key courses, and offering students opportunities to develop important
skills in inquiry, observation, and analysis. A prime impact of this project
beyond the basic research is to support the education and successful scientific
careers of undergraduate students at Fort Lewis College by teaching them basic
knowledge and skills in context of a petrologic-based research project. This
will promote scientific habits of mind by engaging students as "active agents"
in discovery, and the creative development and testing of ideas. It will also
give students a sense of ownership in the scientific process and knowledge
construction. The PI and students from Fort Lewis College will acquire new
skills and knowledge in collaboration with several well-established research
scientists at Arizona and the U.S. Geological Survey. An effort will be made by
the PI to recruit under-represented groups (ethnic minorities and women). The PI
will also gain professional advancement and insight that will be integrated into
undergraduate research and curriculum at Fort Lewis College.&lt;br/&gt;