* 0911032
* III: Large: Discovering Complex Anomalous Patterns
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Daniel Neill, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,598,153.00

Many of the most interesting and valuable discoveries that can be made from data
arise not from the evaluation of single records, but from identifying a set of
records that are anomalous in some interesting way. Together they may indicate
for example the emergence of a disease outbreak or new patterns of criminal
activity. One can view pattern discovery as an interactive process between data
analysis algorithms and human users who have expertise in the domain. This
research will develop an integrated framework of probabilistic methods to
interact with the user in detecting, characterizing, explaining, and learning
anomalous patterns over groups of records. The focus is on the many situations
where the data (and the probabilistic patterns to be discovered) are not
appropriate for using other existing techniques, such as graph mining or
frequent sets. The proposed methods will search over arbitrary subsets of
records and evaluate their correspondence to known, potentially very complex,
probabilistic patterns, or their failure to match baseline data under various
learned statistical models. These methods will assist the user in understanding
and modeling the discovered, previously unknown anomalies to be
identi&amp;#64257;able as a known pattern when encountered in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative team of
researchers will develop, implement, and evaluate a general, comprehensive, and
widely applicable probabilistic framework for pattern discovery. The proposed
work will address these challenging and important research questions:
&lt;br/&gt; - How can machine learning concepts such as classi&amp;#64257;cation
and anomaly detection be generalized to consider groups of records rather than
single records?&lt;br/&gt; - How can a detection algorithm simultaneously detect
and differentiate between known and currently unknown pattern types?&lt;br/&gt;
- How can an algorithm explain clearly to a user what pattern was found and
why?&lt;br/&gt; - How can an algorithm learn new pattern types through feedback
from a user?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to detect, characterize, explain,
and learn patterns from groups of records in massive datasets will provide a
qualitatively new approach for advancing discovery of knowledge from data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Although the applications for
these algorithms are innumerable, development and testing will be prioritized in
the areas of patient care in the intensive care unit (ICU) and aircraft
&amp;#64258;eet maintenance. Through the team's existing collaborations, the
algorithms will also be used during the project in other areas including food
safety, scientific discovery in astronomy sky surveys, and detection of
geographic hot-spots of criminal activity. Together, these applications will
demonstrate the methods' value across a wide spectrum of domains and tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Words: anomalous patterns; pattern discovery;
probabilistic models; incremental learning.