* 0911416
* Collaborative Research: Orogen-parallel Mid-crustal Flow and Exhumation of Domes Along the Southern Margin of the Tibetan Plateau
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* John Cottle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2012
* USD 41,411.00

Some of Earths largest and most intriguing geologic and geographic features,
including the Alpine/Himalayan mountain chain, are the result of continental
collision. Because continental collision systems are responsible for profound
geologic change throughout a large portion of Earth?s history, understanding
their complex dynamics is of fundamental importance to Earth Science. Geologic
studies based on the rocks and structures preserved in eroded cores of
collisional systems provide critical insights into the fundamental processes of
mountain building including metamorphism, melting, deformation, and exhumation.
Results of this work will help refine our knowledge, not only of individual
processes, but also the extent to which they interact to both construct and
destruct large mountain chains. Data from this project will form the basis for
the development of curricular materials that will be distributed to middle
school teachers and a website devoted to highlighting active geoscience projects
in the Himalayas. This project will also support mentoring and education of
graduate and undergraduate students, and with the help of the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering will initiate a wide-ranging international
collaboration on the science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Himalaya provide an
exceptional opportunity to investigate the evolution of mid-crustal rocks in an
active collisional system. Along the collisional front, the major structures
that bound these mid-crustal rocks, the Main Central thrust below and South
Tibetan detachment above, are offset or reactivated by young metamorphic domes
like the Leo Pargil, the focus of this study. Such domes provide an important
opportunity to study the generation of partial melt, the potential feedback
between partial melt and exhumation, the affects of shear zone nucleation, and
the rheology of the crust during dome formation. The high-grade rocks of the Leo
Pargil dome have been exhumed during extension and dome formation within an
active convergent setting along orogen-parallel thrust faults and low angle
detachment faults that were active until the middle Miocene. In collaboration
with US and international academic organizations this project will employ a
field-and lab-based interdisciplinary investigation to explore the evolution of
these rocks using 1) geologic mapping and detailed microstructural analysis, 2)
isotope geochronology (U/Pb, Ar/Ar, [U+Th]/He), and 3) determination of
metamorphic P-T-t paths. Results from Leo Pargil will be contrasted with that
from other domes along the Himalayan front to generate a high-resolution model
for the timing and kinematics of orogen-parallel mid-crustal flow and exhumation
along the southern margin of the Tibetan plateau since the middle Miocene.