* 0911557
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing the sustainability of groundwater pumping from low-arsenic aquifers in southern Asia - a case-study in Vietnam south of Hanoi.
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alexander van Geen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ni-Bin Chang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 489,335.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasis on the elevated level of
arsenic in groundwater tapped by millions of shallow tubewells across southern
Asia over the past two decades has tended to obscure that anoxic aquifers that
are low in As are also widespread and often within reach of drilling in the
affected regions. This proposal addresses two key issues for assessing the
vulnerability of low-As aquifers: (1) whether dissolved or particulate organic
carbon (DOC or POC) drives aquifers towards microbial dissolution of Fe
oxyhydroxides and (2) to what extent adsorption and precipitation of As
attenuate the impact of high-As groundwater drawn into low-As aquifers. The
proposed field investigation takes advantage of the previously documented (a)
juxt-apposition at the same depth of grey sands associated with high-As
groundwater and orange sands with low-As groundwater in a village 15 km south of
Hanoi and (b) large groundwater withdrawals by the city of Hanoi resulting in
water from the former being drawn laterally through the latter. The
configuration is particularly well-suited to shed light on the key processes
that determine the sustainability of continued reliance on low-As aquifers for
the provision of drinking water throughout the affected region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific merit ¡V An unprecedented combination of state-
of-the-art analytical methods will be applied to a previously documented
transition from orange to grey sands corresponding to low- to high-As
groundwater, respectively: 14C-analysis of phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs)
constituting the membranes of living cells, probing of the redox state and
bonding environment of As and Fe in aquifer sands by X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, 3H-3He dating of groundwater, and optically-stimulated
luminescence (OSL) dating of quartz grains. These measurements will provide the
basis for testing the following suite of working hypotheses pertaining to the
vulnerability of low-As aquifers in southern Asia. Whether the associated
predictions hold up to closer scrutiny or not, the implications of the proposed
research will extend beyond the As problem as they address the more general
question of redox control in groundwater. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;H1 Reductive
dissolution of Fe oxyhydroxides associated with the release of As to groundwater
is &lt;br/&gt;driven primarily by the microbial degradation of POC deposited at
the same time as the aquifer sands. &lt;br/&gt;H2 DOC advected by groundwater
flow does not result in significant reductive dissolution of Fe
&lt;br/&gt;oxyhydroxides and therefore does not trigger conversion of orange
sands to grey or the release of As. &lt;br/&gt;H3 Mixing of high-sulfate (SO4)
groundwater with high-As groundwater results in precipitation of As-sulfides
fueled by the oxidation of POC in the aquifer deposit.&lt;br/&gt;H4 Breakthrough
of As through orange sands can be predicted by considering mainly As removal by
precipitation of As-sulfides and competitive adsorption of As and phosphate
(PO4).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Drinking water distributed by
several of Hanoi¡¦s municipal water supply plants contains &gt;100 ?Ýg/L As,
i.e. over ten-fold the WHO guideline for As in drinking water of 10 ?Ýg/L. This
is due to insufficient treatment of groundwater drawn from orange aquifers but
presumably originating in part from adjacent grey aquifers. Expressed as the
last of our working hypotheses, the proposed research will help determine
whether the As content of groundwater tapped by the municipal water supply of
the city of Hanoi, and similarly situated groundwater pumping stations
throughout southern Asia, could be lowered at the source by favoring entrainment
of river water, herewith reducing the need for
treatment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H5 Municipal water supplies engineered to draw
river water through a reducing aquifer would benefit from a reduction in As
prior to abstraction due to the dual effect of increasing SO4 and lowering PO4.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eawag, our Swiss partner in this project, has built an
extensive network of contacts with city water managers over the course of a
long-term collaboration with the Hanoi University of Science. Engineers at QEA,
the environmental consultancy charged with modeling groundwater and As
transport, in consultation with a senior hydrologist at MIT, will help ensure
that the outcome of the research is translated into practical recommendations.
Graduate research by one student in Vietnam will be covered over the duration of
the project and partially covered for post-doctoral work at Lamont-
Doherty.&lt;br/&gt;