* 0911221
* How Deep Do Ruptures Penetrate in Large Earthquakes?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Bruce Shaw, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 07/31/2011
* USD 164,576.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Technical Description: In the shallow crust, most of the strain at plate
boundaries is relieved during sudden rare large earthquakes. Below the shallow
locked portion, strain has often been thought as being relieved through steady
creep, or, in the case of layers just below the locked portions, slow decaying
afterslip. In the last few years, observations of Episodic Tremor and Slip in
subduction zones has caused some rethinking of this simple picture. An even
bigger challenge to this picture has come from new theoretical work suggesting
rapid coseismic slip during large earthquakes might penetrate much deeper below
the locked fault than previously thought. This possibility, that rapid coseismic
deep slip may have been, not missed, but rather misplaced, inferred erroneously
to be happening at shallower locked depths, has significant implications for our
picture of how strain relief occurs at plate boundaries, and for seismic hazard
estimates. This work seeks to further explore and constrain this possibility.

Two sets of projects are proposed. The first set focuses on a newly identified
quantification of the deep slip behavior found to have significant impacts on
seismic hazard estimates: the ratio of seismogenic moment to total moment (or
seismogenic moment fraction). This ratio is argued to impact magnitude-area
scaling, moment balanced estimates of repeat times of large events, and high
frequency shaking hazard. Further re-examing the implications of this ratio, and
constraining its values forms a core of this set of projects. Examining this
ratio in a forward modeling context to capture its robustness to friction and
other uncertainties is a central proposed project. Specifically, variations in
friction in the seismogenic layer, and frictional forms in the deeper stably
sliding layer will be examined, and robustness of this dimensionless ratio
explored. Additional projects studying the seismogenic moment fraction and its
impact on quantities relevant to seismic hazard will be carried out. In
particular, we will examine how well the estimated seismogenic moment fraction
corrections indeed match magnitude area scaling and large event repeat times.

The second set of projects focuses on measurements which have the potential to
provide direct observational constraints of the phenomena of deep slip below the
locked portion of faults. Taking advantage of the geometry of dipping faults,
where depth and horizontal location are associated, one project will examine the
potential to detect deep slip at the surface in dipping fault geometries. In the
case of subduction zones, the project aims to see whether slip propagation into
zones where Episodic Tremor and Slip occur might be observable during large
earthquakes. A final project examines magnitude-area scaling on dipping faults,
in light of our new scaling laws.

Broader Significance: In addition to the broad areas of earth science touched by
this research, including geological, seismological, geodetic, and laboratory
observations, there are significant potential practical benefits to society.
Current methods for estimating seismic hazard rely on a series of of
parameterizations of ruptures to construct probabilities of earthquake
occurrence. Uncertainties in the parameterizations lead to uncertainties in the
estimates, and added uncertainties mean added costs, when trying to manage risk.
It has become increasingly clear that a more physics-based approach would
provide better constraints on parameterizations and better hazard estimates.
This work has important implications for a number of key parameterizations used
in seismic hazard estimates. These seismic hazard estimates have big societal
impacts, and are used for setting building codes and earthquake insurance rates.
Improving estimates help in better allocating resources to mitigate these
hazards, ultimately saving lives and property.