* 0911483
* Catalytic Asymmetric Dimerization of Ketoketenes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nessan Kerrigan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2013
* USD 340,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Reactions catalyzed by organic catalysts (amines, amino
acids and amino alcohols) are often plagued by low reactivity (high catalyst
loadings and long reaction times) and limited substrate scope. This project will
investigate highly nucleophilic phosphines as organocatalysts in order to
facilitate the design of new synthetic organic methodologies. Professor
Kerrigan's group envisaged that phosphines would provide superior reactivity due
to their enhanced polarizability at phosphorus relative to analogous nitrogen
centered catalysts. As part of a program of studies towards the development of
new organocatalyzed reactions involving phosphonium enolates, Professor
Kerrigan's group has sought to develop an efficient methodology for the
asymmetric dimerization of ketoketenes. While isolated examples of ketoketene
dimerization have been reported in the past, no general system has emerged and,
moreover, an asymmetric dimerization of ketoketenes has never been reported.
This reaction will facilitate the study of the reaction of phosphines with
ketenes, and furthermore provide a rare opportunity to study the reactivity of
phosphonium enolate species. The synthetic utility of the proposed methodology
will be validated through its application to the synthesis of interesting drug
molecules (e.g. LY426965), and through the conversion of enantioenriched
ketoketene dimers into useful chiral building blocks (e.g. 1,3-diketones, amino
acids, and amino alcohols).

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor Nessan J. Kerrigan of the Department of Chemistry at
Oakland University. Professor Kerrigan's research efforts focus on the
development of new phosphine-catalyzed reactions. The new methodologies arising
from this project will provide access to chiral building blocks (intermediates)
with great potential for the synthesis of complex molecules, and will enable
alternative strategies for the construction of pharmacologically active
molecules.