* 0911109
* Hybrid Fe(II) Spin Crossover Materials: Organic Conductors, Small Molecule Sensors, and Functionalized Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mykhailo Shatruk, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry program supports work by Professor Mykhailo Shatruk at Florida State
University to carry out fundamental studies on multifunctional spin crossover
materials. Spin crossover compounds can exist in two magnetic states,
transitions between which are achieved by varying temperature, pressure, or
irradiating the sample with light. Materials combining such magnetically
bistable iron(II) ions with synthetic organic conductors, finite multinuclear
metal complexes, and luminescent cadmium selenide quantum dots will be prepared.
Investigation of physical properties of these complexes will focus on
understanding the interplay (synergy) between the spin transition at the Fe(II)
centers and electrical conductivity, small molecule sorption, and luminescence
that originate from the other part of the structure. The study of these
materials involves a broad range of synthetic and characterization techniques
that will form a solid foundation for training students in the fields of
inorganic and materials chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique phenomena
offered by multifunctional spin crossover compounds can be exploited in the
development of new paradigms and more efficient materials for electronic
devices, magnetic sensors, and information storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;