* 0911754
* Improving the Spatial and Temporal Resolution of Strain Rate Models of Continental Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Cornelis Kreemer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 288,230.00

One consequence of plate tectonics is that in continental plate boundary zones,
such as eastern Asia and western United States, tectonic deformation (and the
associated earthquake activity) can be distributed over large areas. There are
essentially two satellite-based observation methods with which this deformation
can be accurately monitored. With the Global Positioning System (GPS) we can
precisely measure the Earth's surface motion at the locations of GPS monuments.
With the help of continuous GPS (CGPS) measurements, we can now track these
motions (horizontal and vertical) on a daily basis. The other methodology is
called InSAR, which uses radar images to map detailed changes in the surface of
a large swath of land between two (infrequent) satellite passes. A limitation of
InSAR is that it is most sensitive to vertical ground motions, which often have
anthropogenic instead of tectonic origins.

This project aims to bridge the gap between the ability of GPS and InSAR to
capture fundamental deformation processes at high spatial and temporal
resolution. InSAR-detected crustal motions are limited by being sampled
intermittently and only in the satellite's line-of-sight (LOS). On the other
hand, GPS-derived descriptions of the deformation field fail to achieve the same
spatial resolution that is obtained with InSAR. The goal of project is to
significantly improve the spatial resolution of existing secular strain rate
tensor models using horizontal GPS velocities, and create additional models of
time-variable deformation using continuous GPS (CGPS) data. This project will
provide useful baseline estimates of secular and time-dependent horizontal
deformation that could aid the interpretation of InSAR results, while also
allowing new advances in studies of the geodynamics and seismic hazard of areas
undergoing continental deformation.

The work is focussed on the Pacific-North America (PA-NA) plate boundary zone,
the Mediterranean and Middle East, and central and eastern Asia. There, all
publicly available CGPS data will be analyzed and combined with estimates of the
secular motions from published campaign-style GPS measurements. The horizontal
velocities will be converted to continuous strain rate tensor models of secular
deformation. Where data coverage is limited, other kinematic indicators (e.g,,
fault slip rates/vectors, earthquake focal mechanisms) will be included for
additional constraints on the strain style and localization. Improvements on the
temporal variation of the strain rate field (most notably due to transients and
postseismic deformation) will be limited to the PA-NA plate boundary zone, where
CGPS sites are abundant. Reliable time-variable strain rate models (and
associated changes in dilatational and shear strain) can likely be created for
1-4 week time windows, sufficient to capture most first order time-variable
processes. Both static and dynamic deformation results will be converted to LOS
equivalents for 1st order comparison with InSAR results.

Estimates of the secular motions of CGPS sites as well as strain rate results
(tensor parameters, maps, and movies) will be made available on a dedicated web
portal, as a valuable tool for scientists and educators. Secular strain rates
correlate closely with expected seismic hazard and can contribute directly to
improving hazard maps. The time-dependent strain rate models may contribute to
investigations in stress transfer, earthquake triggering and, ultimately, time-
dependent seismic hazard.

Through the project, a graduate student will be trained in the management of GPS
data, the characterization of CGPS time-series, and crustal deformation
modeling. The results (data and models) obtained from this project will be made
available on a dedicated web portal, as a valuable tool for scientists and
educators.