* 0911609
* The Kinematic Significance of Folds in the Paleoproterozoic Foxe Fold Belt, Melville Peninsula, Nunavut, Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Yvette Kuiper, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2012
* USD 215,027.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will use
results from numerical modeling of the rotation of fold hinges to elucidate the
tectonic history of the Foxe Fold Belt (FFB) in Nunavut, Canada. Orientations of
fold hinges and related structures yield invaluable information about past
relative movements of tectonic domains. These structures develop and rotate with
increasing strain and their rotation paths can be predicted by numerical
modeling. The numerical models, which may have wide application in structural
geology and mineral exploration, will be tested on the rocks of the Melville
Peninsula. The investigators will also constrain the ages of deformation by
radiometric dating techniques. The project is in collaboration with the
Geological Survey of Canada (GSC) and scientists from other universities. Two
Masters students at Boston College will take part in this multidisciplinary
project and gain invaluable experience working in remote field areas and
cutting-edge laboratories. Local Nunavut Inuit students will be employed in the
field by the GSC as part of the Canadian Geo-mapping for Energy and Minerals
(GEM) program, which is designed to provide economic and training opportunities
to the Inuit community in Nunavut. An Inuit student will work directly with the
PI in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ENE-trending FFB comprises Archean
basement with overlying and infolded Paleoproterozoic rocks. The investigators
will study the kinematics of the deformation, the contacts between the
Paleoproterozoic and Archean rocks, as well as regional Archean province
boundaries, many of which were active during assembly of the supercontinent
Columbia. FFB structures in Melville Peninsula have previously been interpreted
as indicating transport to the WSW, based primarily on sheath fold hinge lines.
However, results from Baffin Island indicate an opposed direction of transport,
and this forms the basis for the numerical testing of two hypotheses. If WSW
transport is correct, the issue of oblique transport directions in adjacent
segments of the FFB remains unresolved. If the opposite is true, the WSW trend
of linear structures may be explained by, for example, extension parallel to the
trend of the belt, or other tectonically plausible scenarios. The two hypotheses
will be tested through field and laboratory microscopy studies of fold
geometries and shear fabrics. In addition, crosscutting relationships and the
age of the folds and kinematics of the shear zones will be constrained through
U-Pb ion-probe and U-Th-Pb electron-probe techniques, which allow for accurate
dating of accessory minerals, particularly in thin-
section.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;