* 0911589
* Mechanics and Seismogenic Potential of Low Angle Normal Faults: A Field and Laboratory Investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2011
* USD 186,048.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Understanding the factors controlling the stress state and nature of slip on
major tectonic faults is a fundamental problem in earthquake physics and fault
mechanics. In particular, many major fault zones, including the San Andreas
Fault, several well-studied subduction zone plate boundaries, and low angle
normal faults appear to slip under anomalously low shear stresses (i.e., they
are mechanically weak). Recent studies also provide conflicting views about the
potential for seismic slip on modern low angle normal faults, which is of
importance for earthquake hazard assessment. Much recent and ongoing work has
focused on identifying the mechanisms causing fault weakness through sampling
and instrumentation of active fault zones by drilling. Another approach is to
study well-exposed exhumed faults that formed earlier in Earth's history, and
which serve as analogs for active faults. This project focuses on low angle
normal faults that formed in response to the regional crustal extension during
the Miocene epoch (24 to 6 million years ago) in the area that is now the Mojave
Desert of California and Arizona. These low angle normal faults dip shallowly,
have accommodated tens of kilometers of slip, and appear to have slipped while
severely misoriented, with the (vertical) maximum principal stress nearly
perpendicular to the fault surface. Subsequent erosion has exhumed the fault
zones from depths of 2-10 km, and has provided access to excellent exposures.
This research project will characterize the frictional properties and stability
of gouge and fault rock from these exhumed faults using a pressure vessel in the
rock mechanics laboratory at Pennsylvania State University, in order to address
two outstanding questions about low angle normal faults that bear on the
underlying causes of fault weakness in general: (1) What is the absolute
strength of natural fault gouge from low angle normal faults, and is the
presence of weak clay minerals sufficient to explain their apparent mechanical
weakness?; and (2) Are the frictional properties of the fault rock consistent
with the possibility of earthquake nucleation on these structures? A particular
feature of this work is the ability to test samples of intact fault gouge, which
preserve their distinctive fabric and are likely to play a key role in governing
their frictional behavior.

Earthquakes pose a major hazard to populated regions in much of the United
States and globally. Both the overall mechanical strength and the nature of slip
(whether it occurs via creep or by episodic failure in earthquakes) on major
tectonic faults depend, to a large extent, on the physical properties of rock
and gouge within these fault zones. Many major fault zones at plate tectonic
boundaries appear to slip under anomalously low stresses, implying that they are
mechanically weak. Low angle normal faults are one class of faults that exhibit
this apparent mechanical weakness, and which are common throughout the
southwestern United States. The potential for earthquakes on these faults is
also a subject of significant debate, owing mainly to overall low slip rates and
potentially long recurrence times that make hazard difficult to assess. This
study will investigate the factors that control the strength and slip behavior
of low angle normal faults through field mapping, sampling, and detailed
laboratory study of fault material. The project will provide new insight into
the mechanics of these structures, and will shed light on the mechanical
behavior and stability of mechanically weak faults in general.