* 0911435
* What are the seasonal controls on stream-riparian groundwater exchange during baseflow recession in headwater catchments?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Michael Gooseff, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 460,692.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;Hyporheic zones and
riparian zones play important roles in catchment-scale budgets of nutrients,
heat, and energy. Significant research has been conducted on the biogeochemical
and hydrologic functions of both hyporheic and riparian zones, though often in
isolation from each other. Here, we seek to determine how dynamic valley-bottom
hydrology is controlled by valley morphology and gradient, and how this in turn
influences hyporheic exchange throughout summer baseflow recession in headwater
catchments. We pose the following research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) How do down-
valley and cross-valley vectors of subsurface flow change through seasonal
baseflow recession?&lt;br/&gt;2) How are these changes controlled by valley-
scale morphology and gradient?&lt;br/&gt;3) How spatially consistent are the
patterns of down- and cross-valley vectors? &lt;br/&gt;4) How does the extent of
hyporheic exchange change during seasonal baseflow recession? &lt;br/&gt;We will
address these questions by combining field methods, groundwater flow and
transport modeling, stream solute transport modeling, and integrated analyses of
tracer data and geophysical surveys of stream tracer distribution in the
subsurface. This research will significantly enhance our ability to predict and
quantify the hydrology of stream-groundwater exchange. &lt;br/&gt;We propose to
conduct a workshop at the Shale Hills Critical Zone Observatory to bring
together hydrologists and geophysicists to define the cutting edge and future
directions of hydrogeophysics in stream-groundwater interactions. We will
additionally train two graduate students and two undergraduate students in
hydrology, groundwater modeling, geophysics, and solute transport. We will
actively recruit from under-represented applicants to Penn
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;