* 0911888
* Precision Electroweak Measurements at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Louisiana Tech Particle Physics
Group (PPG) has a two part experimental nuclear physics research program
utilizing the facilities at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(TJNAF) located in Virginia and a companion educational Outreach Program
designed to involve undergraduate students, science teachers, and high school
students in forefront physics research projects. The group's efforts at present
are centered on a parity violating electron asymmetry program at TJNAF, the
Qweak (E05-008) experiment which represent parity violation measurements at very
low momentum transfers. The group had its own approved experiment (E04-101)
which utilized the G0 apparatus in the backward angle mode to measure the parity
violating asymmetry in the channel where data analysis is still being done.
These programs will investigate ground state nucleon structure properties,
investigate the dynamics of QCD symmetry breaking, and provide a precision test
of the Standard Model. For the Qweak experiment the Louisiana Tech group is
responsible for the Region 1 GEM based tracking system for Qweak critical system
for the experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana Tech is a rural university
with not much opportunity for exposure to fundamental state-of-the-art basic
research. The funding thus far received from the NSF has allowed the group to
develop a vigorous research program and exceptionally equipped laboratories.
With these facilities the group has been able to develop an education outreach
program with a two part thrust. The first part involves the undergraduate and
the high school students in our labs in a capacity much like that of a graduate
student. They have responsibility for a project appropriate to their abilities
which allows them to gain valuable knowledge of how to conduct research which is
not taught in a classroom. The other part is designed to involve high school
teachers in our research projects allowing for them to get a better
understanding of the sciences and mathematics which can then be translated into
learning modules for them to take back to their classrooms. Funding of this
proposal will allow the Louisiana Tech group to continue to make major
contributions to physics research, and enhance the educational opportunities for
undergraduate students, local high school students and teachers, providing an
excellent avenue for recruiting students into scientific disciplines.