* 0911244
* Fundamental Gas-Phase Properties of Non-Protein Amino Acids and Non-Protein Amino Acid - Containing Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Poutsma, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

In this award, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Professor
Poutsma from College of William and Mary and his students will investigate amino
acids and their gas phase ion chemistry. The first goal is to understand the
subtle interplay between the structure of amino acids and their gas-phase
energetic properties. The researchers will focus on the gas phase
thermochemistry of so-called non-protein amino acids (NPAA), many of which are
toxic to humans and other animals in part due to structural similarity to one or
more of the twenty common protein amino acids (PAA). Absolute gas-phase
thermochemical properties will be determined for naturally-occurring non-protein
amino acids (NPAA) as compared to their PAA counterparts, both as isolated amino
acids and when incorporated into small peptides.&lt;br/&gt;The second goal
focuses on the effects of NPAA-substitution into small peptides which will be
accomplished by studying fragmentation patterns of PAA peptides and their NPAA
analogs. There is biological relevance to this project in that many NPAA can
mis-incorporate into peptides and proteins. Detailed knowledge of any unusual
fragmentation behavior for peptides containing NPAAs will be necessary in order
to interpret mass spectra from both top-down and bottom-up proteomics
experiments. The ultimate goal is to better understand the mechanisms for
"selective" fragmentations in low-energy tandem mass spectrometry experiments
that lead to incomplete sequence coverage for the peptide of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;The main function of a primarily undergraduate chemistry department
is the preparation of future generations of scientists. At the College of
William and Mary, this charge is accomplished through both classroom teaching
and undergraduate research. Since over eighty percent of the College's chemistry
majors perform undergraduate research, over the three years of this award it is
anticipated that 15-20 undergraduate students will perform research in Professor
Poutsma's laboratory. Based on current demographics, approximately one-half of
these students will be either female or a member of an underrepresented
group.&lt;br/&gt;