* 0911723
* Laboratory Earthquakes: Characterization of Ground Motion and Stress States in Complex Rupture Scenarios Using High Resolution Optical Diagnostics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ares Rosakis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2012
* USD 405,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thrust of this research effort will
focus on the advancement of a unique experimental capability for generating
earthquake-like ruptures under controlled laboratory conditions. The experiment
features a model specimen with an interface that simulates a natural fault in
the Earth?s crust. The assembly is held together by static friction under the
action of a an applied compressive load which mimics natural tectonic stresses.
Seismic slip induced within the specimen results in a dynamic rupture that
propagates along the fault while radiating seismic wave energy into the body of
the specimen. A well instrumented laboratory earthquake setup provides a
versatile testing capability for investigating complex seismological phenomena
such as dynamic frictional sliding, radiated ground motion, supershear ruptures,
and dynamic rupture processes associated with complex geometries. Work under the
support of this grant will target the development and integration of new optical
diagnostics for the precise measurement of the resulting particle (ground)
motion and associated stress fields in these experiments. A full suite of
optical diagnostics, such as time resolved interferometry techniques and high
speed digital photography will enable high resolution measurements of stress and
ground motion at an array of fixed measurement stations in addition to full
field characterization of radiated wave fields. Collectively, these advanced
laboratory earthquake capabilities will permit the experimental investigation of
numerous long standing problems of seismological relevance. Research findings
will help to bridge the gap between empirical evidence obtained from the field
and computational predictions with obvious potential benefits to seismology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this research necessarily
involves assigning priorities to the many goals within individual disciplines.
In particular, two main characteristics are reflected in the design of the new
experiments. Firstly, the experimental design is intended to be as relevant as
possible to the geophysical systems that they model. Secondly, the experimental
configuration is kept as basic as possible so that real-time data collection and
analyses can produce, unequivocal, understanding of the phenomena under
scrutiny. The proposed experimental investigations will address and resolve many
controversies regarding the dynamics of earthquakes. New findings from such
benchmark experiments will provide data to modelers that will subsequently aid
in the validation of various kinematic inversion and dynamic rupture models. The
research is designed to facilitate connections in seismology and earthquake
hazard mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following list provides an overview
of the proposed instrumentation enhancements and outlines the broader impacts of
this proposal in a number of targeted areas of seismology. Primary research
objectives &lt;br/&gt;are: &lt;br/&gt;Setting up highly instrumented Laboratory
Earthquake experiments especially designed to study a variety of rupture
phenomena and to serve as benchmarks for the validation of analytical and
numerical models of dynamic earthquake rupture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simultaneously measuring ground motion, slip velocity, and
the complete stress tensor in the local vicinity of propagating ruptures.
Combining high temporal resolution, point-wise measurements, obtained at
multiple stations, along with spatially resolved full-field measurements to
study dynamic frictional laws in the presence of non-uniform sliding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the highly controlled laboratory environment to
clearly identify the dominant and distinguishing signatures of radiated ground
motion resulting from either sub-Rayleigh or supershear ruptures and from their
transitions in both speed and mode (pulse-like vs. crack-like). Investigating
the unknown effect of supershear events on seismic hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying rupture propagation through complex geometries
and characterize the high frequency content of the strong ground motion from
such events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introducing complex and more realistic fault
geometry benchmarks and measuring final slip distribution, in addition to time-
resolved multi-station recordings, in order to validate kinematic inversion
codes.