* 0911565
* Three-Dimensional Models of Faulting During Oblique Continental Extension
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Roger Buck, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2012
* USD 255,968.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A newly developed three dimensional
numerical modeling code that can deal with elasto-visco-plastic deformation will
be used to study the controls on faulting during oblique continental extension.
This project is a two-phase study that focuses on the controls on patterns of
tectonic extension of continental lithosphere. The first phase of the project
deals with general questions about the physics of fault development and builds
directly on previous work on two dimensional extensional faulting: (1)
determination of fault weakening parameters that are needed to match normal
fault population statistics for natural and analog studies: size frequency
distribution and length offset ratios of model and observed faults would be
considered; (2) the effect of elasticity on the pattern of faulting, which has
bearing on which numerical methods most efficiently simulate faulting during
lithospheric extension. In the second phase of the project, three natural type
examples of oblique rifting will be modeled, each of which extended with
different initial conditions of thermal and crustal thickness: (1) a region
where the crust was likely cold at the time of rifting in order to assess the
degree of pre-heating of the rift zone that is needed to explain the along-axis
segmentation and across-axis structure of faulting in the Gulf of Suez; (2) a
region of moderately thick, warm crust, where highly oblique extension was
apparently accommodated by two distinct geometries of transtension to determine
what is needed to produce the change from strain partitioning to transtension
seen in the Gulf of California; (3) extension of thick, hot crust that may have
led to the formation of metamorphic core complexes in places like the Colorado
River Extensional Corridor to evaluate if buoyant pluton emplacement is needed
for the formation of domal cores of metamorphic core complexes. All the models
would consider extreme amounts of oblique extension of areas with thin
lithosphere and one suite of models would include a buoyant mid-crustal
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The breakup of continents controls the shape of the
Earth's surface and directly affects regional and global climate. Besides
curiosity about geography and climate there are economic reasons to study the
how breakup, or rifting, occurs. Much of the world's hydrocarbon reserves were
formed and preserved in the geologic structures of rifted continental margins.
The research team has recently advanced the hypothesis that continental breakup
occurs only under one of two special circumstances: when injection of magmatic
dikes heats and weakens the lithosphere or when thickening the crust during
mountain building also warms and weakens the lithosphere. The goal of this
project is to investigate how these very different processes may produce the
great variety of structures observed at rifted continental margins. To study the
development of rift structures advanced numerical models, similar to those used
by engineers to design structures that do not fail under reasonable loads will
be employed. These models differ from most engineering models in that how
multiple failure or slip events on faults combine to produce structures on a
very large spatial and temporal scale are considered. Previously, some of these
structures have been modeled in two dimensions. Now, the combination of better
numerical methods and bigger computer clusters permits examination of how these
structures develop in three dimensions. This is particularly important since
some of the structures are intrinsically three dimensional. By trying to
reproduce the observed patterns of faults, crustal thickness, and topography the
strength of faults may be constrained and aid in understanding earthquake
behavior.