* 0911289
* Deformation and Microstructural Evolution of Harzburgite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2013
* USD 285,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

Plate tectonics is a unifying theory in the Earth sciences that describes the
processes by which Earth?s surface shifts along narrow boundaries. These plate
boundaries are of tremendous importance to society, as they represent the foci
of many natural hazards, including earthquakes and volcanoes. To understand the
behavior of plate boundaries it is essential that we understand the physical
properties of material within these boundaries. This award is funding an effort
to simulate the behavior of materials at these conditions. To simulate this
behavior, a number of specialized apparatuses are needed, including large
pneumatic or hydraulic presses to generate high pressure conditions. Analysis of
the experiments takes place using a particular type of camera in a high-
resolution scanning electron microscope. The data that are collected in this
study will help us understand the physical processes that occur along plate
margins, which will inform a broad spectrum of geophysical research.

It is evident from studies of naturally deformed peridotites that deformation
microstructures such as lattice-preferred orientation (LPO), grain-size and
shape, and phase segregation (or mixing), continue to evolve beyond the strains
achieved in almost all deformation experiments. As deformation microstructures
affect both rheology and the interpretation of geological and geophysical data,
it is important for us to study their formation and evolution. Two series of
experiments are being conducted. (1) The first set of experiments investigates
microstructural and rheological evolution of dunite and harzburgite during
deformation to very large strains (&#947;>10). (2) The second series of
experiments will introduce additional complexity by changing the sense of shear
during experiments to analyze the feedback between the kinematics of deformation
and the kinetics of microstructural and rheological evolution. These experiments
are being conducted in a Paterson-type gas medium apparatus with torsion
capability; additional experiments will be conducted in a rotational Drickamer
apparatus currently under construction. Microstructural analysis will be
conducting using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), as well as other
optical and electron microscope-based techniques. The data collected in this
study will improve our understanding of (1) the effects of secondary phases on
deformation in the mantle, (2) physical processes in mantle shear zones, and (3)
seismic anisotropy in corner flow environments such as subduction zones and mid-
ocean ridges.

