* 0911457
* Super-eruptions, Eruptive Centers and Time-volume Behavior of a Continental Hotspot: The Central Snake River Plain
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Garret Hart, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2012
* USD 210,593.00

The largest and potentially most devastating types of volcanic eruptions are
known as super-eruptions. Such events are outside human experience, yet it is
quite certain that they will occur in the future. Despite some public awareness
of these rare but potentially devastating events, there is a shortfall of basic
research into their ultimate origins, immediate causes, and environmental
impacts. In North America, the most prolific source of super-eruptions for the
past 16 million years has been the Snake River Plain-Yellowstone hotspot trace,
stretching from SW Idaho and northern Nevada to Yellowstone itself. The most
intense episode in this region occurred between ~12 and 9 Ma, with the eruption
of the order of 10,000 - 20,000 km3 of rhyolite (for reference, the 1980
eruption of Mount St. Helens involved less than 1 km3 of magma). The magmas
erupted during this flare-up were high-temperature rhyolites, an unusual type of
magma that has been somewhat neglected in the past and only now is being
thoroughly studied with respect to its origin, and behavior during large
eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps the most important aspect of these
magmas and the way they erupt is the sheer volume of magma involved in any one
event, which largely determines the magnitude of the environmental impact. This
and other aspects of the eruptions can only be reconstructed through detailed
mapping of volcanic units in the field, a difficult project that requires the
full-time attention of an experienced researcher. Therefore, this project will
fund a post-doctoral researcher who will be charged with tying together
different rock outcrops to establsh unit correlations and volumes, and to use
these data to establish the volume and frequency of rhyolitic eruptions from the
central Snake River Plain. The work will additionally involve mineral and
chemical analysis to fingerprint individual units, and radiometric dating to
establish absolute ages. All this information will be used constrain genesis and
storage history of the rhyolitic magmas in conjunction with new and existing
petrologic data. The results will help inform our understanding of Earth's
continental crust during major episodes of volcanism (ultimately driven by
unusually high heat flux from the mantle), and provide a basis for assessing the
degree of enviromental disruption that might be expected from the next such
event.