* 0911350
* Strength of continental lithosphere in western China from seismic body wave studies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Vadim Levin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2011
* USD 133,227.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the basic tenets of plate
tectonics is that quasi-rigid plates traverse the surface of the Earth, with
significant deformations confined to regions near plate boundaries. While this
idea works well in the oceans, it has had to be modified substantially in the
continents, where active mountain building and seismicity related to the
continental collision can be located thousands of kilometers away from the plate
boundary. The present-day continental collision between India and Eurasia is
arguably the best natural laboratory were we can investigate relationships
between stresses applied to the lithosphere and resulting deformation at depth.
We will investigate seismic activity within and around the Tarim basin ? a
largely un-deformed area between the highly deformed Tibetan Plateau and the
Tien Shan mountains. Where earthquakes are (and are not) taking place in this
region will help us understand how the body of the continent is responding to
the stress applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be done in collaboration
with the Provincial Bureau of Seismology in Xinjiang (China), and will hopefully
lead to further scientific collaboration between US and Chinese researchers. Our
findings will advance our understanding of the lithospheric deformation in
continental regions. Since this deformation is often accomplished through
destructive earthquakes, our work will have direct implications for
understanding of seismic activity in continental regions. Specific results will
directly benefit the seismic hazard monitoring and mitigation needs of the
Xinjiang region of China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic activity represents a
response of the lithosphere to stress, and regions of intense deformation of
continental lithosphere are the best places to find observational evidence for
the strength distribution within it. Arguments in favor of locating continental
lithosphere?s strength in both the upper crust and the uppermost mantle rely, in
part, on the rare but significant occurrence of subcrustal earthquakes in the
continental lithosphere. However, whether earthquakes do indeed occur beneath
the crust of the continental lithosphere is not universally accepted. Arguments
for and against the notion of subcrustal lithosphere being strong enough to
permit brittle failure hinge on identifying earthquake hypocenters located
within it. The difficulty arises from uncertainties in both earthquake locations
and crustal thicknesses in areas where sub-crustal earthquakes have been
previously reported. One such area is the Tarim basin, and the surrounding
mountainous regions (Kunlun and Tien Shan). Data from the regional seismic
monitoring efforts, previously not available for study, will enable us to
develop highly accurate hypocentral parameters for earthquakes in the region,
and also to establish with high fidelity the depth of the crust-mantle
transition. We will perform, in a coordinated manner, analyses of crustal
structure (using teleseismic body wave methods) and hypocentral parameters of
local earthquakes (using regional centroid moment tensor inversions). We expect
to resolve the key uncertainty (whether there are earthquakes below the crust
mantle transition) and to develop a nuanced understanding of the way regional
lithosphere is deforming at depth.