* 0911093
* Modification of Primary Magma Composition Through Reaction With Lower Crust: Insights from Icelandic Glass Bearing Crustal Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Alison Shaw, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2012
* USD 236,063.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Partial melting in
the Earth's mantle and subsequent melt transport contribute to the formation of
a new oceanic and continental crust, affect low-temperature surface processes
and have significant impact on chemistry of the atmosphere. Compositions of
primitive basaltic magmas ideally provide the most direct information about
magma generation at depth, but they may be modified by melt-rock interaction
during transport to the surface. To evaluate how extensively chemical
compositions of primary magmas may be modified during migration through crustal
rocks, this project will investigate compositions of crustal partial melts as
represented by glasses in crustal xenoliths from Icelandic volcanics. Iceland
provides an ideal setting for the proposed study because it has an anomalously
thick crust situated on a mid-ocean ridge where, otherwise, normal MORB-like
initial primitive melt compositions are expected to rise from mantle depths.
This work will involve systematic study of major and trace element compositions
of minerals and glasses and determination of temperature, pressure, redox
conditions. Boron isotopes in quenched glasses associated with crustal xenoliths
and their transporting magmas will be used as an independent proxy for magma
contamination. Special attention will be given to U-Pb geochronology and Ti-
geothermometry of zircons, which are abundant in leucocratic xenoliths; the aim
is to determine the age of parent plutonic bodies and temperature range of their
formation, thereby constraining time scales of the consequent melt/rock reaction
processes. A combination of petrographic methods, conventional whole rock
analytical and microanalytical techniques i.e., Laser Ablation Inductively-
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), Electron Probe Microanalysis
(EMPA) and Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS or Ion Microprobe) will be used
to achieve the goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposal will
provide a basis for professional development of the PI who is a new NENIMF
manager and also a new NSF PI. The project will help revitalize interest of the
scientific community in using the WHOI ion probe facility, which was seriously
damaged in a fire in October 2002. Finally, the project will foster
international collaboration between Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (A.
Gurenko) and South Iceland Nature Center (Ingvar A. Sigurdsson).&lt;br/&gt;