* 0911268
* Collaborative Research: A global examination of the subduction zone flow field from seismic anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 09/30/2013
* USD 141,109.00

What happens when a tectonic plate plunges back into the Earth?s interior at a
subduction zone? Surprisingly, this simple question remains one of the
fundamental unsolved problems in earth science. The flow pattern around the
downgoing plate (often called the slab) is typically studied using seismic
anisotropy, a property of the mantle that can be detected by recording seismic
waves. In particular, measurements of shear wave splitting can be used to
characterize seismic anisotropy in subduction zones. It is increasingly clear
from such measurements that the simplest model of two-dimensional corner flow
above the slab and entrained flow beneath the slab is likely incorrect. However,
consensus on an alternative model has not been forthcoming. In this project, we
will undertake a global survey of shear wave splitting observations with the
goal of understanding what controls the mantle flow field in subduction zone
regions. To do this, we will identify parameters that describe subduction zone
dynamics that appear to exert a first-order control on shear wave splitting.
Preliminary work has identified systematic variations in anisotropy both above
and below the slab linked with the magnitude of trench migration velocity. This
has led to the hypothesis that 3-D flow dominates beneath the slab and interacts
with 2-D corner flow in the mantle wedge. In addition to a systematic evaluation
of seismic anisotropy in subduction zones, we will construct laboratory and
numerical models of mantle flow above and below the slab to identify diagnostic
features of the flow field in shear wave splitting measurements and to explore
the implications of our model for mantle dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project constitutes an interdisciplinary effort to understand and characterize
the character of the mantle flow field that accompanies subduction using
observations of seismic anisotropy and geodynamical modeling. With the
increasing popularity of shear wave splitting as a tool for mapping mantle flow,
a copious amount of data from subduction zones is now available. It is timely,
therefore, to undertake a global survey of splitting observations with the goal
of understanding which subduction parameters (such as convergence velocity,
trench migration and curvature, age and spreading history of the downgoing
plate, slab dip and morphology, seismicity, arc length, overriding plate
thickness and stress, and volcanic production) appear to control the subduction
zone flow field. From a preliminary survey, we hypothesize that 3-D flow
dominates beneath the slab and that this flow field interacts with 2-D corner
flow in the mantle wedge. We will complement our primary observational
seismology goals with laboratory and numerical modeling studies. This forward
modeling work will be used to validate the predictions of our working model,
formulate alternative hypotheses, identify any second-order effects on the flow
field, and explore the implications of our working model for larger-scale mantle
dynamics. The availability of constraints on anisotropy from many regions around
the globe and the combination of seismological observations and laboratory and
numerical modeling suggest that a solution to the fundamental problem of
interaction between downgoing slabs and the surrounding mantle is within reach.