* 0911284
* Geometry &amp; Dynamics of Interfaces in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Giordano, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

Geometry and Dynamics of Interfaces in Porous Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L. J.
Pyrak-Nolte &amp; N. J. Giordano&lt;br/&gt;Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;The problem of
multiphase fluid flow in porous media is important in many areas, including
ground water remediation, the extraction of oil &amp; gas from subsurface
reservoirs and carbon sequestration in geologic formations. The development of
experimental and theoretical understandings of the behavior of multiple fluids
in porous systems is an active area of research with many open questions. It is
known that measurements of capillary pressure (Pc) and saturation (Sw) are not
sufficient to fully describe the behavior of fluid distributions. Recent work
has suggested that the interfacial area per volume between the fluid phases
(awn) is an essential third "state variable" needed for a description of these
systems. While studies of 2-D micro-models under equilibrium conditions has
provided important quantitative insight into the role of interfacial geometry in
multiphase systems, key issues remain to be resolved. Scientific objectives of
the proposed research include:&lt;br/&gt; (1) Determine if and how the Pc-Sw-awn
relationship observed in 2-D systems translates to 3-D systems. We will
fabricate 3-D transparent micro-models for direct imaging of fluid distributions
in 3-D using confocal laser scanning microscopy. A significant effort will be
made to develop 3-D transparent micro-models from which information can be
extracted on fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interfaces to determine the effect of
micro-model dimensionality on the Pc-Sw-awn relationship.&lt;br/&gt; (2)
Determine the role of thin films on Pc and on the interfacial geometry. We will
1) use laser confocal microscopy to image films, film pockets and three
dimensional fluid interfaces-especially the presence and movement of entrained
wetting phase and associated films; and (2) fabricate micro-capacitor sensors
inside the 2-D micro-models to measure film thickness directly. A significant
effort will be made to demonstrate the use, resolution and repeatability of
micro-capacitors for measuring local pressures in the micro-model.&lt;br/&gt;
(3) Determine if relaxation behavior under dynamic conditions depends on the
evolution of the interfacial geometry with time, or if it is only a property of
the pore geometry of the medium. While understanding fluid distributions under
equilibrium conditions is important, many industrial and natural systems
experience pressure transients. We will use high frame rate imaging to study the
dynamic behavior of fluid interfaces in 2-D micro-models as they approach
equilibrium after a pressure transient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;