* 0911430
* Magma Residence and Recharge in Thick Continental Crust:  Volcan Maipo, Andean Southern Volcanic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,511.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to determine
the nature of continental crust involvement in the generation of a suite of
lavas erupted over the past ~86 thousand years at Volcán Maipo, one of the
northernmost volcanoes of the Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ) of the Andes. Five of
the six worst volcanic disasters that have occurred since 1600 AD have occurred
at subduction zones, including the 1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz in the
Northern Andes that claimed the lives of &gt;25,000 people. Recent volcanic
activity in the Andean SZV includes eruptions at both Llaima and Chaitén in
Chile. The eruption of Chaitén after ten thousand years of dormancy necessitated
the evacuation of more than 4,000 people, reminding us that we must be mindful
of volcanic processes in the Andes at al times. Volcán Maipo is located within
150 km of the populous cities of Santiago del Chile and Mendoza, Argentina, and
the ash from an ancient eruption of this volcanic system underlies the modern
city of Santiago. The volcano itself lies within a popular national park, and
less than 10 km from an international gas pipeline. The combination of high
population density, threat to public utilities, and historic volcanic activity
make study of this volcano acutely pertinent. Understanding the role of
continental crust in modifying the composition and transport of magma at
subduction zones will provide information that may be of use in understanding
the hazards posed by the Cascades volcanoes, which currently threaten major
metropolitan areas of the American Northwest including Seattle and Portland. The
proposed study will support a PhD student for 3 years, helping to prepare a new
generation of American scientists. The study also supports collaboration between
an early-career female US scientist and a senior female Argentine
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is generally understood that magmas are
generated at subduction zones by fluid-fluxed melting of the mantle wedge to
generate Mg-rich basalts and basaltic andesites. However, the bulk of the lavas
erupted at subduction zones are evolved andesites to dacites. The proposed work
will test the hypothesis that the bulk of chemical differentiation occurs in a
lower crustal hot zone, followed by some degree of continued differentiation
through repeated cycles of magma recharge in an upper crustal magma chamber
prior to eruption. The specific hypotheses to be addressed are: 1)
Differentiation from mantle-derived basaltic magma to fractionated basaltic
andesite occurs in the lowermost crust; 2) Continuous differentiation from
basaltic andesite to dacite proceeds in the deep crustal hot zone by fractional
crystallization of garnet and plagioclase; 3) Magma crystallizes in the shallow
crustal chamber through multiple episodes of recharge by fresh magma from the
lower crustal system until the time of eruption. Whole rock major element, trace
element, and isotopic data for a suite of rocks ranging from basaltic andesites
to dacites will help to address hypotheses (1) and (2), and in situ analysis of
major element, trace element, and Sr isotope zonation in plagioclase phenocrysts
will help to address hypothesis (3), while also helping to determine the
relative amounts of differentiation taking place in the shallow crustal magma
chamber and the deep crustal hot zone.&lt;br/&gt;