* 0911326
* Making Pots and Breaking Rocks: Understanding the Organization of Craft Production in Ancestral Polynesian Society on Tutuila Island, American Samoa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Suzanne Eckert, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2011
* USD 137,413.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Suzanne Eckert will investigate
pottery and stone tool production during the Polynesian Plain Ware Period on
Tutuila Island, American Samoa. Although ethnographic Polynesia is one of the
model societies for which the development of chiefdoms in other parts of the
world is compared, and craft production is recognized as an important aspect of
such development, very little is known about the specifics of production in
ancestral Polynesian society. Were early Polynesians making items in their own
homes for their own uses? Were talented craftspeople producing more difficult-
to-make items for use by their community? Were specialists making highly sought
after items specifically for chiefs to use? Answers to these questions will help
unravel the complexities of how craft production articulated with political
organization as well as create an avenue through which models for production
organization in chiefdom-level societies throughout time and space can be
evaluated and refined archaeologically.

Answering the above questions requires an understanding of how and where
artifacts were produced. Attribute analyses focused on form, function, and style
will provide insights into the technology of pottery and stone tool production
on Tutuila, nd provide insight into the skill level of individual artisans, as
well as the relative number and concentration of producers. Data informing on
where artifacts were produced requires more technical studies. Specifically,
Laser Ablation Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) will be
used to determine which clays on island were used to produce pottery, while
Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF) will be used to determine which
basalt quarries were used for stone tool production during this period. Through
the use of exploratory data analyses, the collected LA-ICP-MS and EDXRF data
will be used to group ceramic and lithic samples, respectively, into chemical
compositional groupings. These groupings, when matched to geological sources,
will represent evidence of production within a specific area or village.

Once completed, this study will have broader impacts in at least five realms.
First, as the first study specifically designed to explore the organization of
both pottery and stone-tool production during this period in Samoa, this study
will add substantially to the growing body of knowledge on the development of
ancestral Polynesian craft production. Second, by providing data comparable to
studies performed on other islands, this study will allow for a discussion of
production organization in Samoa in perspective with production organization in
other areas of the South Pacific. Third, this study will augment understanding
of the roles that production and played in the development and maintenance of
chiefdoms. Fourth, Samoan and U.S. students will participate in this project to
enhance their training and increase their knowledge of Polynesian prehistory.
Fifth, during this research the people of Samoa will be informed of the ongoing
research in order to promote archaeological awareness. In recent years, some
Samoans have challenged the value of historic preservation; in response, this
research will help to provide a positive framework for Samoan views of
archaeology and historic preservation.