* 0911598
* Collaborative Research: Continuation and Termination of  Karakorum and Karakax Faults in Western Tibet: Implications for the Role of Regional Strike-slip Faults in Orogenic Belts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Robinson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2013
* USD 173,357.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of large strike-slip faults in
the evolution of the Himalayan-Tibetan orogen is a topic of continued debate,
with considerable focus on the Altyn Tagh and Karakorum fault systems. Two
primary families of models have emerged regarding the importance and role of
these faults in the orogen that predict that these faults are either: 1) first
order, long lived features in the Himalayan-Tibetan orogen that are currently
active and have interacted in the past to accommodate lateral extrusion of
continental crust; or 2) second order features with complicated histories that
may be transient in nature and may not have interacted. Differentiating these
models has been difficult due to the lack of data from the northwestern and
western portions of the Karakorum and Altyn Tagh fault systems, respectively. In
the southeast Pamir Mountains these faults lie within 50 kilometers of each
other within valleys that preserve numerous generations of Neogene to Quaternary
surficial deposits. This collaborative research project between U.S., Canadian,
and Chinese scientists and students is: 1) determining the Quaternary slip
histories of the two faults through detailed field mapping of the bedrock
geology and surficial deposits, landscape analysis, and determination of rates
of active deformation through terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide surface exposure
and optically stimulated luminescence dating of Quaternary glacial moraine,
fluvial terrace, and loess deposits, and 2) investigating possible interactions
between the two fault systems though detailed structural mapping of the two
faults as well as the region between the currently identified fault strands.
This research will provide new information to address questions regarding the
role, evolution, and interaction of large strike-slip faults in continental
collision zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A general question within the geologic
community is the role of large strike-slip faults in continental collision
zones. This question is of particular interest in regards to the Himalayan-
Tibetan region, the world?s largest active continental collision zone, which has
several strike-slip faults over 1000 km in length. Two competing general
hypotheses are that these faults either 1) play a significant long-term role in
the evolution of the collision zone accommodating hundreds of kilometers of
displacement and interacting to allow lateral motion of crust out of the way of
India as it moves northward relative to Asia, or 2) are transient features
accommodating relatively small amounts of displacement (approximately 100-150
kilometers) that do not interact with each other. This study of the largest
strike-slip faults in the India-Asia collision zone, the Altyn Tagh and
Karakorum faults in the southeast Pamir Mountains, will evaluate the recent
activity of these faults, the role of they have played in the collision zone,
and whether they have or are interacting with each other. As the Altyn Tagh and
Karakorum faults are type examples of large strike-slip faults in continental
collision zones, the results from this study will provide important new
information on the role and evolution of these structures.