* 0911028
* SBIR Phase I:  A Fully Integrated Molecular Biosensor for Rapid Monitoring of Recreational Water
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Richard Montagna, Rheonix, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,928.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
design of a fully automated biosensor that will detect fecal contamination in
recreational (beach) waters with "same day" results. The sophistication built
into the CARD sensor will eliminate virtually all "hands-on" efforts and permit
complicated tests to be performed by individuals of varying skill levels
(including unskilled). Successful completion of this project will not only
reduce the time to results from the 1-2 days now required to perform the
currently approved EPA methods, but will also allow EPA to satisfy a court
ordered mandate to achieve "same day" results for beach monitoring. This will
improve the health and safety of bathers and reduce the unnecessary concern on
the part of beach users who may have used a beach in the several days leading up
to a beach closing announcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this research are that the underlying technology has direct applications in
multiple market niches including human and veterinary diagnostics, personalized
medicine, drinking water/food/beverage testing, and monitoring of pharmaceutical
and personal care products for microbial contamination. Our proprietary and
inexpensive production methods can be used to produce the disposable CARD
microfluidic devices which can then be inserted into a portable (AC or DC
powered) control box, complete with the software required to control all aspects
of the assays (i.e., time and volumes of each step, flow rates, temperatures,
etc.). Taken together, the CARD system can be implemented with reduced training
and expense in growing markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).