* 0911785
* SBIR Phase I:  Identifying and Interpreting Trends through News/Blog Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Mark Fasciano, General Sentiment, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

The Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will investigate a
news/blog analysis system to support the commercialization of a product for
market research and trends analysis. By performing natural language /
statistical analysis on roughly 1,000 U.S. and international news sources
retrieved on a daily basis, the tool can monitor spatial and temporal trends in
the presence, reputation, and linkage among news entities such people, places,
and companies/organizations. This project will focus on computational research
issues associated with improving the performance and versatility of the proposed
algorithms for sentiment detection (positive and negative associations) and
social network analysis. The effort will also undertake the critical task of
transferring the technology from an academic computing environment to a modern
cloud computing infrastructure yielding increased reliability and the potential
to scale the news analysis to vastly larger-scale text corpuses.

If successful, the news analysis databases created under this proposal will be
widely used in a broad range of trends analysis research and applications. It
will help business, government and academic researchers to make wiser social and
economic decisions, by empowering them to conduct their own primary studies on
historical trends and social forces. The market opportunity addressed represents
significant commercial potential across a wide range of vertical segments.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).