* 0911652
* Collaborative Research: Geological Investigations of Non-Andersonian Conjugate Strike-slip Faults in Central Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Michael Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2012
* USD 136,097.00

A foundation of Earth Sciences is the ability to relate spatial arrangements of
geologic features such as tectonic plate boundaries, earthquake-related
ruptures, mountain uplifts and fault patterns in general to their causative
forces. In this regard, geoscientists have long used the experimentally
established Coulomb fracture criterion, which predicts certain angular
relationships between faults, to explain the dynamic causes of fault formation.
This approach has faced increasing difficulties as more and systematic
observations show that many natural faults defy these angular relationships.
This research will involve the use of a new experimental apparatus to simulate
natural faulting, as well as an examination of the geometric evolution of large
fault systems in central Tibet, to determine if a mechanical principle different
to the Coulomb criterion is needed to explain the geometry of natural faults.

Our ability to interpret lithospheric deformation, and perhaps more importantly
the coupling between the flowing middle and fracturing upper crust, depends
critically on the knowledge that relates observed fault geometries to causative
dynamic conditions. The most commonly used relationship in this regard is the
Coulomb fracture criterion that predicts X-shaped conjugate faults oriented at
~30° from the maximum compressive-stress direction. In nature, X-shaped
conjugate fault geometries in strike-slip systems are rarely observed, and while
fault geometries can be complex and difficult to interpret due to post-faulting
deformation, V-shaped geometries with faults orientated at 60-75º from sigma one
have been essentially overlooked. These V-shaped fault systems are common in
nature with prominent large-scale examples in the Alpine-Himalayan collision
zone. These investigators will test whether V-shaped conjugate faults in central
Tibet were created by vertical-axis rotation or paired-general-shear flow by
performing structural mapping and paleomagnetic analysis. The results and
associated models should have important implications for whether the large-scale
deformation of continents is fundamentally plate-like or fluid-like over
geologic timescales.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).