* 0911482
* Incorporation of effects of diffusion on longitudinal dispersion by advection
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Allen Hunt, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 42,066.00

Dispersion is the process by which particles entrained in flow through a porous
medium spread in time and space. This spreading is seldom Gaussian, having much
fatter (power-law) tails, and cannot be predicted using conventional partial
differential equations. We build on an existing procedure that utilized prior
calculations of the distribution of particle velocities and path lengths to
predict the distribution of solute arrival times neglecting molecular diffusion.
The calculations were based on a fusion of percolation theoretical techniques:
cluster statistics of percolation theory, critical path analysis, and path
tortuosity. Each flow path is defined through the smallest (rate-limiting)
conductance on that path. The long-time tail in the distribution of arrival
times relates to those tortuous paths of particle transport near the percolation
threshold. When diffusion is included, however, particles cannot stay on these
paths for such long times and power law behavior grades into Gaussian behavior
at long distances (as is already known to occur for an individual capillary).
Effects of diffusion relative to flow are estimated using a quantity called the
Peclet number, Pe. We find that Gaussian behavior sets on at a distance which is
proportional to a power of Pe. Our proposed research includes: 1) Generating the
probability, fi, that a particle diffuses off a flow path at pore i, 2) Using fi
to generate the probability that a particle stays on a particular flow path to
an arbitrary length and incorporate into existing code, 3) Relating the
resulting distribution of arrival times, W(t), at arbitrary spatial position, x,
to a spatial solute distribution, W(x) at arbitrary time, t, 4) Calculating the
moments of the spatial solute distribution. Understanding spatio-temporal
evolution of the concentrations of solutes is important in monitoring subsurface
spills, evaluating groundwater age distributions, guiding plant uptake of
minerals and fertilizers, and design of enhanced oil-recovery processes. Thus
this research can enhance understanding of processes relevant to agriculture,
oil and mining industries, toxic waste clean up and risk assessment, geological
sequencing, and groundwater age and source estimation. The second potential
impact of our work is that it could lead to a change in perspective of the
people in this field of research, with renewed emphasis on techniques other than
those of continuum mechanics and the associated differential equations.