* 0911098
* Ore Metals in Magmatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Philip Candela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2013
* USD 398,729.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research is designed to fill critical gaps in our knowledge concerning the
magmatic partitioning of selected elements among sulfides, Fe-(Cu)-S-O melts,
and selected oxides and silicates. These elements fall into two important groups
found in magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits: the Mo-W group, and the Cu-Ag-Au
group. This project builds on previous work on the experimental determination of
the mineral/melt partition coefficients of many ore and related elements in
felsic melt - vapor - brine - oxide - pyrrhotite systems by studying the
partitioning of Mo, W, Ag and Au among melts, sulfides, oxides, and silicate
minerals under well specified, low-variance conditions. In detail, this work
involves: [1] Comprehensive evaluation of the effects of sulfur and oxygen
fugacity on ore metal partitioning among magmatic phases; [2] LA-ICP-MS analysis
of selected elements (many of which were difficult to study in the past); and
[3] Expand the range of mineral/melt pairs to be investigated to include rock-
forming silicates. New and previously collected partitioning data will be used
to quantitatively evaluate competing hypotheses regarding magmatic processes
that contribute to ore metal diversity in magmatic-hydrothermal deposits.
Important parameters needed for such models are estimates of the proportion of
metals lost to crystallization before magmas reach shallow crustal
depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Beyond the collection of important
data on ore metal partitioning, and the fundamentals of their redistribution in
the crust, these data will also serve as a basis for the construction of
exploration models for porphyry deposits. The research group has an excellent
track record of involving a mix of high school, undergraduate, masters and
doctoral students in active research. All graduate students are involved in
undergraduate teaching. Additionally, faculty and students participate in, and
highlight their research in Maryland Day (held in April each year); the campus
attracts an average of some 70,000 visitors for this event. Furthermore, the PIs
actively participate in outreach in a variety of formats (science lectures in a
retirement community and a church group; Partners in Education Program (PEP)
sponsored by GSA; training for the Ranger Interpreter Program in Yosemite
National Park for the National Park Service; visits to local Maryland elementary
schools as part of the earth science curriculum; and lectures to local gem and
lapidary societies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;