* 0911616
* A molecular balance for studying the non-covalent interactions of aromatic surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ken Shimizu, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 460,000.00

The goal of this project is to study the weak attractive forces between aromatic
surfaces. A better understanding of these cohesive forces will allows chemists
to design better pharmaceuticals, stronger material and more efficient
catalysts. Despite their importance, current models are not able to accurately
predict the strength of these interactions due to a lack of experimental data.
The difficulty is that these interactions are very weak and are hard to measure
accurately. The Shimizu group's solution is to use molecular balances to measure
these interactions. The balances have two aromatic surfaces connected together
by a hinge. When the hinge is closed, the surfaces are forced together, and when
the hinge is open, the surfaces are forced apart. Therefore, the molecular
balances are very sensitive to the magnitude of the attractive forces between
the aromatic surfaces. Measuring the ratio of balances in the open and closed
states provides a direct and accurate measure of the attractive forces. The
group plans to synthesize balances with different aromatic surfaces and test
them in a range of chemical environments in order to study systematically the
factors that favor and disfavor aromatic-aromatic interactions. The broader
scientific impact of this research will be improved predictive models for the
rational design for pharmaceuticals, materials, and catalysts. Specifically, the
data acquired in this project will be used in formulating and testing new
computational models of aromatic-aromatic interactions. The boarder educational
aims will be: 1) training of graduate and undergraduate student in
interdisciplinary research, 2) K-12 outreach where the PI and graduate students
give chemistry demonstrations at local elementary, middle, and high schools, 3)
support of undergraduate research and 4) the development of a high
school/undergraduate laboratory specifically based on the molecular balance
research. This laboratory will be tested in our SCienceLab program, which brings
a high school class to the University for a full day, hands-on laboratory.