* 0911569
* Laboratory Study of Fault Healing and Frictional Properties: Role of Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Derek Elsworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2012
* USD 374,643.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will investigate slip on tectonic faults and important processes
that occur during earthquakes. We will focus on the frictional strength of
faults and the role of underground fluids in modifying fault strength. Damaging
earthquakes occur on major tectonic faults in a sequence that is often separated
by 50 to 100 years or more. One important question for seismic hazard analysis
is that of how fault strength is regained between earthquakes ?so called fault
healing. This project will investigate fault healing via a combination of
detailed laboratory experiments coupled with computational modeling and
microscope-based studies of the fault zone textures. Faults in Earth's crust
undergo a range of slip behaviors including earthquakes and non-damaging 'creep'
events in which slip occurs without releasing damaging seismic waves. One of the
goals of this project is to determine the microscopic and larger-scale factors
that cause each type of slip behavior. This information will help us build more
realistic models for seismic hazard around the country. Results of the project
are expected to have significant impact on understanding faults and earthquakes
including triggering of seismic and aseismic fault slip, fault interaction, and
seismic hazard assessment.

Fault healing plays a central role in earthquake rupture processes at time
scales ranging from tectonic to elastodynamic. Frictional healing (as evidenced
by increasing static friction during quasi-stationary contact) is considered the
most likely mechanism of interseismic and dynamic fault strengthening, and there
is good agreement between laboratory-based friction laws and field observations
of fault healing in some cases. However, laboratory data are limited in quantity
and scope. Existing lab data do not provide a consistent explanation of fault
healing as observed via repeating earthquakes, which indicate both increases and
decreases in seismic moment as a function of time between successive events.
Moreover, the physical processes of fault healing and, more generally, the
micro-mechanisms of frictional rate/state effects are poorly understood. This
project will support a multidisciplinary investigation of fault healing. The
work includes two general tasks. 1) Laboratory study of frictional healing and
fault zone transport properties for a range of conditions (shearing rate, gouge
material, normal stress, fluid properties, temperature). Experiments will be
conducted under true-triaxial stress conditions using the double-direct shear
configuration with controlled pore fluid pressure and flow through. We will
measure healing via frictional strength, elastic properties of the fault zone,
and hydraulic transmissivity during shear. Detailed microstructural studies of
the deformed samples will be used to identify processes responsible for healing.
2) Coupled numerical, laboratory, and microstructural studies aimed at
identifying the physico-chemical processes that determine fault healing, creep
consolidation, and time-dependent fault weakening. Preliminary data are
available in each area of proposed study