* 0911577
* Collaborative Research: In Pursuit of Missing Andean Lithosphere: Constraining Late Cenozoic Crust-mantle Processes in the Puna Plateau, Central Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Clementz, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2013
* USD 326,140.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Puna Plateau, northwestern
Argentina, together with the Altiplano of Bolivia, is the second largest plateau
on Earth. One popular model often invoked to explain the present day crustal
structure and elevation of the Central Andean Plateau, including the Argentinean
Puna and the Bolivian Altiplano, is lithospheric delamination. Full, convective
removal of eclogitized lower crust and lithospheric root and subsequent rebound
in the Altiplano of Bolivia is proposed to explain paleoaltimetric evidence for
high magnitude (greater than 2 kilometers) surface uplift. However, the region
of thin crust and lithosphere and of basaltic volcanism originally argued to be
the site of lithospheric removal is located to the south in the Puna Plateau of
Argentina. Moreover, geochemical data suggest the presence of Ordovician
lithosphere beneath the Puna, arguing against complete lithospheric removal. The
objective of this research project is to reconcile the geological observations
with geophysical data in the area of thin crust and mantle lithosphere in the
Puna Plateau. This international effort, lead by researchers at the University
of Wyoming and University of Arizona, is a multidisciplinary investigation
utilizing structural geology, sedimentology and stratigraphy, geochronology,
thermochronology, geochemistry and paleontology, targeting the thinned region in
order to constrain: 1) the history of horizontal shortening and extension; 2)
basin evolution and incision; 3) magma geochemistry; and 4) paleo-environment in
the mid-late Cenozoic. These comprehensive new data are being used as input
parameters to a combined numerical-analog model that will test a set of
hypotheses to explain the present crustal configuration of the Plateau
including: 1) full removal of mantle lithosphere and possibly lower crust
through viscous Rayleigh-Taylor type convective instability; 2) partial removal
of mantle lithosphere and possibly lower crust plateau-wide, leaving a horizon
of uppermost mantle lithosphere intact following viscous convective instability;
3) partial removal of mantle lithosphere and possibly lower crust via small-
scale viscous convective instability; 4) full removal of mantle lithosphere
through; 5) lithospheric extension in a continental back-arc type
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tectonic explanations for the uplift of
large plateaus in orogenic belts, such as the Altiplano in the Andes and the
Tibet plateau, are numerous and controversial. The objective of this project is
to test these models by using geological observations as constraints on
numerical and physical models of the processes. This research will ultimately
constrain the connection between mantle processes on deformation, uplift,
subsidence and magmatism within the Puna Plateau, a natural laboratory that will
serve as an example for other geodynamically similar regions on Earth.