* 0911528
* Ultrafast dynamics, mechanism, and linkage isomerization of photosensitive organometallic manganese and chromium complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Charles Edwin Webster, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 390,000.00

This Research award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professors Theodore Burkey and Charles Edwin Webster at
the University of Memphis to develop photochromic compounds based on the a
migration a transition metal between functional groups. The synthesis of
organometallic compounds with functional groups located at key positions
relative to the metal provides a means to investigate how a metal can migrate
between the functional groups as a mechanism for color change. Studies of new
organometallic photochromic complexes reveal how structural changes 1) improve
the yield per photon, 2) increase rates of the color change caused by the metal
migration, and 3) reduce side reactions such as recombination or solvation that
interfere with the metal migration. The structural changes include functional
groups, the bridge between the metal and functional group, and the bridge
between functional groups. This project trains students and postdoctoral fellows
important to the infrastructure of academic, government, and industrial
institutions in collaborative experimental and computational research. This
project increases the participation of underrepresented groups in chemistry in
our Minority Undergraduate Mentoring and Immersion in Research, American
Chemical Society Project SEED (Summer Research Internship Program for
Economically Disadvantaged High School Students), and National Organization of
Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers at the University of Memphis. Faster, more
stable, and more efficient photochromic organometallics are required in
practical applications of photochromic materials, which have established or
potential use in data storage, optical switches, microfluidic devices,
photoacuators, and smart windows.