* 0911225
* Spectroscopy and Photodissociation Dynamics Imaging of C-C and C-H Bond Activation by Transition Metal and Metal Oxide Cations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ricardo Metz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tanja Pietraß
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry
supports the research of Professor Ricardo Metz and his students at the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Professor Metz will study the spectroscopy
and photodissociation dynamics of the reactants and intermediates of reactions
in which C-C and C-H bonds are activated by transition metal and metal oxide
cations. As a reaction proceeds from reactants to products, it forms several
intermediates (e.g., entrance channel complexes, insertion intermediates, and
exit channel complexes). By studying the structure and bonding of these
intermediates, Metz and his students will be able to characterize the detailed
mechanism for the reaction. Vibrational spectroscopy will be used to study
bonding in the ground electronic states of the ions. A novel photofragment
imaging instrument will be constructed to study ion photodissociation dynamics
following electronic excitation, measuring kinetic energy release and fragment
anisotropy. This will determine precise bond strengths and is a detailed probe
of excited state dynamics and the couplings between excited electronic states.
Reactions to be studied include the conversion of methane to larger hydrocarbons
by metal atoms and clusters and methane to methanol and benzene to phenol
conversion by metal oxides. Photoionization studies of neutral metal oxides and
metal carbenes carried out at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, will measure ionization energies and neutral bond
strengths. Extensive electronic structure calculations will complement the
experiments.

Improved catalysts are needed to make optimal use of limited energy resources,
and fundamental studies of C-H and C-C bond activation aid in this effort by
expanding our understanding of the mechanisms of metal-based catalysis. The
project also provides graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with
extensive training in experimental and computational physical chemistry.