* 0911336
* Early Village Social Dynamics:  Prehistoric Settlement Nucleation on the Great Hungarian Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* William Parkinson, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 257,146.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. William Parkinson and Dr. Richard
Yerkes will work with an international team of colleagues to conduct three
seasons of multi-disciplinary field research in southeastern Hungary. The team
brings together U.S., Hungarian, Greek, and Serbian specialists in archaeology,
paleo-botany, archaeo-zoology, geophysics, soil chemistry, and geomorphology to
examine the development of pre-urban settlements in the Körös Region of the
Great Hungarian Plain within the Carpathian Basin in Central Europe.

Specifically, the team will examine the process of settlement nucleation and
population aggregation as revealed in the archaeology of agricultural villages
during the Middle and Late Neolithic (5,300-4,700 cal BC). The project examines
dramatic changes in socio-economic organization and settlement patterns that
occurred nearly a thousand years after farming was established in the Carpathian
Basin. These changes include natural and cultural processes that led to the
establishment of compact, nucleated, fortified, villages that grew by accretion
into 'tells' (artificial mounds of stratified occupations that spanned several
centuries and consist of layers of leveled wattle-and-daub structures, filled-in
features, and burials). This multi-disciplinary research project at several
Neolithic sites in the Sebes-Körös region, Hungary will test models of
settlement aggregation and nucleation that can be used to explore similar social
processes elsewhere in the world.

The main research objective is to test explanatory models for the emergence of
nucleated agricultural villages that emphasize different causal factors (e.g.,
environmental changes, new animal husbandry practices, intensification of ritual
and warfare, demographic transformation). The multi-disciplinary, international
team will conduct systematic investigations at two tells and contemporary "flat"
(non-tell) sites in the Sebes-Körös Region of Hungary. A geomorphological and
soil coring program aimed at reconstructing the mid-Holocene hydrology of the
region will also be conducted. Most data recovery and analysis will occur in
Hungary, with only some samples for destructive analysis being brought back to
the U.S. Data entry and artifact processing, cleaning, and sorting will occur
daily at the research facility in Vésztõ.

This study of nucleation in ancient village societies contributes to a broader
anthropological understanding of the natural and cultural processes that laid
the foundation for many other social changes, including the emergence of
urbanization, territorialism and the development of economic and political
complexity. By assessing independent lines of evidence, it will be possible to
demonstrate how environmental, ecological, and social factors resulted in
settlement nucleation, and eventually the development of large urban centers.
Investigations of this long-term process on the Great Hungarian Plain will
contribute to a general understanding of the social and structural dynamics
within autonomous village or tribal societies that pushed and pulled them
eventually toward social stratification, hierarchical organization, and
urbanization.

The proposed research will contribute to anthropological knowledge and social
theory, advance international collaboration between American and East European
scholars, and make datasets and research results widely available in public
lectures, scientific journals, websites, and a monograph. It will increase
technological and scientific understanding of the human past, and demonstrate
how current social problems may have originated.