* 0912837
* SBIR Phase I:  Transgenically Mediated Sterility by Targeted Germ Cell Ablation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Xavier Lauth, Aqua Bounty Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,840.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate a new
transgenic approach to induce sterility in economically important species, with
initial applications in aquaculture. This approach will evaluate the potential
to produce transgenic lines of fish capable of passing on the transgene to
subsequent generations through the male lineage while the progeny of transgenic
female would be sterile. This technology should be widely applicable to multiple
fish species, other vertebrates, and invertebrates. Zebrafish will serve as a
primary model and will be used to document sterility at the cellular and
molecular level. Histological and morphological study of the gonad structure in
transgenic adults will confirm functional sterility. We will also confirm that
this approach has broad application by demonstrating feasibility in salmon
embryos.

The broader impacts of this research address a need for improved performance and
reproductive confinement in aquaculture that can be achieved by induced
sterility. This technology should prove applicable to multiple fishes to prevent
gene flow to wild populations, to prevent colonization of new habitats by farmed
non-native species, and to increase culture performance by preventing loss of
energy and condition to gonad development and sexual differentiation.
Sterilization methods will also be a prerequisite for the application of
transgenic improvement to aquaculture species. Besides its application in
aquaculture, this technology should prove broadly applicable to multiple species
and could have additional applications in other economically relevant arenas.

