* 0912463
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost, Robust Multi-Gas Sensors for Environmental Sensing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* John Wilkinson, SENS4
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop a gas sensor technology that is both highly sensitive and selective,
with a rapidity and accuracy not yet seen in commercially available
technologies. This will develop an integrated high performance, low cost, and
compact gas sensor device for environmental monitoring, with emphasis placed on
the early and reliable detection of a variety of prevalent environmental and
industrial airborne contaminants. The sensor system will be fast (i.e., having a
response time &lt;100 milliseconds) while demonstrating a minimum number of
false positives. This detection requires sensors that are prevalent, sensitive,
robust, and inexpensive. Furthermore, the response to targeted gases will be
orthogonal to interfering species while also displaying fast recovery times.
Many types of current gas sensors reveal large interfering sensitivities to
molecules other than those of interest, typically resulting in false positive
signals for the targeted gases. A micro-cantilever-based gas sensor technology
that provides high sensitivity and low cross-sensitivity will be developed. The
proposal will concentrate its efforts on detecting 5 gases of commercial and
environmental importance: CO, NO2, H2S, NH3, and benzene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to meet future environmental safety
standards as outlined by the EPA will require gas sensors with high sensitivity
(ppb level) and low cross-sensitivity. Currently available gas sensors cannot
meet such requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;