* 0912260
* SBIR Phase I: Biomimetic Tactile Sensing for Industrial Robots
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Nicholas Wettels, SynTouch LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is to develop a novel
biomimetic technology for tactile sensing in which all sensors, connections and
circuitry are protected from hostile environments.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
refine existing designs into commercial products and it will test the
transduction properties of the sensors and integrate them with signal processing
electronics into self-contained modules. The immediate goal of the proposed
research is to facilitate the production of customized tactile sensing arrays
that can be incorporated onto mechatronic manipulanda of industrial robots. The
research will include design, production engineering, prototype manufacturing
and testing to achieve and demonstrate the sensitivity, dynamic range and
durability required to perform as an industrial sensor. The results of the
preliminary work show the ability of the technology to detect forces in the
physiological range of a human finger, and to detect vibrations consistent with
slip. Testing the sensitivity will be one key component of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts and commercial potential of the
proposed activities will be the development of a critical capability that will
enable robots to interact with the physical world outside of rigid assembly-line
environments. Importantly, the designs, materials and fabrication methods of the
tactile sensors developed herein shall be suitable to support mass production
and field servicing for robots involved in manufacturing of a wide range of
goods. Commercial robots could have diverse and dramatic impact on society in
manufacturing and service industries by automating repetitive tasks. Robots with
tactile feedback will be able to identify and manipulate a wide range of
objects. Telerobots with such sensors would offer benefits to society by
reducing the need for people to work directly in dangerous
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;