* 0912255
* Collaborative Research: Net Carbon Transport and Reaction in the bottom Boundary Layer of an Upwelling Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2008,12/31/2011
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2011
* USD 380,846.00

ABSTRACT OCE - 0628583

Upwelling coastal margins are regions of intense carbon cycling, air-sea gas
exchange, and redox chemistry where the sea floor, ocean interior, and air-sea
interface are closely coupled. In this research, a multidisciplinary team from
Oregon State University, University of Washington, University of Chicago,
Princeton University, and Columbia University will conduct a coordinated study
of transport and biogeochemical reaction rates within the bottom boundary layer,
and of exchanges across the boundaries between coastal and open ocean; the sea
surface and atmosphere; and the water column and seafloor. They hypothesize that
net carbon fluxes in these settings are governed by the juxtaposition of
physical transport and chemical reaction in the bottom boundary layer. They will
address questions such as how much of the net community carbon production is
ultimately sequestered in the ocean interior and how does this happen, how do
large, fast-growing coastal diatoms responsible for the high net community
production meet their iron demands, and how much mobilized iron and methane
reaches illuminated depths and/or the sea-surface and outgases to the
atmosphere.

These goals will be accomplished with a field program off the Oregon coast that
will include the following: (1) high-resolution surveys of the distributions of
temperature, salinity, velocity, carbon (inorganic pCO2 and TCO2, and
particulate and dissolved organic carbon), methane, and iron in the water
column; (2) deliberate multiple-tracer releases in the bottom boundary layer to
examine physical transport processes, illumination history, and air-sea gas
exchange; (3) direct measurement using benthic flux chambers of transport
between the sediments and the boundary layer; (4) measurement of reactivity of
organic matter, iron and methane in the boundary layer using incubations and
compound specific markers. Data-synthesis, carbon-budgeting, and modeling
efforts will integrate all the field data, incorporate reaction and transport
rates, and generate predictive capabilities that can extend our results to other
upwelling systems.

Among the broader impacts, the research will produce several technological
developments that will have multi-disciplinary applications in earth science.
Eight graduate students from five institutions will participate in this project,
producing either master's degrees or the foundations for doctoral dissertations.
Undergraduate students will participate in the laboratory and fieldwork.
Outreach activities include participation of reporters and adult educators on
the expeditions, as well as working with the State of Oregon's Ocean Sciences
and Math Collaborative program that provides learning activities linking ocean
sciences with real life issues and reaches an underserved population of adult
learners.