* 0912436
* SBIR Phase I:  Units-based numeric data extraction with knowledge of scientific context
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ari Tuchman, Quantifind Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on a novel
approach to develop units-based numeric indexing and search tools. The goal is
to extract numeric quantities from technical literature, identify each with a
corresponding physical unit, and further relate these to other identified
semantic entities such as device properties. Unlike generic semantic information
extraction strategies, which attempt to identify ambiguous structure with AI
learning algorithms, Entanglement Technologies? solution capitalizes on the
standardization and universality of units. Physical quantities are identified
accurately with scientific heuristics in knowledge-rich contexts, and thus
numeric search can be more efficient than keyword searches. The research
objectives are to design and optimize these scientific heuristics across a wide
array of physical units to intelligently extract numeric data. Concurrently,
Entanglement will develop detailed scientific ontologies for identifying the
context of an indexed number-unit pair.

Successful demonstration of this project offers the potential for rapid and
accurate data mining for technical and scientific specifications. This will have
broad applications in industrial and scientific research. Entanglement
Technologies anticipates generating licensing revenue from access to this search
technology, targeting financial institutions involved in high-tech investments
and academic libraries providing scientific search capabilities. The ability to
define comprehensive, yet objective, heuristics for contextualizing a number
removes much of the user's responsibility for identifying the correctness of the
search engine?s retrieval. This inherent feature provides a non-expert with the
capability for searching, aggregating and analyzing technical data currently
only processed by experts. Furthermore, units-based numeric search offers the
potential for automated number extraction and aggregation. Entanglement will
utilize this capability by integrating its search functionality into a front-end
user-friendly package, allowing a customer to benefit not only from the search
but also from streamlined graph and report generation. If successful, this
potential for automation will reduce the cost of such services currently
provided by technical consulting firms.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).