* 0912131
* SBIR Phase I:  Aptamer-Based Colorimetric Test Kit for Biological Contamination Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Anastasia Bogomolova, Smart Polymers Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is dedicated to the
development of rapid aptamer-based dipstick sensor. Based on a known DNA
aptamer, we intend to develop a colorimetric test strip sensor for B.
thuringiensis spores (anthrax simulant), to demonstrate its performance and to
characterize its sensitivity, specificity, detection time and stability. Using
the developed prototype, we will substitute the aptamer by the one specific to
B. anthracis spores and demonstrate detection of anthrax spores in spiked water
samples. If successful, we will expand the same approach in Phase II and include
other known aptamers to Shiga toxin, cholera toxin, staphylococcal enterotoxin
B, botulinum toxin A, ricin toxin and to tularemia bacteria to create test-strip
sensors for these analytes and perform additional sensitivity and performance
optimization and stability testing. Individual testing strips can be assembled
on a single laminating support card to result in a multi-specific single-dip
colorimetric sensing card, ready for field use. Since the innovative technology
is universal, it will find use in a variety of applications. We have assembled a
capable team of scientists and commercial partners for to ensure success of the
program all the way through commercialization of the technology.

The sensor will have immediate applications for environmental monitoring,
providing rapid specific detection and identification of multiple biological
agents without extensive sample preparation or expensive detection equipment. In
addition to indoor/outdoor surfaces, the developed technology will address
numerous healthcare needs, from drinking water safety to food pathogen
monitoring. The rapid detection and identification of pathogens would be of
enormous benefit from a public health perspective. The functionality of the
sensor will be expanded towards other biowarfare agents as new relevant aptamers
are being selected. Such sensors will have a great potential for detection of
minute amounts of a variety of biowarfare agents immediately after their use in
a possible attack on military targets or the general population. Once developed,
these sensors can become useful not only for battlefield pathogen detection, but
for constant environmental monitoring of air and water to rule out any disease
outbreak due to bioterror attack or to natural reasons. They have the potential
to become in fact a part of creating an Urban Bioshield, maintaining the safety
of large cities.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).