* 0912597
* SBIR Phase I: Functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes for making highly efficient water separation membranes for ultralow sulfur diesel fuels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Vardhan Bajpai, Seldon Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,853.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
membrane based on functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes. This membrane
will radically outperform conventional membranes used for water separation from
ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel (ULSD). Water present in ULSD forms highly stable
emulsions which are very difficult to separate. There is a critical need for
water separation from ULSD in diesel-vehicles because water drastically reduces
the engines' durability and efficiency. Conventional membranes cannot
destabilize these emulsions completely. Most importantly, these membranes
perform differently over the range of ULSDs available. Surface chemistry of the
fibers is critical for obtaining the optimal wetting behavior required for
separation of such fuel-water systems. Multi-walled carbon nanotube surface
chemistry will be used as a parameter for controlling the water-ULSD separation
performance of the membrane. If successful, this would solve that long standing
problem in the fuel industry and would also pave the way for subsequent products
for water separation from liquids (e.g. biodiesels) which form highly stable
emulsions with water. In the short term, this innovation would yield significant
benefits for the ULSD vehicular industry by reducing the engines' maintenance
and operational costs, while in the long term it would fulfill the challenging
liquid-liquid separation needs of, among others, our chemical and pharmaceutical
industries.

On a broader scale, the potential commercial, societal, and scientific &
technological benefits are numerous and profound. The commercial yields from
this research and development involve setting a patent-protected standard for
water separation from ULSD in a potential annual market of $3 billion in the US
diesel-road-vehicular niche alone. Additional large ULSD markets are likely to
arise in non-road and locomotive and marine sectors (mandated by 2014), and
biofuels. Adaptations of this core liquid-liquid separation to related needs
provide significant opportunities also. The societal benefits include cleaner
fuel and air, longer injector/engine life, better combustion of ULSD, lower
maintenance costs, new jobs, enabling use of high-sulfur fuel reserves, more
efficient combustion of biofuels, products for export, and much more. Finally,
Seldon's science team is building a deep understanding of MWCNT characteristics
such as dispersion within its water filtration products, the fuel work potential
here, and elsewhere. New functionalization and media fabrication strategies that
Seldon will develop in this research project with this novel water-ULSD
separation membrane and other efforts are all yielding a portfolio of expertise
available to address broad issues, known and still to be identified.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).