* 0912122
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Manufacturing Method for Carbon Nanofiber Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Barry Rosenbaum, NGJ LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
effectiveness of forming novel carbon nanofibers by a gas jet process (NGJ) and
confirm performance benefits as these nanofibers are incorporated into polymer
systems. Carbon fibers of various diameters enhance a broad range of materials
and products to increase the strength-to-weight ratio and improve thermal and
electrical properties of composite structures. However, a substantial gap in
available fiber diameters exists between the largest nanofiber (100 nm) and the
smallest microfiber (3000 nm). A similar gap exists in the aspect ratio of the
fibers. Laboratory demonstrations have shown the NGJ process produces fibers
that fill these gaps. The objectives of this project are to develop the
equipment and procedures that demonstrate the high volume and low cost
advantages of NGJ nanofibers reproducibly in important applications. This
project consists of 1) design and fabrication of pilot scale equipment, 2)
production and characterization of nanofibers, 3) preparation of composite
samples, and 4) comparison of composites reinforced with NJG nanofibers to those
reinforced with commercially available nanofibers. The results of this research
will prove the advantages of the NGJ nanofibers and their commercial viability.

Completion of this project will provide an understanding of the impact of larger
diameter, higher aspect ratio carbon nanofibers on composite polymer
performance. Additionally, the design and optimization of composite components
and the process controls of fabrication will be improved by the availability of
a wide range of diameters of the graphitic reinforcing nanofibers fibers. Also,
fundamental morphological differences will be revealed in the way that graphene-
like sheets are arranged in fibers of varying diameters produced by the NGJ
process. This project will lead to the commercialization of low cost, high
performance carbon nanofibers with unique mechanical properties. Benefits to
society from these materials will include lighter weight, higher strength
components utilized in most automobiles, which will reduce fuel consumption.
Also, when used as affordable high performance fillers in lithium ion battery
electrodes, these carbon nanofibers will help electric cars achieve mass appeal.
Additional benefits will arise from the significant performance improvements and
cost reductions that occur as the low cost, high performance materials are
incorporated into manufacturing processes, packaging products, adhesives, and
many other supply chain materials.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).