* 0912472
* SBIR Phase I:  UV LED Lamp Based Water Disinfection for POU Compact Purification Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Max Shatalov, Sensor Electronic Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,499.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
innovative water disinfection unit based on solid state UV LED lamps for compact
point-of-use and point-of-entry water purification reactors. Accomplishment of
the proposed research will result in compact semiconductor LED based UV water
disinfection unit with reduced power consumption and extended reliability.
Development of UV disinfection technology using semiconductor UV lamps utilizes
unique characteristics, such as possibility of controlled UV spectral power
distribution, fast switching time, lower power consumption, reliability, small
size and ruggedness.

The broader impacts of this research are the developments of commercially viable
and environmentally safe technology for UV water disinfection. The primary
market segment addressed through the work that will be performed under this
Phase I effort is the microbial disinfection of water for point-of-use and
point-of-entry applications in remote and rural areas. Incorporation of
innovative UV LED lamps in water purification modules will enable cost effective
and environmentally friendly technology for water purification designed for a
variety of water supplies including residential, remote, and emergency relief.
Solid state UV LED lamps enable new mercury-free UV technology for variety of
application technologies, which will provide better quality of life in US and
worldwide. Use of environmentally friendly semiconductor UV sources will lead to
reduction of toxic waste and cost associated with mercury lamp disposal. The
purification, sterilization, and early warning detection systems designed with
UV LED sources will also benefit quality of life for people.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).