* 0912440
* SBIR Phase I:  Heat Spreader Using Nanofluid Oscillating Heat Pipes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Peng Cheng, ThermAvant Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I proposal describes a heat
spreader embedded with a nanolfuid oscillating heat pipe (OHP) that will meet
the cooling needs of high power density electronics by utilizing: 1) the extra-
high heat transfer coefficient of thin film evaporation; 2) the elevated thermal
conductivities of nanofluids; and 3) the enhanced heat transfer of thermally-
excited oscillating motions. Although the advantages of nanofluid OHPs have been
proven in academic settings, commercial heat spreaders embedded with nanofluid
OHPs have yet to be developed. The proposed research will: first develop a
mathematical model of the heat transfer performance; then investigators will
fabricate a commercial-scale prototype with a low-cost production process; and,
finally, empirical results will be compared to company's modeled results and
those of potential users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need for high
heat flux, low cost heat transfer innovations. Computer makers, chip
manufacturers, telecommunications companies, and other high-tech electronics
providers cannot develop high power density solutions without cost-effective,
micro-scale coolers. Given the absence of such a technology, the proposed
nanofluid cooling device will find immediate acceptance in the microelectronics
industry. Its performance and low cost will facilitate the aggressive
development of faster, smaller computer chips. In doing so, the proposed
research benefits all fields impacted by more powerful (or smaller)
microprocessors. Outside of microelectronics, there are other fields where high
heat transfer rates are needed but not currently provided. For example, the
proposed heat spreader embedded with nanofluid OHPs can facilitate an extra high
cooling rate in the cellular cryopreservation process and faster cooling rates
increase cell survival rates (Jiao et al., 2006).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5)."