* 0912486
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Amplification Technology as a Path to Practical Application of USP Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Mike Mielke, Raydiance Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will focus on the
development of a compact novel gain medium with application to a wide variety of
pulsed lasers, including ultrashort pulse (USP) lasers,(less than 1 picosecond
pulse length) and longer pulse lasers (greater than 1 picosecond to hundreds of
nanoseconds). The average power and peak power levels of such pulse lasers are
currently limited by the power handling of the amplifier gain medium, resulting
in severe pulse distortions or beam distortion at high owers. Moreover, the
amplifier limitations in USP lasers require bulky stretching and compression
methods resulting in large, environmentally unstable lasers. The proposed
compact gain medium will have over an order of magnitude increased peak power
handling over todays available gain media and will be readily scalable to high
average power without beam distortions. The research will focus on an
understanding of the performance, prototype design and demonstration of key
parameters of the gain medium, including gain, efficiency,power,beam quality and
pulse quality. The proposed approach results in a solution that is robust,
compact, highly manufacturable, and scalable to high powers and pulse energies.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project will be the integration
of computing, software, and broadband technology with USP photonics,this project
will drive the USP industry toward practical consumer devices. However, for USP
lasers to be significantly transformational in the commercial space, an order of
magnitude reduction in size and cost while increasing power output is necessary.
If executed, this effort will fuel an explosion of new applications estimated to
reach a multi-billion dollar market value within five years. Such applications
include selective cancer removal, precise material machining such as for making
vascular stents and thin film photovoltaic cells, gene transfection, and
imaging.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."