* 0912221
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioadhesive Construct to Augment Rotator Cuff Repair
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Laura Vollenweider, Nerites Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,990.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel bioadhesive construct to help repair rotator cuff tears. Current
methods are limited and frequently result in repair failure. Marine mussels
provide the inspiration for the technology presented in this proposal. By
releasing rapidly hardening, tightly binding adhesive proteins, marine mussels
can firmly anchor themselves to surfaces in wet, turbulent, and saline
environments. Nerites' biomimetic synthetic adhesives will be combined with a
commercially available graft to create a novel bioadhesive construct that will
be secured over the entire repair site, adhere well, and support new tissue
growth. Nerites thus expects to create a repair stronger than currently possible
with conventional methods (sutures and suture anchors) alone.

The broader impacts of this research are a potential reduction in re-tear rates
as well as reduced time to rehabilitation. Both would provide a substantial
economic and societal benefit by decreasing the recovery time and by reducing
the cost of revision surgeries. The success of Nerites' proposed product could
dramatically improve overall patient comfort, and offer several additional areas
of value to both orthopaedic surgeons and patients undergoing rotator cuff
repair, including increased surgical success rates, reduced number of failures
due to poor bone quality, decreased operative time (due to the need for fewer
sutures); and shortened patient rehabilitation time (due to the load-sharing of
the adhesive implant). Such a product has large commercial potential.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).