* 0912432
* SBIR Phase I:  UltraWave: A Combined Breast Imaging Solution
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* khaled salama, Parvulus Solutions inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 77,715.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I research proposal is to experimentally verify the feasibility of
combining ultrasound imaging and microwave imaging for the detection of
malignant cells. This effort will investigate the feasibility of a novel medical
imaging solution that provides high resolution images matching the quality of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems at the high throughput and low cost of
X-ray systems. This involves coupling an ultrasound subsystem for exciting
target tissues with a microwave subsystem for measuring the response and imaging
the target tissues. The system combines the superior penetration and resolution
characteristics of focused high-frequency ultrasound input waves, and the
superior penetration and detection capacity of microwave detection and
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breast cancer is among the most common forms of
cancer for nonsmokers. Among the 1.2 million women diagnosed with breast cancer
in 2005, 0.5 million died from the disease. Recent research studies at Sloan
Kettering Hospital show that mammography detects only 50% of breast cancer cases
at an early stage. Breast cancer has received a great deal of attention due to
the inadequacy of existing screening technologies for early-stage detection.
These recent findings emphasize the immense financial burden on patients and the
medical community since MRI screenings cost about $1,500, i.e. nearly 10 times
more than X-ray mammography. Consequently, there is a dire need for an imaging
solution that matches the resolution and quality of MRI at the cost of X-ray
mammography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;