* 0912547
* SBIR Phase I: Metabolic Engineering for Clostridial Biotechnology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* BRYAN TRACY, ELCRITON, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,492.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop platform
clostridia strains suitable for industrial scale alcohol production from
renewable feedstocks and also to improve metabolic engineering technologies for
all clostridia. Clostridia are strictly anaerobic, endospore forming prokaryotes
of major importance to cellulose degradation, human and animal health and
physiology, anaerobic degradation of simple and complex carbohydrates. Obstacles
for the industrial use of these organisms include the development of genetic and
metabolic engineering tools and strategies that could lead to strains suitable
for production of chemicals and fuels from renewable feedstocks. This project
focuses on developing metabolic engineering strategies and strains of
solventogenic clostridia for the production of chemicals and biofuels. Through
novel approaches, this project aims to solve three important bioprocessing
bottlenecks: 1) product formation characteristics, 2) product yield and
selectivity, 3) and suitable characteristics for repeated fed-batch or
continuous fermentations. Anticipated outcomes of this project are clostridia
strains that overcome the aforementioned bioprocessing bottlenecks and improved
metabolic engineering technologies that are applicable to all clostridia.

Development of biorefinery and biofuel technologies has been on the scientific
and technological agenda of our nation for over 35 years now but never quite
with the urgency of the last 2-3 years. Oil supplies for producing chemicals and
fuels are becoming increasingly limiting and unreliable. Moreover, use or
combustion of non-renewable chemicals and fuels detrimentally impacts the
climate of our planet. Biomass is a carbon-neutral renewable resource for
producing chemicals and fuels and the basis for the biorefinery concept.
Solventogenic, butyric-acid clostridia played a major industrial role in the
production of acetone and butanol in the past. Metabolic engineering of
solventogenic clostridia may lead to industrial processes for production of
chemicals such as butyric acid, butanol, butanediol, propanol, and acetoin, and
production of hydrogen. Some of these chemicals can serve as biofuels directly,
while others can be used for chemical conversion to biofuels. A major advantage
of these organisms is that they can directly ferment a large spectrum of simple
and complex carbohydrates including lignocellulosics with minimal pretreatment.
The commercial potential of metabolically engineered solventogenic clostridia is
exceptional but remains largely unexplored. This project aims to capture and
demonstrate part of this potential.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).