* 0912193
* SBIR Phase I:   Voice-based Wearable Computers for Emergency Medical Services
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Prakash Somasundaram, Vocollect, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,380.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project aims to develop
a wearable computer system with an innovative multimodal input mechanism. The
objective of this research is to assess the feasibility, efficiency, and quality
of documentation performed with a wearable computer utilizing speech recognition
against the current methods of laptop input and paper notation. To measure the
impact, field trials will be performed at two local EMS agencies, replacing
their current method of field documentation with this wearable computer system.
Data will be gathered on accuracy, documentation time, and other metrics for
both their current system and the Phase I prototype. The anticipated results
include an increase in percentage of documentation completed, reduction in time
taken for documentation and communication, and reduction in documentation errors
per trip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seamless exchange of patient information will
impact emergency care on a national level for both EMTs and patients. As new
regulations are introduced to require electronic patient records, EMS agencies
will be forced to transfer their current operations to digital records. This
wearable computer system will enable a smoother transition from paper to
electronic documentation as it follows the EMT?s current workflow for
documentation input. For patients, hands-free documentation at the point-of-care
can decrease the number of errors and allow EMTs to focus on their patients,
enabling faster and higher quality care during transport and at the
hospital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;