* 0912519
* SBIR Phase I:  Multimodal Semantic Video Retrieval and Summarization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Wael Abd-Almageed, Video Semantics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
methodology and software for highly accurate and efficient semantic video
retrieval and summarization. Video Semantics will, provide personalized
summaries of video content that meet users' preferences. These summaries will be
based on shot granularity instead of the widely used key-frame-based summaries
that are oblivious of semantics. Additionally, the proposed technology will
significantly enhance online video search by enabling users to retrieve only
semantically-relevant shots instead of the entire video. The key component of
the software is an automated semantic video annotation system that integrates
realtime video shot detection, speech recognition, natural language processing,
and logic inference methods to accurately select video shots according to
semantic user requests and preferences. Consumers and video content service
providers will use the proposed adaptive video messaging technique to
efficiently communicate queries, preferences and results using Semantic Video
Summary messages (SVS).

The proposed software, once commercialized, can affect a shift in the way online
video content is searched and retrieved. Moreover, if successful, the software
will advance the state-of-the-art of constructing video summaries, which in
contrast to current technologies, accurately responds to semantic level user
queries. Consequently, the software may be of interest to numerous content
providers and consumers to be employed in a multitude of video applications. The
software could also be integrated into the ever-popular digital video recorders
to enable the owner to search large volumes of archived videos and retrieve
specific ones given semantic queries, rather than the usually inaccurate file
names. On the other hand, the unique summarization capabilities of the software
can be used by content/service providers where personalized, semantic-based
summary criteria can be predefined by the user so that the content providers,
adaptively (based on network and device capabilities) stream summaries matching
users' requirements to their smart phones of other mobile devices.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

