* 0912601
* SBIR Phase I:  Food Antioxidants (AOs) With or Without Estrogenic Activity (EA)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Cathy Yang, CertiChem, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,884.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will confirm that it is
feasible to identify food antioxidants (AOs) to make formulations that have no
detectable estrogenic activity (EA) or anti-EA (EA-Free) or have well-specified
levels of EA (EA-Specified AO formulations). This project is innovative because
food AOs have not previously been examined for levels of EA, especially after
common-use-stresses of sterilizing or microwaving. CertiChem is uniquely
qualified to develop and commercialize EA-free/EA-specified AO formulations
because of its exclusive patents and experience in bringing EA-Free products to
market.

The broader impacts of this research are that CertiChem's data show that most
current food AOs have EA in unknown concentrations. CertiChem proposes to
develop AO formulations that are EA-Free or have well-specified levels of EA.
Chemicals having EA at concentrations used in foodstuffs (mM to uM) often have
adverse effects on mammals, including humans. Fetal or juvenile mammals are
especially sensitive to effects of chemicals having EA at very low dosages (nM
to pM concentrations). Conversely, some conditions in adult humans (e.g.,
menopause, some cancers or abnormalities of the prostate) are probably
ameliorated by chemicals having well-specified levels of EA. CertiChem is
raising consumer awareness by actively working with NGOs and legislators to
educate the public on health risks or benefits associated with chemicals that
have EA. Significant consumer demand for EA-Free products or EA-Specified
products is already observed.

