* 0912459
* SBIR Phase I:  Selective Chemical Probes for Measurement of Flotation Collector Reagents in Sulfidic Ore Beneficiation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Jon Thompson, United Science LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,900.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research and
develop selective chemical probes for use in froth flotation systems. Sulfide
mineral froth flotation is a solid-solid separations process which dominates all
other methods used in the mining industry to purify a target mineral from refuse
minerals such as clay, wood, , diesel fuel, and other economically worthless
substances. Flotation operators typically maximize mineral recovery and
knowingly add into the flotation device an excess (10-30%) of mineral selective
collector reagents that react with the target mineral and are subsequently
removed by flotation. The aim of this project is to accurately control the
amount of collector to a small (1-2%) excess. There are no commercially
available sensors to do this task primarily because these complex and highly
variable matrices strongly interfere with the measurement. It is the goal of
this work to research and develop probes that will allow the selective
measurement of the collector reagent in the presence of the interfering matrix.
The bulk of the work involves synthesis of various types of probe materials for
two different collectors. The effectiveness of the probes to separate the target
collector chemical from the matrix with real world mining effluents will be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a significant societal impact
by making the mining industry more sustainable in its approach to mineral
recovery. Specifically, the research aims to significantly reduce the amount of
toxic chemical waste associated with froth flotation and its inevitable
environmental impact. The method has the potential of making the US copper
industry more competitive by saving over $200 M in wasted collector while
simultaneously improving mining sustainability by eliminating an estimated
891,000 kg of unnecessary chemical discharges. This project will make a
significant contribution to flotation operating knowledge, as it is well known
that recommended conditions based on lab testing rarely match a real operation,
and will bring sensors to the operation. This project will be conducted in close
collaboration with Professor Peter Carr of the University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).