* 0912144
* US - Egypt Cooperative Research:  Climate Change and Biotic Effects During the Late Cretaceous of Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2013
* USD 63,833.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project is
being undertaken by Dr. Gerta Keller, Princeton University, and Dr. Abdel Aziz
Tantawy, South Valley University in Egypt, to collect the necessary long-term
biotic, mineralogical and geochemical records needed to understand the
greenhouse-icehouse transition and the late Cretaceous environmental changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Campanian-Maastrichtian interval is a critical time
period in Earth's history. It marks (1) the long-term global cooling accompanied
by fluctuations in sea-level and productivity, (2) witnessed the gradual demise
of most of the greenhouse world fauna and flora and the evolution and adaptive
strategies of species trying to survive in the changing paleoenvironment, but
mostly failing, and (3) witnessed one of Earth's five major mass extinctions at
the end of the Cretaceous. These global events are most pronounced in the
continental shelf sediments of the eastern Tethys and Egypt in particular. The
transition was accompanied by sea level fluctuations and intermittent organic-
rich sedimentation that created most of the currently known oil, gas and
phosphorite deposits. Study of these sediments, as proposed in this project can
yield critical information to help understand the environmental and biotic
changes associated with major climatic transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main research objective is to develop a comprehensive integrated multi-
disciplinary history of late Cretaceous climate, sea-level and biotic changes in
Egypt with special emphasis on mineral and organic-rich deposits that yield
scientific information regarding biotic consequences of climate warming. The
proposed study will include paleontology, stable isotopes, mineralogy, and
geochemistry. The results will provide the necessary long-term biotic,
mineralogical and geochemical records needed to understand the greenhouse-
icehouse transition, significantly improve our understanding of both long-term
and short-term biotic diversity changes, and elucidate the environmental
conditions that led to the decline of the Cretaceous fauna during the Campanian
and leading up to the K-T mass extinction. The database generated will be
directly applicable to future paleoenvironmental studies of the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study involves international collaboration
between US scientists and those of 3 other countries (Egypt, Germany, and
Switzerland), as well as opportunities for US student (graduate and
undergraduate) participation in international research.