* 0912671
* SBIR Phase I:  High Performance Supercapacitors Based on Nano-engineered Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Kuiyang Jiang, Agiltron Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,969.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal will develop a novel super-capacitor that
will have two times the energy density and ten times the power density of the
best conventional carbon-based super-capacitors. This will be achieved by
fabricating a nano-engineered electrode comprising of core/shell fibrils with
Titanium Carbide (TiC) as an inner core and Carbide-Derived Carbon (CDC) as a
shell. This novel core/shell nano-structured electrode material combines the
recent breakthroughs in fabricating one-dimensional metal carbides and precision
pore size engineering of carbide-derived carbon materials. Due to the metallic
conductivity of the TiC core, the proposed electrode inherently possesses high
electrical conductivity allowing fast transport of electrons. Moreover, this new
electrode design not only eliminates the use of a current collector but also
drastically reduces contact resistance. The use of nano-engineered CDC shells
provides ideal electrode structure properties of high surface area, tunable pore
size and uniform pore size distribution, achieving high energy
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Super-capacitors are indispensable energy storage
devices because their performance bridges those of batteries and conventional
capacitors. The most significant challenges to realizing super-capacitors are to
dramatically increase their energy density and power density. The proposed
superior super-capacitors will meet the needs of quickly growing markets of
hybrid electric vehicles (HEV), city buses, rails (heavy rail vehicles, tramways
and metro), and renewable energy systems (wind power and solar
applications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;