* 0912586
* SBIR Phase I:  Injection-molded Thermoset Shape-memory Polymers with Enhanced Acoustic Properties
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Brent Duncan, Syzygy Memory Plastics
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a new
material and methodology to design comfortable, custom earpieces based on shape-
memory polymers. These devices are stand alone earplugs or attachments to
products in three other markets - headphones, hands-free and Bluetooth devices,
and hearing aids: any aural device that demands comfort and seal. The work
focuses on these adaptive self-adjusting materials that conform to complex
contours of the inner ear canal, are comfortable and seal well. The intellectual
merit of the project is related to developing adaptive earpieces from tailored
shape-memory polymers with enhanced acoustic properties. Current material
solutions suffer from several drawbacks, including an inability to control the
force exerted by the earpiece upon the sensitive regions of the inner ear and
concurrently block out unwanted noise. This Phase I project will develop next
generation self-adjusting shape-memory polymers that deliver both long term
comfort and an effective seal as cost-effective one-size-fits-all devices. This
project will also provide overall proof of concept for enhanced devices and
generate a fundamental research knowledge base necessary to ultimately produce
successful commercial devices.

Due to their desirable properties, chemically crosslinked shape-memory polymers
are increasingly being proposed in biomedical applications, but their broader
adoption into mass markets has been limited. The novel manufacturing process,
mnemosynation, developed leading up to this project enables a new class of
thermoset polymers with fully recoverable strains that can be mass manufactured
through traditional plastics processing techniques. Thus, the broad impact of
this project is two-fold: it will lay the groundwork for future injection
moldable devices of complex geometries possessing shape memory and it will
establish the first links between sound attenuation and crosslinker density in
shape-memory polymer earpieces. Better occlusion translates into lower required
listening volumes on devices such as earphones, Bluetooth hands free devices and
hearing aids. This will be the first commercial proving ground for the
mnemosynation manufacturing process and pave the way for a new generation of
mass producible customizable ergonomic plastics with tunable shape memory
properties.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).