* 0912672
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel SWIR/MWIR monolithic electro-optical sensor for manportable applications for day/night surveillance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Bora Onat, Princeton Lightwave, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,935.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a novel electro-optical day/night vision sensor for man-portable surveillance
applications. The proposed solid-state imager comprises of a monolithic focal
plane array with an absorber that can detect mid-wave infrared (i.e., thermal)
and SWIR radiation. This concept will require the development of a type-II
semiconductor absorber material of InGaAs/GaAsSb quantum wells superlattice
structures grown on InP substrates with low dark current. The processing of the
device will use the company's established InGaAs/InP-based photodiode array
technology platform. The combination of excellent epitaxial growth and low dark
current processing technology is anticipated to yield a high sensitivity imager.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project will be a multi-
spectral imager that will augment conventional SWIR imaging capability (low
light level identification, imaging of near-infrared lasers, imaging through
glass and atmospheric obscurants) by adding MWIR thermal detection capability.
The use of a single focal plane array will drastically reduce cost, system size,
and weight and will consume less power compared to fused imaging systems with
dedicated sensors for each wavelength band. The imager developed for this
project would require only modest cooling (~250K) using solid-state
thermoelectric coolers reducing size weight and power of the imager enabling
man-portable applications. Along with these improvements, the reduction in cost
enables many commercial applications such as perimeter security, law
enforcement, border and homeland security, and fire fighting. In other
commercial markets, applications include high-resolution molecular spectroscopy,
trace gas monitoring, air pollution analysis, wind shear measurement, non-
invasive and medical diagnostics. Military applications include target
identification and detection, laser designation detection, passive and active
night vision, infrared thermal sensors, long stand-off reconnaissance and
surveillance from UAVs and airships, helmet mounted night vision systems and
remote sensing.

