* 0912233
* SBIR Phase I:  Molecular diagnostics and biological control of disease in farmed channel catfish
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Thomas Schoenfeld, LUCIGEN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
an effective, inexpensive, safe means of controlling infectious diseases among
farmed catfish. An integrated system of detection and control is targeted at
Edwardsiella ictaluri, the most costly pathogen among farmed catfish. Detection
is based on rapid, simple tests for pathogen genes. Control is based on
naturally occurring viruses and bacteria. Together these technologies comprise
an integrated system for rapidly and inexpensively detecting and treating
catfish more safely, inexpensively and specifically. This approach is generally
applicable to pathogens affecting a wide range of farmed fish.

As commercial wild harvest of most fish species is proving unsustainable, farmed
fish are increasingly significant as a food source and an important industry,
often in underdeveloped parts of US and the rest of the world. A major
impediment to developing this industry is infectious disease due to unnaturally
high densities of fish that cause losses of up to half of the fish worth
billions of dollars worldwide. There is currently no satisfactory means of
controlling these outbreaks. Alternatives including antibiotics, vaccines,
chemicals or controlled feeding are either expensive, harmful to human and
environmental health and/or detrimental to yields. The immediate focus of this
proposal, Enteric Septicemia of Catfish due to Edwardsiella ictaluri, addresses
the $20-30M in losses and promises to improve the viability of an important
source of income to the rural southeastern US. Longer term, this approach will
be applied to other fish species throughout the US and the world.

