* 0912450
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-invasive Intracranial Pressure Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Anthony Bellezza, Third Eye Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will involve the development of a noninvasive intracranial
pressure (ICP) monitor based on a pilot clinical study correlating ocular blood
pressure and blood flow parameters to ICP. The proposed novel device will
combine several standard medical techniques used by ophthalmologists to gather
data. The ultimate goal for this project is to develop a portable, easy-to-use
unit that will be used by medical personnel on patients in the hospital and
prior to their arrival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
research are on patients with head injury, improving the diagnosis of elevated
ICP and reducing the complications associated with unnecessary invasive
procedures. ICP monitoring is a common tool for physicians treating patients
with acute intracranial hypertension caused by neurological disorders, trauma,
and stroke. Knowledge of a patient's ICP progression aids the physician in
determining the optimal medical and/or surgical treatment. Every year, these
surgical procedures expose patients to significant complications.
Commercialization of a noninvasive ICP monitor would significantly decrease the
burden on patients and to the healthcare system in the diagnosis and treatment
of head injury by determining ICP more cheaply and safely than current
technologies. A non-invasive method would also address the need for additional
long term ICP monitoring data and expand the knowledge of how mild or moderate
traumatic brain injury relates to ICP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;