* 0912615
* SBIR Phase I:  Fully Integrated Seamless Protein Production and Purification System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Sheldon Broedel, Athena Environmental Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This small business innovation research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
demonstrating the technical feasibility of building an automated system for the
large-scale production of recombinant proteins. The design criteria is for a
device that provides for low cost, high throughput production at bench-scale as
well as having the flexibility for a fully automated commercial-scale production
system. In the Phase I portion of the project, a point-to-point construction
format will be used to model the concept and demonstrate the technical
feasibility of coupling the upstream biomass production with the downstream
protein purification into a seamless production system. A key enabling facet of
the design concept is the integration of Athena's novel expression system for
the production of recombinant proteins.

The broader impacts of this research are for lower production cost of
recombinant proteins. The production and purification of proteins remains a
rate-limiting step for basic and applied research as well as for commercial
production. The general approach for producing large quantities of recombinant
protein involves multiple steps that are physically and functionally separated.
Consequently, it is a labor intensive process that is not readily amenable to
parallel or high throughput operations. One means of addressing this is by
linking the processes together; yet no system is available where the cell
culturing and protein purification operations are coupled into one integrated
fully-automated system. The device envisioned here will solve this by allowing
for the automated large-scale production of recombinant proteins in a seamless
system.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).