* 0912622
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Polyesters for Foams
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Bigwood, Polymer Phases Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop new
sustainable, biodegradable polyester materials that will replace many currently-
used petrochemical polymer plastics. Polymer Phases, Inc. (PPI) has developed
biodegradable materials based on byproducts of bio-fuels. These materials can be
somewhat water sensitive and sticky, not unlike many natural polymers. We have
found, with modification in the synthetic process, polymers can be dry at room
temperature and resistance and toughness properties improved through application
processing. The purpose of this proposal is to study the effect of adding
materials to these sustainable, biodegradable materials, varying the synthetic
process, and changing the composition to see if the polymers will exhibit the
performance to replace currently-used petrochemical-based plastics for a broader
group of applications beyond adhesives. Polymer Phases, Inc. is seeking a family
of polymers that can be extruded into pellets. These pellets need to be dry
enough to flow like a powder. For this project's target, the customer would use
the pellets to make foam sheets which could be formed into disposable food
containers. During this project, PPI will form the foam sheets and compare the
performance with polystyrene foam sheets.

Petrochemical plastics, which are synthesized from finite supplies of petroleum
resources, do not degrade in the environment and therefore contribute to the
global accumulation of waste. In addition synthetic polymers are also associated
with a number of documented health risks, including cancer, inflammation, and
reproductive and endocrine disorders. There is a critical need for alternatives
to current synthetic petrochemical polymers. Polymer Phases' unique materials
will replace many conventional petrochemical-based polymers, which are derived
from non-renewable sources, and which rely heavily on expensive and potentially
toxic cross-linkers. PPI's products have potential applications ranging from
disposable, biodegradable foams, insulation, bottles, plastic wares, packaging,
coatings, plasticizers, film, and biomedical devices. The monomers utilized in
PPI's unique synthesis method are non-toxic, renewable materials, and their
resulting polyester pre-polymer products are easily biodegraded. Beyond the
environmental and health benefits, PPI believes their unique production methods
can be developed to yield polymers that are cost-competitive to petroleum raw
material polymer products, with mechanical and performance attributes equal to
or better than, bio-based or renewable polymers. Activities within this project
will be integrated into existing educational programs (such as the Co-op
internship) at Drexel University.

