* 0912589
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Predictive Maintenance System for Mitigating CSO &amp; SSO
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Ivan Howitt, InfoSense Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project develops a cost
effective solution to the sewer overflow hazard within combined sewer systems
and sanitary sewer systems. Specifically, the complexity and dynamic nature of
the wastewater system presents significant challenges for maintenance.
Underlying the maintenance policy development is an engineering trade-off: over-
maintenance incurs unnecessary maintenance costs and under-maintenance incurs a
greater overflow risk. The proposed solution introduces novel technology
innovations which address the limitation in both the reliability and economic
feasibility of current blockage detection approaches. Reliably predicting
blockage locations will mitigate the risk with minimal maintenance requirements.
The proposed project develops the technology innovations for implementing a
Dynamic Predictive Maintenance System (DPMS) which allows municipal wastewater
utilities to institute a just-in-time maintenance program for mitigating
combined sewer overflows (CSO) and sanitary sewer overflows
(SSO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the Environmental Protection Agency 2004
Congressional Report, well over 34 thousand sewer overflows occur annually
within the United States resulting in spillage in excess of 850 billion gallons
of untreated wastewater. In Charlotte, North Carolina, over 400 sanitary sewer
overflows occurred in 2007 within the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utilities service
area resulting in 1.6 million gallons of wastewater overflow. The overflows are
predominantly caused by blockages. The blockages cause wastewater to spill out
of manholes onto streets, public/private property or into waterways. Overflows
result in property damage, environmental problems, and, in severe cases, public
health and safety hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).