* 0912422
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Identification of Environmental Contaminants Using an Electrospray Ionization - Ion Mobility Spectrometer / Chiral Ion Mobility Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ching Wu, Excellims Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on the
development of a stand-alone electrospray ionization-ion mobility
spectrometer/chiral ion mobility spectrometer (ESI-IMS/CIMS) for on-site
separation, detection and identification of environmental contaminants with the
unique capability of separating chiral molecules. Many pesticides are applied as
a mixture of chiral forms despite the fact that each chiral form may differ in
its impact on environmental and biological processes. Efficient methods for
chiral analysis will facilitate the study of stereoisomer-dependent toxicity and
biodegradation, as well as permit evaluation of pollutant potential and
agricultural pesticide loading. The ESI-IMS/CIMS system will be used in place of
slow, expensive, lab-based chiral separation methods and will be able to
concurrently detect non-chiral species of interest, including both volatile and
non-volatile compounds. In Phase I, the focus is on the development of a
commercial ESI-IMS system and identification and validation of chiral modifiers
for use in CIMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many environmental analysis laboratories
provide pesticide analysis to their clients as the identity and quantity of
pesticide residues in water, soils, and foods can have an impact on agricultural
use and public attitudes. With growing awareness of the importance of chirality
to the function and degradation of environmental contaminants, interest in rapid
and cost-effective chiral separations will increase. Successful
commercialization of ESI-IMS/CIMS technology will enhance both field and
laboratory analytical abilities for environmental analysis. A portable chiral
ion mobility spectrometer will allow fast, on-site analysis of pesticide
residues and will provide a powerful field analytical tool for environmental
scientists and analytical testing/service labs as well as government regulators.
Research to determine optimal conditions to separate chiral forms of
environmental contaminants using chiral ion mobility spectrometry will
facilitate rapid development of the technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).