* 0912724
* SBIR Phase I:  Analysis and Acceleration of Engineering Simulation and Modeling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Raymond Hoare, Concurrent Electronic Design Automation, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I proposal will research, develop and demonstrate that the performance of
Engineering Simulation and Modeling applications can be dramatically improved
using FPGA and GPU accelerated servers. Engineering Simulation and Modeling
applications enable the design and manufacture of complex mechanical systems
that incorporate material modeling, heat transfer and fluid flow. There are
significant financial, time and quality benefits derived from incorporating
these multi-physics computer driven simulation methods into both the design and
manufacturing processes. The Intellectual Merit in Phase I of the proposed
project is to demonstrate that it is feasible to achieve 10 to 30 GFLOPS of
sustained performance using FPGA and GPU accelerated servers to execute real-
world Engineering Modeling and Simulation applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
simulation models grow in detail, simulation times will become an inhibiting
factor to the growth of this industry. The broader impact of this proposal will
be realized through the acceleration of simulations by a factor of 10 times. If
the proposed work is successful, a week-long simulation will become less than a
day and the work will be performed with one accelerated server rather than a
rack of computers. The success of this effort carries with it significant
savings in time and the cost of infrastructure. Additionally, significant
environmental savings will be achieved through reduced energy costs, thermal
emissions and square footage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;