* 0912467
* SBIR Phase I:  Light-channeling Metamaterials for Polarimetric Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Thomas James, Phoebus Optoelectronics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,872.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will assess the
feasibility of using the diverse, enabling light management capabilities of a
subset of metamaterials called Plasmonic/ Photonic Hybrid Crystals to develop
higher-performance, lower-cost polarimetric infrared sensors. The company's
hybrid crystals, single-layer surface structures, can be fabricated atop any
substrate material using standard CMOS fabrication techniques. A prototype
polarizer array capable of extinction ratios of at least 500:1; with the
potential of ratios as high as 5000:1; will be designed, modeled, fabricated and
initially characterized. It is anticipated that the structure will also minimize
light scattering, the primary cause of performance impairing crosstalk in
current polarimetric sensors. The design will use polarization-dependent optical
and electromagnetic modes within periodic subwavelength apertures to achieve the
high polarization extinction ratios and to minimize or eliminate light
scattering from surface polarizers. Fabrication processes will be developed and
a preliminary prototype of a hybrid crystal to be applied to a polarimetric
sensor operating in the 4-5m range will be fabricated &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts/commercial potential of this project will represent a
breakthrough enabling tool for managing the flow of light in optoelectronic
devices in extremely varied, precise and sophisticated ways, and can be readily
applied to a diverse array of photonic components operating in several
wavelength ranges and across multiple industries. This technology involves CMOS-
based fabrication of simple single-layer structures, it is essentially substrate
independent; the hybrid crystals can be fabricated atop almost any material.
Potential device applications include, but are not limited to, infrared imaging
sensors, cloaking devices, solar cells and all optical memory arrays. The annual
market opportunity for these devices alone is approximately $15 billion. The
potential societal impact is significant, as the end-use applications include:
remote sensing related to critical military and homeland security missions as
well as to planetary mapping for global warming research; the development of
higher-density, higher-speed computers, and the detection of environmental
chemical and biological threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."