* 0912068
* Information Assurance Excellence Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Walt Stewart, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2013
* USD 2,027,074.00

Information Science and Systems (33)

This project establishes the Information Assurance Excellence Program (IAEP) to
address the need for Information Assurance specialists in federal government
agencies. The program creates a long-term recruitment pipeline that includes
recruiting students on campus, creating agreements with community colleges, and
providing early exposure for high school students. In addition to enrolling in
courses as a cohort, the Scholars engage in professional and career development
activities in which they deliver technical workshops and have opportunities to
engage in discussions with practicing professionals. They participate in
technology competitions and they work on research projects.

The evaluation of the program components and its overall effectiveness
contributes to the body of knowledge and best practice strategies for successful
recruitment, mentorship, retention and placement of Information Assurance
professionals. This program emphasizes practice. Under the mentorship of
experienced faculty and alumni IA professionals, IAEP students are required to
work in applied activities beyond the classroom. Specific requirements include
the dissemination of skills based learning in the form of presentations and
workshops, peer outreach to community colleges and high schools, and
participation in regional IA competitions.

IAEP recruitment efforts focus on attracting a diverse range of applicants from
CSUSB and community colleges, many of whom are likely to be students from
underrepresented groups. By offering mentoring and support to increase the
scholarly abilities of these future professionals, and by maintaining these
support mechanisms throughout their internships and in their ultimate placement,
the program experiences little attrition. The results of the program form a
replicable model that can be disseminated to other participating Center of
Academic Excellence in Information Assurance colleges and universities.