* 0912360
* SBIR Phase I:  Coconut (Coir) Fiber Automotive Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* David Greer, Natural Composites, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of replacing polypropylene/polyester composite materials used
for automobile trunk liners with more environmentally friendly coconut fiber
based fabric composites. The environmentally friendly coconut fibers, produced
from coconut husks, have a superior combination of fiber diameter, strength,
stiffness, and ductility compared to synthetic, petroleum based polyester fibers
currently used, making it possible to produce greener, lower cost trunk liners,
door panels and floor boards. Preliminary results on an engineered composite
material made from a compression molded blend of coconut fibers and
polypropylene fibers are very promising, but additional research is needed to
develop the optimal (1) combination of coconut fibers and polypropylene fibers,
(2) interfacial adhesion between fibers, and (3) processing path (temperature,
pressure and time) to meet the automotive certification/specification tests for
General Motors and other automotive companies. The total market potential for
coconut fiber automotive composites is 300 million kg/year.

The broader impacts of this research include the reduction of petroleum
consumption by 2-4 million barrels per year and the potential reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions by 450,000 tons per year. There are over 10 million
poor coconut farmers (income ~ $500/year) who own 95% of the coconuts harvested
annually worldwide. Approximately 85% of the coconut husks, which contain the
coconut fiber, are burned because there is insufficient demand for this biomass.
The successful development of coconut fiber based automotive composites could
provide an additional $100-$200 million of annual income for these farmers.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).