* 0912642
* SBIR Phase I:  Electro-Optically Tunable Diode Lasers for Sensing Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Mike Anderson, Vescent Photonics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will reduce
mechanical external-cavity diode lasers to a centimeter-sized waveguide chip
using a novel giant electro-optic effect. The device, a waveguide external-
cavity semiconductor laser (WECSL), will be environmentally robust, compact,
entirely electro-optic and capable of continuous, mode-hop-free tuning of 100 nm
in 500 ms. The laser will also exhibit a side-mode-suppression ratio of 40 dB
and a (fast) line width of ~100 kHz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts/commercial potential of this project will be a low-cost technology
platform of WECSLs, and their precision performance specifications will enable
laser-based sensors to assume a prominent role in commercial applications. In
biophotonics, tunable lasers can replace broadband light sources and enhance the
performance of optical coherence tomography instruments that measure the tissue
layers in the human retina and the vascular system. Distributed fiber sensing
arrays greatly benefit from tunable lasers that probe Bragg sensors spaced along
the fiber. Distributed fiber sensors needing low-cost tunable lasers are being
developed for chemical and biological sensing, pressure sensing, and vibration,
strain and temperature sensing. Low-cost tunable lasers are also needed for
environmental sensing of toxic industrial compounds and safety monitoring for
lower explosive limits in mining and other industrial
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5)."