* 0912154
* The Origin and Spread of Glaze-Painted Pottery as Seen from Tijeras Pueblo, NM
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Judith Habicht-Mauche, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 101,144.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Habicht Mauche and her multi-
institutional research team will examine the early development, production and
exchange of glaze-painted pottery in the Rio Grande Valley of New Mexico, from
the perspective of the site of Tijeras Pueblo, using a mix of standard
archaeological and innovative material science techniques.

The Late Precontact Period (A.D. 1275-1400) among the Eastern Pueblos of the Rio
Grande Valley was characterized by dramatic changes in demography, settlement
structure, domestic and ritual architecture, and decorated ceramics. These
material changes are interpreted as evidence for massive migration, the
emergence of new and more complex social identities, the adoption of new
religious practices, and the development of more structured local and regional
political economies.

Associated with these processes are the specialized production, widespread
exchange and ritualized use of glaze-painted pottery among the Eastern Pueblos.
An understanding of the origin and spread of glaze-paint technology, thus, has
implications for understanding issues related to migration, community
reorganization, and identity formation during this very dynamic period in the
American Southwest.

Tijeras Pueblo, located directly east of the modern city of Albuquerque, is an
excellent place from which to launch an investigation of the early development
and spread of the Rio Grande glaze ware tradition. Archaeological evidence
suggests that local farmers, as well as possible immigrants from the Western
Pueblo area, began to aggregate at the site sometime during the last decade of
the thirteenth century. The site has yielded the earliest known tree-ring dates
associated with Rio Grande Glaze Ware (A.D. 1313). Importantly, the site also
has been the subject of several systematic and well-documented excavations,
beginning in 1948, again in 1968-69, and finally between 1971-76. Ceramic
collections, with site records and documentation, are housed at the Laboratory
of Anthropology/Museum of New Mexico in Santa Fe and the Maxwell Museum at the
University of New Mexico in Albuquerque.

The researchers will utilize a variety of innovative analytical techniques,
including ceramic petrography, neutron activation analysis, and lead isotope
analysis, to characterize existing ceramic collections from Tijeras Pueblo and,
thus, to trace the circulation of techniques, raw materials, and finished
objects through regional social and economic networks. In turn, they will
explore how these networks facilitated migration and acted as arenas for the
social reproduction and transformation of community and identity among the
Eastern Pueblos. At the same time, this project will also make broader
intellectual contributions to studies of migration and the relationship between
technology and society.

Tijeras Pueblo is located on National Forest Service property and is listed on
the National Register of Historic Places. It currently has a self-guided
interpretive trail and a new interpretive center is being constructed for
visitors at the site. Dr. Habicht Mauche is working closely with National Forest
archaeologists and local volunteers to assure that the results of her research
feed directly into interpretive efforts at the site. By engaging undergraduate
and graduate students as research assistants, this project promotes the
integration of research and teaching.