* 0912664
* SBIR Phase I:  Real time optical control system for thin film solar cell manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* George Atanasoff, AccuStrata Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project relates to a
real-time optical control system in the manufacture of next generation thin film
solar cells and panels. The proposed system improves thin film solar cell
manufacturing by improving the quality of the individual solar cells and panels.
It allows manufacturing of more consistent and uniform products resulting in
higher solar conversion efficiency and manufacturing yield. The proposed system
uses patented miniature fiber optic sensors, installed at many locations in the
film deposition chambers. They monitor different spots on the substrate and
obtain real time measurements of film properties. The system compares the
measured with the targeted values and provides immediate correction, improving
film uniformity and narrowing material property distribution. It returns most of
the products to their targeted specification, which would otherwise be
rejected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will reduce waste and improve the
manufacturing yield and the conversion efficiency of thin film solar cells and
panels. It has specific benefits for the large-size solar panels, which are
manufactured at higher cost today due to insufficient manufacturing yield. The
proposed technology will reduce the time it takes for solar panels to reach grid
parity with traditional energy sources. The proposed technology will also
facilitate the development of numerous other applications for next generation
thin film based products such as photonic crystals, nanotechnology, meta-
materials, multi-junction solar cells, printing and counterfeiting
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;