* 0912758
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Flow Pipelining Based Radio Communication Chip Architecture
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Zoran Miljanic, MultiFlow Communications
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I research proposal
will develop architectural solutions for programmable radio devices. The
emergence of multiple radio access technologies and their continued evolutionary
development drive a need to support them in a programmable manner. The objective
is to enable flexibility for future evolution while ensuring processing of high
data bandwidths. Current practices are based on the Software Defined Radio (SDR)
approach. This approach lacks performance, is difficult to program and silicon-
on-chip (SoC) devices are complex. The Virtual Flow Pipelining architecture
proposed here enables programmable SoC devices with low hardware complexity,
simple programming model, and high performance. These characteristics are
achieved using atomic architectural support for the function synchronization,
scheduling, sequencing and communication with performance
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the programmable platform are
longer lifetime of devices, faster time to market, and universal reach. It will
simplify prototyping effort, and accelerate product and technology adoption. The
market opportunities for commercialization are wireless protocol IP cores with
semiconductor companies such as Intel, Broadcom, Qualcomm as target
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;