* 0912667
* SBIR Phase I:  An RF Radiation Empowered Sensing Method for Low Cost Structural State Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Mehdi Khandani, Resensys, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,700.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project addresses
distributed structural integrity monitoring of infrastructure systems such as
bridges and pipelines. The existing solutions for structural state sensing are
expensive, labor intensive, non-scalable, and unreliable. The focus of this
project is to determine the feasibility of an innovative, cost effective, non-
intrusive, and scalable structural-state sensing technology known as Active RF
Test (ART). The ART technology is based on the use of mechanically flexible
patch-like wireless sensor devices that can be attached to distributed points of
a structure. ART uses RF energy delivered from an in-network energy source to
the sensors. Because the ART sensor patches will be battery-less, they will be
durable and environment-friendly. The expected outcomes of this project are a
novel battery-less power system for the ART patch sensors including a receive
and rectifier antenna and a thin film super-capacitor as the energy storage
medium, an energy-efficient wakeup scheduling scheme, in which the active duty
cycles of the sensors are synchronized for correlated measurements, and a proof-
of-concept prototype of a flexible ART patch
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the National Bridge Inventory
database, the US transportation infrastructure has 589,540 bridges, of which
68,571 are structurally deficient. The report also indicates that more than 80%
of deficient bridges are more than 30 years old. Other infrastructures such as
energy pipelines also suffer from aging. There are more than 2.3 million miles
of domestic oil and gas pipelines, of which 30% are more than 50 years old. As
demonstrated by the Minnesota bridge collapse of 2007, aging infrastructures
poses a significant societal challenge. The unique features of the proposed ART
technology ? easy installation, low cost, scalability, energy self sufficiency,
and durability ? make it an ideal response to this challenging
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).