* 0912148
* Predator-Prey Dynamics, Site Formation Processes &amp; the Roots of the Forager-Herder Socioeconomic Transition at Asikli Hoyuk, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Mary Stiner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 130,807.00

This project investigates the roots of the forager-producer socioeconomic
transition at the site of Asikli Houk in Central Anatolia (Turkey). This mound
site is located in the northern arc of the "Fertile Crescent", the Old World
region that gave rise to the first farming and herding cultures. The basal
cultural layers of the mound exceed 8200 cal BC, and they present a rare
opportunity to examine the ecological and social substrates from which village
economies arose out of a hunter-gatherer heritage. Led by Prof. Mary Stiner from
the University of Arizona, the study will last 3 years and is nested within a
larger international excavation and conservation effort overseen by Prof. M.
Ozbasaran of Istanbul University, Turkey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program integrates zooarchaeological, geoarchaeological (including
micromorphological), and radiocarbon dating methods to address a common set of
questions. Of great interest is the ecological and behavioral background of
incipient sheep and goat domestication as hypothesized strategies for enhancing
meat security and responses to social competition. The zooarchaeological part of
the study considers possible evidence for harvesting pressure on wild animal
populations (sheep, goats, deer &amp; wild cattle), changes in dietary breadth,
intensified carcass processing such as grease extraction, and possible evidence
for corraling of animals on site. The econimic evidence will be used as the
standard against which anomalous (less explicitly practical) patterns of animal
use can be guaged, such as those that may relate to social display or
conspicuous consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of the study is to
understand how some or all of the consumer behaviors listed above may have
contributed to shifts in trophic level and energy capture from the environment
at the end of the Pleistocene and beginning of the Holocene. In addition to
dating the 2 m of cultural deposits, an analyses of biomineralized Celtis
endocarps will be conducted to obtain background information on local
precipitation during the periods of occupation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geoarchaeological component of the research program is crucial for determining
the functions of mudbrick structures on the site and the kinds of activities
conducted on prepared floor and natural ground surfaces. Evidence for animal
captivity, hypothesized for wild sheep and goat, is expected to include
microscopic dung remnants inside enclosures. Preliminary tests indicate that
traces of dung are present in the younger layers of the site, and the contents
of the earliest layers are unknown. A pilot geological sampling study will also
be conducted in the surrounding region in anticipation of future strontium
isotope work on ungulate teeth. The latter effort is important to establishing
the geographic areas where animals were hunted as opposed to those which may
have been held captive on site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
interdisciplinary, and its components are bound together by close conceptual and
technical links. The issues of collections access, sample suitability, and
available infrastructure have been worked-out, greatly increasing the chances
for successful completion of the study. The research builds on existing
approaches but is also distinct in its emphasis on an integrated model of social
and economic valuations of meat resources. In addition to its scientific
contributions, the research program contributes substantively to the development
of synergistic professional exchanges between Turkish and American researchers,
on the excavation and through two workshops to be held at the University of
Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will generate unique data on one of
the most remarkable periods in human evolution. The forager-producer transition
marks a profound restructuring of human socioeconomics, demographic potential,
and relationships with nature. The A&amp;#351;&amp;#305;kl&amp;#305; Höyük
stratigraphic series is sufficiently detailed and continuous to examine the
conditions from which domestic ungulates and ownership evolved. Because the
sedimentary layers and faunas targeted by this study push the evolutionary
chronology of Central Anatolia back into a poorly known period, the results will
enhance the value of existing data sets in the region. Not all benefits to come
from this study concern the past: any success in understanding the underlying
processes of the forager-producer transition can also expose important lessons
in conservation and management for the present and future of humans in natural
systems.