* 0912548
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Engineered  Yeast Strain for the Production of Butanol - a Second Generation Biofuel
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Nikolai KHRAMTSOV, Arbor Fuel Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes the
engineering of a novel recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain containing
the butanol biosynthetic pathway. Currently, most butanol technology development
focuses on the genetic manipulation of the Acetone-Butanol-Ethanol (ABE)
fermentation microorganisms of the genus Clostridium. While several Clostridium
species have the natural ability to make butanol via the ABE pathway, the amount
of butanol produced is low, and therefore these strains would struggle to be
commercially viable. To avoid this limitation, the genes involved in the butanol
biosynthesis from Clostridium acetobutylicum were introduced into the yeast
Sacharomyces cerevisiae using genetic engineering techniques. This simple
eukaryote was chosen because of its robust nature in industrial fermentation and
also because it is a genetically tractable organism. When combined with our work
enabling yeast to digest and utilize cellulose as a feedstock, we expect to have
generated a microbe capable of converting biomass into a next generation biofuel
and industrial solvent.

Much research and development has gone into the production of ethanol from
biomass; although ethanol production is the most mature biofuel technology,
other alcohol-based fuels, such as butanol, can be used as renewable
replacements for gasoline. Butanol offers a number of benefits over ethanol
including higher energy content; butanol can be used directly as a fuel in
current vehicles without modification; butanol is less corrosive than ethanol
and can be piped through the existing pipeline infrastructure. Butanol produced
from petroleum is currently used as an industrial solvent or as feedstock for
manufacturing plastics and has an existing market of several billion dollars
worldwide. The current economic climate has forced the identification of new
manufacturing processes that replace the use of petroleum. As a result, there is
growing interest in fermentation of butanol from renewable resources. Through
the 1940s, butanol was produced as a fermentation product by bacteria from the
genus Clostridium. Due to economic considerations, manufacturing processes
utilizing petroleum as the raw material replaced commercial scale fermentation.
By utilizing non-food feedstock, the yeast strain that Arbor Fuel Inc will
construct could play a significant role in reducing our country's reliance on
petroleum and increase the utilization of renewable energy resources.

