* 0912157
* SBIR Phase I:  Regulating Transgene Expression for Biosecure Microalgal Biofuel Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Brad Postier, Phycal LLC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops a system for
the biosecure production of algal oils in open raceways while utilizing
genetically modified algae. Through production of transgenic algae containing
specific gene regulatory sequences, this research develops algal strains that
conditionally express an essential chloroplast-encoded gene only in the presence
of the specific inducer compound. Thus, transgenic algal strains would survive
only in the presence of the inducer compound (which will be added to the ponds
in our production facility). On escape from the production facility, these algae
will stop production of the essential target protein and be unable to reproduce
in the environment. This biosecure production system will allow the use of
genetically modified algae in open pond production systems without fear of
impacting the surrounding systems.

The broader impact of the proposed research will be to enable the use of low
cost, open-pond culturing systems for the production of biofuels using
microalgae genetically manipulated for maximum oil and biomass production. This
will be accomplished in a biosecure manner through the development of molecular
biological strategies that prevent the genetically manipulated algal strains
from reproducing once they are removed from the production ponds. The use of
molecular genetics to both increase the production of oil and ensure biosecure
use of the transgenic algae (unable to replicate in the surrounding environment)
could enable cost effective production of biofuels using algal systems.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).