* 0912482
* SBIR Phase I:  High Performance Electrochemical Capacitor Using Carbide-Derived Carbon Nanomaterial Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Ranjan Dash, Y-Carbon
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This SBIR Phase I research proposal will develop nano-porous carbide-derived
carbon electrodes for improved super-capacitor performance. The high power
charge/discharge rate of current super-capacitors is offset by a low storage
capacity compared to batteries. The capacitance of activated carbon super-
capacitor electrodes is partially limited by the large diameter and wide size
distribution of pores resulting from conventional synthesis from organic
precursors. This proposal will develop a novel method to produce nano-porous
carbon with a narrow distribution of pores less than 2 nm in diameter. Metal
atoms are chemically etched from a metal carbide lattice, leaving only carbon,
the pore size of which can be tuned with Angstrom precision by varying the
carbide precursor or etching conditions. While the use of a metal carbide
lattice as a template for porous carbon allows precise control over the pore
size, the pore volume is limited by the number of carbon atoms per unit of
volume in the carbide lattice. Increasing the volume of pores and specific
surface area without substantial broadening of the pore size distribution would
lead to a significant increase in capacitance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of
their long life and rapid power delivery, super-capacitors are replacing or
supplementing batteries and fuel cells in many applications. Advanced super-
capacitors will be used for energy harvesting from fast processes and for
storage of electrical energy, facilitating the production and use of electrical
energy from alternative sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;