* 0912870
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Pivoting-sliding Elliptical Machine for Knee Injury Prevention/Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Yupeng Ren, Rehabtek LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,503.00

This SBIR Phase I research project will develop a controllable and measurable
knee training system with a novel pivoting and sliding mechanism, which trains
patients to improve neuromuscular control in off-axis motions of pivoting and
sliding. This pivoting and sliding mechanism can be potentially implemented on
many existing exercise machines (elliptical machine, step machine and bicycle
exerciser) as a training accessory. As a powerful clinical evaluation tool, this
system also benefits the current study of knee injury prevention and
rehabilitation. Among those injuries, the knee is one of the most easily injured
body areas, with injuries to the Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) as the most
frequent problem overall followed by the PatelloFemoral Pain Syndrome (PFPS). In
most cases the knee injury involves the entire lower limb and trunk, so it is
more effective and efficient to train the whole lower limb, instead of an
individual joint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed unique neuromuscular
training system on the pivoting-sliding mechanism has significant potential for
rehabilitation after ACL and PFPS injury prevention/reduction. It is especially
important to provide the patients a scientific evaluation and make them recover
efficiently after their surgeries. It can be used widely in rehabilitation
centers for lower limb rehabilitation and ACL injury
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;