* 0912604
* SBIR Phase I: Seismic Inertial Data Fusion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Eric Canuteson, Metrozet, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,077.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides the
foundational work for a novel data fusion method that corrects rotational
effects in seismic data. After further refinement in a Phase II program, the
method will enable a commercially-viable data fusion sensor package that streams
digital rotationally-corrected seismic signals for infrastructure monitoring and
seismic networks. The project includes the implementation of a patent-pending
correction method followed by multi-axis shake table (MAST) testing of algorithm
performance as measured by key technical and market metrics. The project fills a
significant research and market gap; no automated correction scheme has been
demonstrated or introduced to the market despite the numerous research studies
by major customers that describe and quantify the problem. The project addresses
a known problem that is considered one of most significant unsolved problems in
seismic sensors and instrumentation.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will directly impact the
following markets and civic applications: seismic networks, earthquake hazard
mitigation, structural health monitoring, structural design, building
construction and site evaluation, actuarial and risk assessment, tsunami warning
systems, forensic seismology and post-earthquake emergency management. The
addressable market size of the proposed Phase I innovation is $35-65M/year. The
innovation has a clear market foundation based on concrete, demonstrated needs
that are currently unmet due to a widely recognized but unsolved problem in the
current products sold to customers today. The innovation will enable a
substantial improvement to the seismic and structural monitoring infrastructure
by filling a major gap in the existing instrumentation marketplace. A successful
commercial outcome of this project will improve the accuracy of tsunami
warnings, assist in the protection of major infrastructure, and find immediate
application in reducing the human and economic cost of earthquakes. With this
project the team wants to lead the transformation of the seismic sensor market
away from simple physical sensors and toward compound data fusion devices that
synthesize data from multiple physical devices.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."