* 0912219
* String compactification, generalized geometry, and 4D physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Michael Schulz, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad program of research is proposed
to elucidate the geometrical structure that underlies the internal dimensions of
string theory, and to overcome key obstacles to extracting 4D particle physics
from this geometry. The two main areas that will be investigated are warped
compactifications and generalized geometry. Three additional areas include
global embeddings of local models of particle physics, the string theory LHC
inverse problem, and a cosmological model in which conventional string theory
vacua arise from a more symmetric phase in the past. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Nearly all compactifications of string theory currently under sudy are
warped compactifications. It is proposed to apply string duality to derive the
precise effect of warping in the reduction to 4D, and to check nonperturbative
corrections to warped compactifications. The first project is essential for
reliably computing perturbative mass spectra in string theory models. The second
will increase confidence in recent nonperturbative mechanisms for moduli
stabilization and for the generation of hierarchically small Majorana neutrino
masses and mu-terms. Another critical ingredient in moduli stabilization and
inflationary scenarios is internal magnetic flux, now generalized to
nongeometric flux. The nongeometric flux radically alters our understanding of
the internal geometry by destroying the usual 6D interpretation of the extra
dimensions as a manifold. A set of strategies is outlined to more precisely
characterize compactifications with generalized flux, and to extract the 4D
physics of D-branes in this background. Of the remaining three proposed
projects, two further advance the goal of connecting string theory to 4D physics
at the scale soon to be probed at the LHC. The last project provides a concrete
realization of a long speculated idea that conventional string theory vacua
describe a symmetry breaking phase of a more symmetric underlying theory.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI brings the exciting frontiers of string
theory and elementary particle physics to Bryn Mawr College. Supervised research
will foster diversity in science and engineering, by building on Bryn Mawr's
strong tradition of individualized research mentoring of talented undergraduate
women (a quarter of whom are students of color) and coeducational graduate
students, with a proven track record of recruitment and retention. The Ph.D.
program, as a feeder to the faculties of regional liberal arts colleges, expands
research activity in high energy physics. The plan exploits existing
infrastructure: departmental colloquia, the Tri-College PACT seminar, and
connections to the University of Pennsylvania. The PI will initiate a Theory
Lunch and a visitor program tailored to the needs of a high energy theory
program at a thriving liberal arts college.