* 0912413
* SBIR Phase I: Microbial Production of Selected Anthocyanins
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Sheryl Verbitski, ChromaDex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2010
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project "Microbial
Production of Selected Anthocyanins", aims to establish cost-effective
methodologies for the efficient production of anthocyanins from genetically
engineered bacteria. Anthocyanins are plant secondary metabolites that are
mainly responsible for the colors in plant tissues, primarily reds, purples and
blues. They are non-toxic and have been observed to possess antioxidant,
anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities, thus making them attractive
candidates in the pharmaceutical, dietary supplement, and food colorants
industries. As the benefits of anthocyanins continue to gain definition, the
demand for these compounds is growing exponentially. Unfortunately, the cost of
attaining pure or well defined mixtures of anthocyanins using conventional
techniques outweighs the potential market return. By using engineered microbes,
large batches of selected anthocyanins can theoretically be produced, making
compound isolation efficient and cost effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research are to produce cost-effective natural and non-
natural anthocyanins, whose health benefits can be investigated; allow students
to participate and train in the ongoing development of a microbial production
platform; foster a collaboration between a U.S. academic institution and a U.S.
company, and contribute to the expansion of a small specialtychemical company.
This project will utilize students to create a biosynthetic system that will
produce a vast array of anthocyanins. As these compounds are attained they will
be moved to the market place, where they can be further researched by academia,
industry and governmental agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).