* 0912383
* SBIR Phase I:  Conversion of biomass by catalytic hydrothermal gasification, bromination, and catalytic coupling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Zachary Komon, GRT, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,971.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is an innovative route
to produce liquid fuels from biomass. The process will convert biomass,
including lignocellulosic biomass, to liquid fuels, with three key steps. First,
a synthetic natural gas (SNG) or biogas is generated by either anaerobic
digestion or by catalytic hydrothermal gasification. The SNG is rich in methane,
which is activated with bromine to produce methyl bromide. Finally, the methyl
bromide is coupled catalytically to higher hydrocarbons. Each of the steps is
known, but proof of concept has not been established. Feasibility of the
technology will be determined through a series of carefully planned laboratory
experiments. It is anticipated that this research will exhibit technical
viability, and demonstrate commercial feasibility. GRT has substantial
experience with and intellectual property related to converting natural gas to
fuels; the project is a natural extension of in-house expertise, utilizing
existing facilities.

Substantial demand for carbon-neutral renewable fuels exists in contemporary
society. The project contemplates a process to convert biomass into hydrocarbon
fuels, with substantial market impact. The US DOE has estimated that as much as
a billion tons per year of biomass is available sustainably for conversion to
biofuels, sufficient to displace one third of petroleum use in the US. Society
requires a process to produce biofuels at costs competitive with petroleum; a
successful outcome to the project will satisfy that demand. GRT has partnered
with Fortune 100 companies in the past for process development. Should technical
and economic viability of the process be demonstrated, a similar partnership is
anticipated.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).