* 0912176
*  Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Fish Remains from Four Archaic Sites of the Southeastern United States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Elizabeth Reitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 14,766.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Elizabeth J. Reitz, Carol Colaninno will examine
fish remains from the earliest known archaeological sites on the Georgia coast
(U.S.A.), for evidence of overfishing and environmental variations. The remains
were excavated from four Late Archaic shell rings, occupied by early Native
Americans between 3000-1000 B.C: the Marsh and West Rings sites on St. Simons
Island, and the St. Catherines and McQueen Rings on St. Catherines Island. Late
Archaic shell rings consist of densely packed shell and animal bones encircling
relatively shell-free interiors. Archaeological investigations at these and
other sites document the complexity of the social and political systems among
these fisher-hunter-gatherers. Previous works also demonstrate that fish
comprised a large portion of the inhabitants' diet. It is unclear, however, if
human populations impacted fish populations or rather if early environmental
fluctuations, unrelated to human activity, altered them. This project will
clarify this question by pursuing three research objectives; 1) documenting Late
Archaic fishing practices off the Georgia coast, 2) examining fish remains for
evidence of overexploitation by people, and 3) analyzing fish remains to
estimate environmental conditions and fluctuations during this time period.

Standard zooarchaeological methods will be used to identify unknown
archaeological fish remains to determine the fish and fishing practices used by
these Archaic people. To assess whether fish populations represented in these
shell rings experienced overfishing, incremental growth bands of fish ear bones
(otoliths), which are similar to tree rings, will be examined for changes in
growth rates. Ecological theory predicts that fish in overfished populations
achieve larger sizes at younger ages. Natural environmental fluctuations, in
addition to human fishing pressures, can influence fish growth rates. Before it
is possible to determine if overfishing occurred, environmental fluctuations
must be eliminated as potential factors affecting fish growth. Geochemical
analysis (stable oxygen isotopic profiles) of fish ear bones will be used to
establish Mid-Holocene temperatures. The resulting temperatures and growth rates
will clarify the relationship between human use and other environmental impacts
on fish populations.

Recent assessments of fisheries suggest twentieth-century changes in fish
populations and growth patterns. It is urgent to establish preindustrial
comparisons to which the effect of modern fisheries can be compared and to
establish historical changes associated with fishing activities. The use of
environmental data in conjunction with fish growth rates is an important step
towards determining the causes that influence the health of fisheries.

This research will assist in graduate student training in addition to
instructing undergraduates in archaeological and museum procedures associated
with this project. The results will be presented to a broader audience through
the Education and Outreach Program of the Georgia Museum of Natural History.