* 0912712
* SBIR Phase I:  Next generation optochemical sensors for detection of growing mold
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Joel White, CogniScent, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,700.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will develop
and employ an innovative signal amplification methodology to create highly
sensitive polymer sensors that can detect mold in residential and workplace
settings. One method is to detect the airborne microbial volatile organic
compounds (MVOC) released by growing mold. However, to be valuable any
technology needs to be highly sensitive to the MVOC compounds, provide real time
results, portable and inexpensive. The results of the proposed research will
lead to highly sensitive sensors that can be incorporated into a handheld
instrument which will regularly screen suspect areas to provide early detection
and point of source mold detection in areas where mold may be present but not
seen, create building histories, provide understanding of the relationship
between mold and health, and promote standards relating to the levels of MVOC in
workplaces and other buildings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently mold is primarily
detected through human observation - sight and smell ? however, by the time mold
is detected through human observation, it has already been growing for some time
in hidden or inaccessible areas, and may have caused adverse health problems and
significant property damage. The proposed research will enhance the science of
polymer based sensors through developing and proving a new signal amplification
strategy. This same strategy can be used across many different polymer types and
detection problems to enable trace detection of compounds in other applications
such as security explosives) and industrial safety (toxic industrial
chemicals).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).