* 0912824
* SBIR Phase I:  A Portable High-Power Tunable Terahertz Source using a Two-Color VECSEL
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Yarorough, Desert Beam Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel room temperature, narrow-line, high power vertical external-cavity
semiconductor laser (VECSEL) THz source based on difference-frequency-mixing of
high-power circulating dual wavelength fields in a high-finesse cavity.
Semiconductor quantum-well gain media have the unique property that multiple
wavelengths can be simultaneously generated within single laser cavity through a
physical process known as spectral hole-burning. A preliminary experiment has
demonstrated 3mW of THz power, far exceeding (by six orders of magnitude) the
existing record for CW THz sources using optical generation schemes. The project
goal is to develop an integrated source/detection solution for detection of and
countermeasures to improvised explosive devices.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project will be a price
competitive and comprehensive solution that would impact a broad range of
defense and commercial applications. Potential THz applications range from the
standoff detection of explosives and chemical and biological agents, to the
measurement of in vivo tissue water content, fat content, blood glucose and
cholesterol contents and the diagnosis of cancer. In dentistry THz may provide a
powerful alternative to X-ray images. In the food processing industry THz waves
will help detect E-coli and other poisonous bacteria as well as small
imperfections in packaging. THz spectroscopic imaging can help Law-enforcement
with the detection of prohibited substances and counterfeit bank notes.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."