* 0912210
* US-India Program for Exploratory Experiences for Researchers and Students (PEERS)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Sukumar Ghosh, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 01/31/2010
* USD 27,200.00

US-India Program for Exploratory Experiences for&lt;br/&gt;Researchers and
Students (PEERS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
organize a workshop focusing on ways to foster research and collaboration
between Indian and US scientists in the area of distributed systems and
networks, and to retain and encourage students to pursue advanced degrees in
computer science. The workshop is being organized in conjunction with ICDCN 2009
(International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking) at Hyderabad,
India during January 3-6, 2009. A panel of 8-10 US and Indian scientists are to
be invited to meet over two days and develop a set of recommendations for
effective collaboration and refine them via interactions with other ICDCN
participants. A comprehensive report on the recommendations will be generated
and submitted to NSF. The workshop is planned to be followed up with activities
to develop concrete collaboration proposals with the help of NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both US and
India are facing unique challenges in terms of interest of students in Computer
Science and engineering discipline. This workshop intends to address some of
these via collaborative programs and by exploiting the unique strengths of each
country so that both can benefit and learn from each other. The collaboration is
expected to lead to sustained activities where senior and junior researchers and
graduate students in Computer Science from both India and US will benefit from
exchange visits, student co-advising and other collaborative programs. The
resulting synergy will help us recruit and retain better students in our
advanced degree in computer science and help improve the participation of women
and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;