* 0912531
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Non-disruptive Updates in Order to Improve OS Security
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jeffrey Arnold, Ksplice, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of fundamental improvements to OS update technology. These
improvements would allow system administrators to apply OS patches faster than
current practice, which would significantly hinder botnets and other attackers
by reducing the window of vulnerability during which systems are running
software with known problems. The current state-of-the-art requires that
computers reboot to apply kernel updates. Since rebooting is disruptive, many
system administrators delay performing security updates, despite the greatly
increased risk-more than 90% of attacks exploit known vulnerabilities. Security
would improve if administrators could apply updates immediately, as hot updates,
without the need for reboots or disruption. Although programmers have long been
capable of making ad hoc modifications to running programs, hot update
technology has not seen widespread use because of key technical problems. In
particular, constructing hot updates has always required extensive programming
effort, which is expensive and-since programmers make mistakes-risky.

If successful, the current project will transform the state-of-the-art of
software updates. Most directly, this research has the potential deliver a
change that the IT industry wants: a way to apply security updates without
rebooting. More generally, this research aims to improve the field's technical
understanding of how to automatically apply traditional source code patches to a
running program, such as the kernel. This problem has broad applications in
debugging, profiling, instrumentation, and education. This research can lead to
the creation of a hot update service, provided to companies on a per-machine,
per-month basis, for a subscription charge. Companies who subscribe machines to
this service would, without any ongoing effort, be able to transparently receive
hot updates that solve software problems, without reboots or other disruption.
This distribution of hot updates would improve security and reliability while
decreasing machine maintenance costs.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).