* 0912668
* SBIR Phase I:  Lower Cost Carbon-Carbon Composites Densified by Microwave Heating
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Lori Bracamonte, MATERIALS FOCUS INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 04/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
more cost effective, carbon/carbon (C/C) composites with improved properties.
Microwave processing will be investigated to enhance densification of C/C
composites traditionally produced by lengthy chemical vapor infiltration (CVI)
processes that are known to be very costly. The innovation is to utilize
microwave processing to produce temperature gradients within individual
components, such that it will be possible to preferentially densify from the
inside-out thus reducing densification times and potentially improving material
properties. Materials Focus has developed technology that enables microwave
heating of electrically conductive carbon fiber performs at low pressures in
hydrocarbon environments without arcing that results in sooting and preferential
heating at the soot deposits. This program will continue this research to
achieve the best microwave equipment design/setup and to optimize processing
parameters to demonstrate significantly shorter CVI times. Composites will be
densified and characterized to assess progression of densification, measure
strength, and provide an evaluation of the cost benefits over traditional CVI
processing techniques. It is anticipated that densification times will be
significantly reduced without detrimentally affecting the properties of the C/C
composites.

High specific strength C/C composites have been used for decades in high
technology applications. The development of lower cost, higher strength C/C
composites would be enabling to a multitude of industries requiring high
performance friction components as well as aerospace and defense applications
necessary for national defense. This includes aircraft brakes, clutch plates,
rocket nozzles, and gas turbine engine components. As the cost of carbon and
graphite fibers is escalating, lower cost processing techniques are required to
make these materials more cost effective. The microwave CVI process is better
than conventional CVI since it has potential to significantly reduce processing
times which could result in substantial manufacturing processing cost reductions
and improved composite properties. An additional benefit of microwave processing
to society is that it is environmentally friendly and typically results in
energy savings. The scientific value will arise from improved understanding of
the interaction of microwaves with different materials and how microwave
equipment design is critical for the heating of high electrical conductivity
materials.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).