* 0912203
* REU Site:  Engaging Tribal College Students in Undergraduate Ecological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Jeremy Guinn, Sitting Bull College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2012
* USD 402,837.00

The North Dakota Tribal College REU Site will provide a research program for
undergraduates during the summers of 2009-2011. Eight (8) Tribal College
students will be selected each year to participate in an intensive 10-week
research program in ecology. Research will be conducted by students under the
guidance of mentors from Sitting Bull College, Turtle Mountain Community
College, Virginia Tech, and others. Students will be involved in ecological
research focusing on avian ecology and brood parasitism, the ecology and bio-
accumulation of heavy metals in turtles, and the ecology of West Nile virus. The
goal of the proposal is to utilize the resources of Tribal Colleges and
Universities that comprise the North Dakota Association of Tribal Colleges
(NDATC) in order to provide meaningful research experiences to tribal school
undergraduates. Students will conduct individual research projects while
becoming part of a summer research team. Research projects will focus on
culturally-important issues of concern for Reservation communities in areas of
environmental health and natural resource management. It is expected that this
program will increase the recruitment, retention, and completion of Native
American students in science, while providing a solid foundation for these
students to be successful in graduate programs beyond the Tribal Colleges.
Students will receive stipends and allowances for meals and lodging. Additional
information can be found at http://www.sittingbull.edu/programs/envsci/REU or by
contacting the Project Principal Investigator, Dr. Jeremy Guinn, by email at
jeremyg@sbci.edu or by phone at 701-854-8037.