* 0912773
* SBIR Phase I:  New Thermosetting Wood Composite Binder Resin having Low Formaldehyde Emission Potential
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Moon Kim, Mississippi Pacific Resins Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 05/31/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims at improving the
reaction yield in synthesizing a new resin monomer material. The monomer was
found to be processed to polymeric thermosetting resins useful for replacement
of current urea-formaldehyde resins used as binders of various interior grade
wood composite boards because of their excellent capability of reducing the
formaldehyde emission levels of boards. Formaldehyde emission reduction or
elimination from wood composite boards has been called for by general public as
well as by various government regulations. There is currently no good commercial
alternative binder resin system available to meet impending government
regulations. For further development of the new resin system to the pilot plant
and then to the commercial stage, the chemical synthesis method for the resin
monomer material needs to be improved significantly in the laboratory. The
proposed research aims to investigate the chemical synthesis method of the
monomer by carrying out a series of reactions and measuring the yields of the
product and byproducts to obtain the most optimum synthesis reaction parameters.
The objective of research is to reach the chemical synthesis reaction yield of
95% or higher along with minimal associated costs of reaction.

The Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims at expediting the
commercialization of a new resin technology by optimizing the manufacturing
process of monomer and thereby lowering the overall manufacturing cost. The new
resin technology will enable the interior grade wood composite board industry to
significantly reduce the formaldehyde emission levels of boards below the
regulation levels. The industry will be able to continue the manufacturing of
otherwise well-accepted wood composite boards, converting low value wood wastes
into high-value wood composite boards. Further, the low formaldehyde emission of
wood composite boards will directly result in significant health benefits to the
public as well as lowering of environmental pollution. The proposed research and
resultant implementation of the resin technology will enhance the technological
understanding on the chemical and physical mechanisms of formaldehyde emission
generally occurring in the hot press manufacturing of wood composite boards
using UF resins. Relationship of the mole ratio of formaldehyde vs.
functionality of base monomer of resins and resultant strength properties of
boards and formaldehyde emission levels will be more clearly understood, which
may lead to improvements in technologies that further reduce the formaldehyde
emission levels of wood composite boards in the future.

