* 0912527
* SBIR Phase I:  Interactive video based Contextual & Dynamic Application Access
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Syed Abbas, 2Cimple Inc
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,831.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses a significant
need facing video industry - how to monetize online video. There were over 11.5
billion online videos watched in USA only in July 2008. The online video
consumption trend is increasing approximately 10% - to 13% monthly. The current
approach to monetize online video is limited and does not scale. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research is to assess the feasibility of a
new and unique approach to monetize online video through an Interactive video
based "Contextual" and "Dynamic" Ad insertion technology platform. A new
algorithm/methodology/framework will be designed and an alpha prototype of the
Interactive video based dynamic Ad insertion technology will be proven feasible.

The key value proposition of this interactive video based contextual and dynamic
Ad insertion technology is a new way to enhance end-user engagement with
advanced business intelligence. The video publisher will have a new approach to
monetize their online video assets with high scalability. The advertisers will
have a unique tool to advertise and communicate about their products and
services to target customers. The end users will have highly-engaging access to
personalized and relevant information about a product or service. If proven
successful, the technology would allow interactivity within the online video
thus allowing end users quick call-to-action within the video in a novel way
that will represent significant value for multiple stakeholders.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).