* 0912492
* SBIR Phase I:  Metal-based microchannel heat exchange systems for electronic devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Fanghua Mei, Enervana Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
compact, metalbased, sealed, recirculating, fluid cooling system for electronic
devices. Metal-based microchannel heat exchangers (MHEs) have potential
advantages over Si-based devices in terms of thermal performance and mechanical
robustness. The proposed fabrication technology is unique and provides a means
to low-cost, high-throughput, mass production of high efficiency, microchannel
cooling systems for micro-electronic and power-electronic devices. Efficient
fabrication of metal-based MHEs and quantitative flow and heat transfer
measurements on them are critical for establishing the economic and technical
feasibility of such devices. The proposing team has spearheaded the development
of metallic high-aspect-ratio microscale structures (HARMSs) fabrication by
molding replication, a potentially low-cost, high-throughput, mass production
technique. This proposal will focus on the fabrication, assembly, and testing of
metallic MHE based heat absorption modules and metallic MHE assembly based heat
rejection modules. The team will 1) build all-metal, compact, high-efficiency,
heat absorption/rejection module prototypes, 2) test these prototypes and
quantify their heat transfer performance, 3) establish the engineering protocol
for optimizing MHE geometries. The testing results on MHE-assembly based heat
rejection modules will be benchmarked against competing devices.

Traditional air cooling technology has become a limiting factor for current
generation high performance electronic devices and will be insufficient for
removing heat generated from new generation micro-electronic and power-
electronic devices. Successful execution of this proposal will provide a novel,
high-efficiency, microchannel fluid cooling technique for these new generation
devices. The target product of this proposal will be marketed to computer
original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), such as Intel, IBM, Apple, Dell,
Lenovo, etc., and is believed to enjoy performance and cost advantages over
competing devices currently being contemplated. The study on the fabrication and
heat transfer testing of metal-based MHEs with complicated designs will enhance
scientific and technological understanding related to both science of
manufacturing and fluid flow and heat transfer.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."