* 0912743
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost Low-Impact Magnesium Production by Solid Oxide Membrane Electrolysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Adam Powell, INFINIUM, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
mathematical model of the Solid Oxide Membrane (SOM) electrolysis process for
producing magnesium metal from its oxide. This model will simulate fluid flow
and heat and mass transfer in the SOM process in order to provide a design tool
for an industrial-scale SOM reactor for magnesium production. Experiments
performed by the subcontractor at Boston University will validate the model and
help to tune its parameters. The mathematical model will also couple to a cost
model in order to predict various costs including energy, capital and raw
materials and determine the most cost-effective size and configuration of the
industrial-scale process. If successful, this will be the first industrial
process to produce metal and oxygen from metal oxides in one step with no carbon
or chlorine anywhere in the process. This model will also be useful for
assessing the fitness of the SOM process to producing other metals.

Magnesium is the lowest-density engineering metal and third most abundant metal
in the earth's crust with good strength and stiffness. But high and fluctuating
prices have prevented its broad utilization in motor vehicles and other
applications. Auto makers led by the U.S. Big Three are seeking to increase the
magnesium alloy content of vehicles from 10-15 lbs/vehicle to 350 lbs/vehicle by
2020, replacing 650 lbs/vehicle of steel and aluminum parts. This will increase
fleet fuel economy by 1.5-2 miles per gallon, reducing annual petroleum import
expenditures by about $20 billion. In addition to magnesium's impact on vehicle
efficiency, the straightforward and efficient SOM process will likely use much
less energy than is used to produce aluminum, and its magnesium product may
rival the raw material cost of the steel and aluminum which it replaces. This
could lead to a new magnesium economy taking full advantage of its light weight
and ease of manufacturing in products from bicycles to refrigerators to trucks.
Furthermore, the SOM process can likely reduce the cost and environmental impact
of producing other metals such as titanium, copper, and tantalum leading to a
new primary metals industrial ecology.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).