* 0912855
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Characterization of Bio-inert UNCD films for Implantable Devices to Eliminate Blood Clotting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* John Carlisle, ADVANCED DIAMOND TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,852.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate UNCD®,
a nanocrystalline from of smooth, thin diamond, as an anti-thrombotic coating
for implantable medical devices. One of the largest problem with implantable
circulatory assist devices such as artificial hearts and vascular assist devices
(VADs) is the need to treat patients with anticoagulants to avoid blood clots
within the devices and to avoid heart attack, stroke, and death that may occur
if the anticoagulation dosage is not right. Previous work on diamond and
diamond-like carbon (DLC) has demonstrated reduced interactivity between the
coating and human blood clotting factors. The use of UNCD however, with its
overall biochemical and electrochemical inertness, extreme durability to wear,
and very low surface roughness, will extend the advantages previously
demonstrated with other carbon materials.

The broader impacts of this research are the potential reduction or elimination
of anticoagulants for patients with implanted medical devices, making a much
larger patient population eligible for advanced devices such as heart pumps, and
enabling the use of these devices for new applications. UNCD coatings on the
blood contacting surfaces of these and similar devices has the potential to
eliminate the need for anticoagulation or to reduce it to so low a dose that the
risk of fatal bleeding can be eliminated. The reduction in prescription costs
alone could pay for this investment many times over. Fundamental work will also
shed light on the effects of dynamic blood flow, variations in surface chemistry
and morphology on the thrombus/clot formation.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).