* 0912541
* SBIR Phase I:  Volatile gene expression reporters for use during fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Reshma Shetty, Ginkgo BioWorks
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,981.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
set of novel, versatile measurement tools for use during fermentation and scale-
up in metabolic engineering. The tools will be based on the production of
odorants and enable real-time time monitoring of gene expression levels during
fermentation. Metabolic engineering holds great promise for enabling a range of
important applications including cellulosic biofuels, therapeutics production,
and bio-based, environmentally-friendly chemical manufacturing. But any such
project requires that an engineered organism expressing the relevant
biosynthetic pathway be scaled up from lab-sized cultures to large-scale
commercial fermentation. This is not a straightforward task, and is different
for every project, because the fermentation conditions required for each
engineered strain are different. The new measurement tools will enable more
detailed quantification of cell state during fermentation so that strain and
pathway optimization is more informed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this research are to enable more informed strain optimization for large-scale
fermentation thereby reducing R&amp;D costs for the bio-based manufacturing
industry. With the growing interest in clean technology and alternatives to
petroleum-based manufacturing, many new companies and existing companies are
moving into the bioengineering and biomanufacturing industries. However, all of
these companies face a common hurdle of scaling up production of their fuel,
specialty chemical or biomaterial to commercial scale. The companies spend
significant R&amp;D money and time optimizing pathway yield during fermentation.
For example, Dupont took 7 years and $400M to scale-up microbial production of
1,3-propanediol. Jay Keasling, a founder of Amyris Biotechnologies, a leading
synthetic biology company, reported that Amyris spends 95% of their time trying
to find and eliminate unintended interactions between components in their
engineered metabolic pathways. Reducing the R&amp;D costs in the biofuels and
industrial biotechnology industries would open up new application areas to
environmentally-friendly, bio-based production
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).