* 0912623
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast, High-Precision Model-Based Deformable Mirror Calibration and Control in Adaptive Optics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Glenn Tyler, the Optical Sciences Company
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,936.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a
significant advancement of the state of the art in fast, high-precision
calibration and control of deformable mirrors for adaptive optics
(AO)applications. This is accomplished by the development of a detailed
nonlinear model of deformable mirror performance and fast solvers for the
differential equations that describe the situation. Inverse techniques are
utilized in the calibration process and fast solvers are used in the control.
This approach provides enhanced performance over conventional approaches which
assume that the deformable mirror is linear and only approximately solves the
differential equations involved in two important ways. The first is that
convergence in closed loop operation will be accelerated and the second is that
accurate open loop control is available. The two major results of the proposed
effort, accurate calibration and high-precision control of deformable mirrors,
will be demonstrated by using the appropriate level of analysis and simulation.
The team will concentrate in applying these advances to extra solar planet
detection.

The commercial impact of this work will be significant as it will facilitate the
application of AO technology to areas that are unavailable today such as laser
communications, biomedical imaging, consumer electronics, surveillance, and
solar energy. Although the purpose of the proposed work is to bring this
capability to market the scientific merits of this work are significant in their
own right. Since this effort develops fast solvers to differential equations and
solving an inverse problem that leads to the practical calibration and control
of hardware there is little doubt these techniques have scientific merit and
will be useful in these areas.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."