* 0912978
* SBIR Phase I:  Robust Adaptive Levitation Control Technologies for High Speed, High Power Energy Storage Flywheels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Ricci, LaunchPoint Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,710.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will develop
advanced control techniques that will enable high-speed, high-efficiency
operation of large-scale energy storage flywheels. A novel flywheel concept ?
the ?Power Ring'' ? based on a hub-less rotor levitated and controlled by a
hybrid magnetic bearing has been developed. The design and zero-speed levitation
of the Power Ring have been demonstrated. Idle or ?spinning? losses are a key
specification as they directly influence operational cost of the unit. Bearing
losses are predicted to be 20% of the idle loss in the system. An advanced
control system can reduce these losses by precisely monitoring and modifying the
rotor vibrational modes as they sweep across the frequency band with changing
machine speed. Modal control of the energy in individual vibration modes will
give a highly efficient system that removes energy only from those modes that
limit the machine operation. Advanced control will allow multi-megawatt devices
with idle losses reduced by at least a factor of 2. A new control topology for
the magnetic bearing that integrates robust control theory, modulated frequency
control, on-line system identification, and adaptive control to create a
reliable energy efficient levitation system will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrical power quality problems have enormous
economic impact. The Electric Power Research Institute estimates that power
fluctuation and blackout losses exceed $100 billion/year. The majority of these
problems are outages, surges, and sags lasting only a few seconds. The Power
Ring flywheel is a cost effective method of maintaining power system stability
by injecting stored energy back into the grid to carry the system through the
disturbance. It can serve as a rapid-response energy storage device, allowing
control of grid power flows and frequency, and enhancing grid stability and
power quality/reliability. Flywheels are more efficient and less polluting than
the current method of using idling power stations (typically coal-fired) to
provide reserve for frequency regulation applications. Flywheels have a longer
life, lower maintenance cost, and do not contain toxic chemicals as do battery
storage systems for power quality applications. The high power density and cycle
life of flywheels makes them an enabling technology for regenerative
transportation applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;