* 0912496
* Collaborative Research:   Action Dynamics as an Index of Learning and Generalization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/17/2008,08/31/2010
* Michael Spivey, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2010
* USD 78,680.00

Traditional theories in cognitive science often see mental processing and motor
execution as separate domains of psychological investigation. In opposition to
this, the past half-century has seen a resurgence of continuous and dynamical
approaches to the mind, arguing for a smooth transition from cognitive into
motor subsystems. This predicts that the dynamic characteristics of observable
action will directly reflect underlying thought processes. In support of this,
much recent research has shown that continuous tracking of motor movement can
provide rich information about the mental processing giving rise to it.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support of the National Science Foundation, Drs. Rick
Dale and Michael Spivey will explore how action dynamics can shed light on human
learning. By tracking computer-mouse trajectories, Dale and Spivey aim to
uncover how action dynamics evolve as people learn. Several multi-choice,
computer-based experiments will employ tasks of varying complexity, from simple
associative learning (e.g., pairing symbols) to acquiring knowledge from text.
Such measures would supplement traditional performance variables based on
discrete answers. These studies can also provide a further understanding of the
intimate connection between thought and action. In addition, the work can
provide insights about how best to adapt computer systems for education: Through
automatic analysis of computer-mouse movements, these adapted systems could
detect such states as lack of learner confidence or deep understanding, and
could appropriately respond to these potential deficits in real time, and
thereby enhance learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;