* 0912851
* Pleistocene-Holocene Transition Era Human Subsistence and Paleoecology at Marmes Rockshelter, Southeastern Washington
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* R. Lee Lyman, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 130,996.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. R. Lee Lyman will evaluate the
alternative hypotheses concerning the subsistence strategies practiced the
earliest human inhabitants of North America. Some archaeologists believe that
these early groups were specialized hunters of mega-mammals and only
occasionally exploited small game; others argue that they were dietary
generalists who opportunistically exploited an occasional mammoth or bison.
Previous statistical analyses of published data by different researchers have
produced conflicting results, but all researchers agree that the only way to
choose the correct hypothesis is to analyze data newly derived from faunal or
paleozoological remains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appropriate paleozoological
remains were excavated in the 1960s from Marmes Rockshelter in southeastern
Washington State. The Marmes site's stratigraphic column spans the PHT and many
faunal remains were collected from 1-mm mesh sieves, making the collection
unique in the western U.S. The small sample of remains that have been studied to
date suggest that the entire collection will consist of about 4500 identifiable
bones and teeth distributed across six stratigraphically distinct assemblages.
Initial paleoamerican subsistence practices and shifts in subsistence pursuits
as people learned about their newly colonized landscape will be documented with
fine-grain temporal resolution and notably large samples. Further,
paleoecological responses of resident fauna to the environmentally dynamic PHT
in the form of shifting phenotypes and taxonomic abundances will be revealed.
Knowing these responses will assist with answering the focal questions: How did
paleoamerican colonists who were initially ignorant of local landscape ecology
survive? And how did their subsistence practices shift as they learned local
ecology? Related questions include: Which of the available faunal resources did
early humans at Marmes exploit? In what proportions were they exploited? How
were prey carcasses butchered (e.g., for immediate consumption or delayed
consumption)? At what seasons of the year were species exploited (based on age
at death of species with seasonally limited birth seasons)? Precisely these
questions underpin the alternative hypotheses about paleoamerican subsistence.
Further, learning the nature of the ecological landscape (including climate)
that paleoamericans encountered and adapted to will assist with ascertaining the
why of paleoamerican subsistence pursuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of the research are that two to four graduate students will receive training in
zooarchaeological methods. Several of them will develop their own research
projects using the Marmes faunal collection. Further, the collection very likely
contains human remains that will be sorted out and returned to the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (that administers the collection) and made available for
repatriation. Finally, the value of curation of such collections (in this case,
&gt; 40 years) will be demonstrated.