* 0912756
* SBIR Phase I:  Hugebrow Lite, A Participatory Human Genome Browser for Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Beatriz Perez-Sweeney, Hugebrow
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on creating a
3-dimensional human genome visualization for education and exhibition. The
platform will be a 3-D visualization software toolkit designed to explore the
genome's structure and function in the context of the entire body. It will also
ease the difficulty of genomic and proteomic searches. The toolkit will use
public data to interactively present and build pathways from gene to phenotype.

Currently, no genomic software incorporates the molecular movement capability of
software tools into animated processes of gene expression. In addition, no
software takes the powerful dataset integration of applications to create
powerful 3-D visuals. Biochemical, medical, and genetic researchers lack
intuitive software to input data-rich files and automatically output genetic
pathways. The team envisions a tool that will accept keyword search terms, like
a trait name, and show all related regulatory molecules and pathways. This would
provide users with an efficient visual map on a particular genetic topic, which
could then be used to focus deeper investigation. By showing how somatic
concepts connected through the integrated workings of the genome, the team will
create a visualization tool for research, media production, and education. If
successful, this platform will find a wide array application across industry and
education sectors.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).