* 0912828
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Near Infrared Monitor for Pichia Pastoris Bioreactors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Elizabeth Gibson, ASL Analytical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
sensing technology capable of continuously monitoring concentrations of critical
metabolites during protein expression with the yeast Pichia pastoris. Presently,
continuous monitoring is unavailable and this process is controlled using time
consuming and labor intensive off-line analyses. This sensing technology uses
near infrared absorption spectra of bioreactor growth medium collected
continuously to monitor analyte concentrations and changes in biomass throughout
the fermentation process. Preliminary results demonstrate the ability to make
accurate and continuous analytical measurements and to actively control
metabolite concentrations. This success is attributed to ASL innovations that
include using a solid-state spectrometer, restricting the measurement spectral
range, and implementing a calibration strategy based on analyte-specific
chemical information. This Phase I effort will establish the commercial
feasibility of this monitoring approach by developing a robust, practical
calibration system for routine operation and by designing a means to
continuously and non-destructively collect analytical spectra.

The broader impacts of this research will be to enable accurate feedback control
of bioreactors, thereby enhancing optimization efforts and maximizing production
yields of high commodity proteins. Successful development of a continuous, real-
time monitor for Pichia pastoris will enhance its attractiveness as a protein
expression platform. The proposed monitor will overcome the limitations of off-
line analyses by providing an effective means to follow metabolite
concentrations and cell density changes non-destructively during the course of a
fermentation process. This sensing technology will fill a void in the general
protein expression market where reliable, on-line sensing is unavailable.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).