* 0912629
* SBIR Phase I:  Combinatorial, controlled, and timed release of parylene encapsulated anti-cancer therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Erik Pierstorff, Biotic Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 98,328.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
enhancing combinatorial and timed release of drugs for the localized treatment
of cancer. Currently there are few solutions for localized elimination of tumor
cells following surgical removal of breast cancer (lumpectomy). There is a real
unmet need for minimally invasive devices that locally deliver a cocktail of
drugs in a sustained and safe fashion. We propose to develop an implantable
polymer-based microfilm device for the release of Paclitaxel and Gemcitabine
that is non-toxic, comfortable and cosmetically acceptable to the patient.

The broader Impacts of this research are: - Establishment of a multidisciplinary
initiative that integrates expertise in biology, materials science/engineering
and nanotechnology to address an unmet medical need. - Enhancements in breast
cancer treatment, coupled with downstream opportunities to treat a broader array
of other diseases that are expected to improve patient outcomes globally. -
Economic value through new market creation, product development and clinical
applications - Biotic Laboratories has a strong relationship with educational
institutions (high schools and universities) in the LA and Chicago area and has
engaged intern activity as part of its start-up activities. In general, new
entrepreneurial companies such as Biotic serve as both economic growth engines
and inspiration to a future generation of scientists and engineers.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).