* 0912524
* SBIR Phase I:  Force-Controlled Robotic Arm Capable of Sub-Millimeter Precision
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* William Townsend, Barrett Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a portable,
interactive Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM) for geometric data collection
consistent with statistical sampling of a series of parts. The innovation
exploits a characteristic of cable drives that supports precise repeatability in
an articulated arm. To optimize production and avoid scrap generation,
manufacturing process corrections must occur promptly and yet must be based on
adequate measurement data. Existing metrology systems inhibit these preferred
statistical process control principles. Large motorized CMMs are either taught
offline using CAD models or online using awkward joystick interfaces. Manual
only portable-arm CMMs are safe and convenient to use, but teach-and-playback is
not supported. The proposed solution is a motorized articulated robot that
combines the safety of a manual system with playback precision thereby
supporting convenient statistical process control. The anticipated final product
will be a portable, user-friendly, cost-effective robotic arm that spreads the
quality advantages of statistical process control across a broad range of
products and manufacturers including non-traditional manufacturing such as
medical surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shortcomings of metrology devices
available today discourage the use of statistical process control, thereby
undermining manufacturing quality. The proposed solution improves manufacturing
competitiveness by enabling easier adoption of statistical process control,
leading to higher quality and reduced scrap costs. The proposed solution invites
production line workers back into close physical contact with the process that
they must ultimately understand and control. The worker strengthens intuition by
teaching the device for each new-part geometry, while the playback capability
avoids tedium and repetitive stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).