* 0912290
* SBIR:  Innovative Recycled Microballoon Thermoplastic Sandwich Composites
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Dana Grow, SIOUX MANUFACTURING CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project applies to material and
process development of products from scrap (recycled) thermoplastic composite
materials with microballoon fillers. Thermoplastics have superior strength,
stiffness, impact energy absorption capacity, low cost and are readily recycled.
Sandwich composite materials will be produced with recycled polypropylene
syntactic microballoons and power plan derivate flyash microballoons. A sandwich
composite is structurally efficient because it comprises a lightweight core that
resists shear forces, bounded by stiff/strong facesheets that resist bending
forces, and the above constituents will produce structures of superior specific
strength and stiffness. The research objectives are to: (a) investigate the
processing aspects of microballoon thermoplastics; (b) develop facesheets from
recycled and sustainable thermoplastic composite scrap; (c) develop sandwich
constructions with the recycled thermoplastic facesheets in conjunction with
microballoon core materials, and (d) characterize thermal and mechanical
properties of the sandwich composite panels. The results from these finding will
establish design-process-performance windows to produce panels and intermediate
forms to utilize recycled thermoplastic microballoon materials in semi-
structural and structural applications.

The ability to process recycled thermoplastic materials, syntactic foams and
power plant waste derivative fly ash will create commercial value for products
in transportation, pipeline safety and repair, infrastructure, protection of
mass transit and school buses, enclosures for outdoor electrical equipment
around buildings and marine vessels, and military gear. The material
constituents are extremely cost-effective, so the product(s) will have lower to
comparable cost metric to that of competing materials such as plywood, bulk
metals and sheet metals. The materials developed will have positive societal
benefits in terms of sustainability, recyclability, enhanced protection, cost-
effectiveness, energy dissipation, insulation, impact resistance and vibration
damping. This innovation will overcome the scientific and technological barrier
for material and processing of regrind thermoplastic constituents and
microballoon to create sustainable products. This is a high-risk, yet high pay-
off developmental effort. The societal impact is further enhanced because (a)
Sioux Manufacturing Corporation is a Native American company located in the
Spirit Lake Nation, and (b) the educational impact is significant due to the
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students including minority students
at University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB), the academic partner.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).