* 0912365
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Biomass to Alcohols Process
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Mitrajit Mukherjee, Exelus, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop a
breakthrough chemical process to convert cellulosic biomass into alcohols that
can be easily blended into gasoline. This project addresses the urgent need for
biomass conversion technologies that can efficiently produce motor fuels
compatible with existing engines and infrastructure. This project responds to
the NSF-stated desire to develop new biomass conversion and biorefinery
improvement technologies, and in particular to the problem of selectively
deconstructing biomass and converting it into useful materials. Biomass is
converted into gasoline-range alcohols suitable for use as a motor fuel additive
or substitute. The key innovations in this technology are a unique reaction
scheme combining three steps to depolymerize and stabilize biomass, and then to
selectively convert it to useful alcohols using a new heterogeneous catalyst
with combined acid/base functionalities. If successful, this technology would
provide a renewable source of motor fuel to begin to offset the 390 million
gallons of gasoline consumed in the US each day.

This SBIR Phase I project offers significantly better performance than other
proposed biomass conversion technologies. Specifically, no acidic waste is
produced, byproducts are minimized, and all of the carbon contained in the feed
is preserved in the desired fuel products. This technology could form the basis
of the first economically viable biorefineries. Many oil companies, as well as
private investor groups have expressed interest in being the first to market
with this type of next-generation biorefinery, but they lack cost-effective
technology. This advanced biomass-to-gasoline process can be that enabling
technology, offering clean, renewable motor fuels from non-food waste biomass,
zero net carbon emissions, and the ability to reduce the US dependence on
imported oil.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).