* 0912515
* SBIR Phase I:  Chip-Scale Micromechanical Gyroscope for Angular Roation Detection, Stability and Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* David Chen, Sand 9, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
vibratory gyroscope with electrostatic actuation and capacitive (or
piezoelectric) detection at 0.1 - 1 MHz, a much higher frequency than the ones
used by current commercial MEMS gyroscopes and with quality factors exceeding
1000. Because of the high frequencies, the thermal Johnson noise (which
typically defines the noise floor for standard micromechanical gyroscopes) is
reduced considerably by orders of magnitude. The proposed technology involves a
two-mode approach in which the drive force is applied in one mode of the
resonator. Under external rotation, this mode is coupled to a second mode, which
is detected, either by electrostatic or piezoelectric technique. Using this
approach, it is possible to achieve micron-sized chip-scale gyroscopes,
manufactured on wafer scale, with performance parameters compared to high-end
tactical grade gyroscopes.

Micromechanical vibratory gyroscopes have increasing relevance in inertial
navigation systems and automotive applications. Beyond these applications which
require devices with better sensitivity and performance parameters, a host of
new applications in consumer electronics have suddenly emerged. In particular,
hand-held devices such as cellular devices and GPS systems, and gaming consoles
such as the Nintendo Wii are now including miniature gyroscopes as low cost
companion to existing micromachined accelerometers. These applications are in
essence similar to the automotive applications in which the gyroscopes are used
to detect angular rotation and provide ride stabilization, roll over detection
and better traction control. Development of high sensitivity high stability
micromechanical gyroscopes will also be of importance to a number of fundamental
research questions, which include measuring gravitational red shift for
validating the predictions of general relativity. As an inertial system, a
highly sensitive gyroscope that can be cooled down to low temperatures can also
be used to detect or put limits on new fundamental spin-dependent forces.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."