* 0912640
* SBIR Phase I:  Large-Scale Social Network Analysis Software Services for the Telecommunications Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Nathan Eagle, NDM Labs
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
potential of using call log data to assist the telecommunications industry in
better serving its customers. Call logs (records of who called whom) can be
viewed as social networks, with phone numbers representing vertices and phone
calls representing edges. Understanding a customer's social network can
potentially provide a much better understanding of their behavior and
preference. The technical challenge of this project is both statistical and
computational. As the telecommunications industry serves a very large number of
customers, their data sets are massive. In the single month, for example, a
major telecommunications provider logged 12 billion phone calls made between 250
million phone numbers. The technical objectives are: 1) to further develop s
nascent computational platform for extremely large-scale network analysis, and
2) to validate algorithms and procedures, which quantify the effectiveness of
operator marketing campaigns.

The goal is to create s software-and-services product offering designed to
leverage telecom companies' own call logs to help them better value, serve and
retain their customers. It is believed that the telecommunications industry has
overlooked the richest data in their possession: the call logs themselves. A
telecommunications operator has information not just on individuals, but on
their calling behavior, their communities, and their communities' calling
behavior. A single major operator typically serves over 15 million customers;
given the sheer number of subscribers, operators must rely on statistical
analysis to monitor customer satisfaction and to anticipate customer needs.
Enhancing this knowledge will allow them to optimize their product marketing, to
improve their customer care strategies, to more efficiently use their
advertising budget, and to anticipate "churn," the cessation of service. The
mobile phone market currently reaches over 4 billion subscribers globally. While
the past decade has seen significant growth, most markets have reached
saturation; mobile phone operators now are shifting their focus from growth to
efficient customer retention strategies. This shift in strategy presents an
opportunity to apply data mining techniques to call logs, a rich resource that
to date has remained unused by the industry.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).