* 0912608
* Collaborative Research: Components of Floral Attraction in a Functionally Specialized but Ecologically Generalized Flower Guild
* BIO,DEB
* 10/08/2008,12/31/2012
* Peter Palmiotto, Antioch University New England
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 135,775.00

This project studies plants with foul-smelling red flowers that bloom in early
spring in the southeastern U.S.A. These plants are intriguing because they
appear to be sending the same floral message to pollinators. This looks like a
floral syndrome (where unrelated plants converge on a common appearance or odor
to lure the same, specific pollinators) BUT something is amiss: these flowers
attract as pollinators a guild of generalized insects that feed on decaying
organic matter. Documenting blooming patterns, visitors, and floral
characteristics in populations across three southeastern states will
characterize this apparent syndrome. This project impacts undergraduates who
will perform all stages of science for academic credit. Students will read
relevant literature and design experiments, set out field plots, collect and
analyze their data. The following spring, students will present their results at
the Association for Southeastern Biologists? annual meeting and submit them for
publication. This project initiates the Wine Guild Curriculum Partnership with
the GSU Botanical Garden that will impact several thousand K-12 school children
and their teachers. This outdoor curriculum provides hands-on experience with
pollination biology. The children will run essentially the same experiments at
the Botanical Garden that investigators run in the field, providing first-hand
experience with the scientific process and a greater appreciation for this rich
floral heritage.