* 0912423
* SBIR Phase I: Automated Identification and Rapid Detection of Explosives Using Piezoresistive Micro- and Nano-Cantilever Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Weibin Zhu, Kytaro Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,776.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project develops an
inexpensive, rugged piezo-resistive micro-cantilever sensor array for explosives
and toxins detection with the ability for wireless data transmission. The sensor
can identify analytes by changes in the electronic properties of the sensor
material due to analyte absorption or binding. The sensitivities and detection
limits are significantly improved by using ultra-compliant coated polymers that
show a high degree of sensitivity and selectivity to different explosives.
Ultrathin metallic piezo-resistive sensors are embedded into the cantilevers to
enable both static and dynamic measurements. Compared to micro gas
chromatographic systems and film based sensor arrays for detection of
explosives, the sensor proposed has several advantages including a low-cost
fabrication process, higher sensitivity for lower detection limits, and highly
selective coating materials for absorption of chemical vapors from Improvised
Explosive Devices (IED). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remote detection systems for
explosives are of great concern for homeland security. This proposed sensor can
potentially enable low-cost and reliable handheld systems for remote explosive
detection or help develop wireless explosive sensing networks for cargos,
buildings and other security needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).