* 0912765
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of novel SMP-based embolic coils
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Julie Trommeter, EndoShape Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
the next generation of vascular embolization coils using proprietary shape
memory polymer (SMP) technology. Coils are used to occlude or isolate vessels
for treatment of malformations, hemorrhage and tumor isolation. Current metal
coils are expensive, cannot effectively occlude large vessels, and exhibit
limitations resulting in long procedures. EndoShape's (ESI) SMP technologies
promise to significantly reduce device cost, reduce procedure time, achieve
large vessel closure, while enabling a broad set of medical procedures. This
project leverages previous material research from the University of Colorado,
combined with ESI's ongoing development work on device design and SMP
manufacturing technology. To optimize design, we focus on: resistance to
migration, fatigue, and biocompatibility. By employing finite element analysis,
in vitro testing and animal evaluation, we efficiently distill many design and
material combinations to the most promising candidates. Phase I work will pursue
a sub-set of these goals.

The broader impacts of this research are providing physicians with more
effective and more cost efficient devices that can be adapted to an expanded
patient population and a broader set of medical procedures. A direct benefit of
an SMP embolic coil is an expanded indication for use in pediatrics, or
neurovascular intervention, wherein current metal coils have limited utility or
present compromises (e.g. imaging artifacts) associated with their material.
Further clinical advances through integration of tissue engineering or
development of patient specific devices can be leveraged from the success of
these devices.

