* 0912603
* SBIR Phase I:  Cable-Driven Manipulator for Light Manufacturing and Service Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Gilbert Lovell, Advanced Technology and Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,941.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project focuses on the
development of several technical capabilities for the class of open-frame,
cable-driven robots and demonstrates these capabilities in a practical boat
maintenance application. To-date such robots have largely remained laboratory
curiosities, despite their potential for affording a large work volume in a
light-weight, low-cost package. The proposer intends to advance this robotic
technology along specific technical avenues, including work volume enhancement,
force control, vibration resistance and tool orientation dexterity, in order to
demonstrate the fitness of this class of robots for wide and productive
application as machine tools. The work program will include conceptual design of
the robot and the provisions for end-effectors, control system design, and lab-
based testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted innovations will advance the
design and applications of cable-driven robots to support machine automation in
areas ignored by traditional robotic systems. They will foster the spread of
commercially valuable automation technology and reduce the use of labor in
dirty, dangerous and arduous tasks by lowering the cost, capability and work
space barriers to the acceptance of robots in light manufacturing and service
industry settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).