* 0912834
* SBIR Phase I:  A multispectral system for real-time prediction of beef tenderness
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Jeyamkondan Subbiah, Goldfinch Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to determine the
feasibility of a multispectral imaging technology, to provide real time beef
tenderness prediction. The hypothesis is that it is possible to predict the
tenderness of beef using only a moderate number of bands for the image. This is
based on the observation that hyperspectral images contain large amounts of
redundant information. The technological challenge is to verify the hypothesis
by identifying the key bands that are central to tenderness prediction and to
develop a model to accurately predict tenderness. Identification of key bands
will be performed using data mining and image analysis algorithms. Successful
verification of the hypothesis will directly lead to the development of a
multispectral system for tenderness prediction at commercial speeds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently there are limited methods for real time
classification of beef by tenderness, the most important trait influencing
consumer satisfaction. Meat packers have expressed a desire to sort by
tenderness, because consumers are willing to pay a premium for steaks that are
guaranteed tender (an added value of $170 to $421 per carcass certified as
tender). Some of the major packers have expressed interest in a service to
classify beef for tenderness. At 2.5% of value added per head for 20% of the
cattle, annual revenue of $23.7 million to $58.7 million could be generated from
service sales to the top four U.S. meat packers. International potential would
magnify this effect. This project, if successful, is expected to enhance
economic opportunities for cattle producers and processors by improving
assessment of beef product quality to meet consumer
expectations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;