* 0912138
* SBIR Phase I:  Understanding Science Processes Through Modeling and Animation: Efficiently Producing Low-Cost Software Tools for K-12
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Kate Levy, GOKNOW, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,970.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a new generation of computer-based science modeling tools that will
enable middle schoolers to develop a deep understanding of key science processes
e.g, carbon cycle, storm movement, energy conversions. The key features of the
100 'animodelers' (animation & modeling) in the Animodeler Science Library are:
1) they are lightweight - easy to use, easy to integrate by teachers into the
curriculum, requiring little computational resources; 2) they employ media
(images, sounds, etc.) and animation to engage the digital children of today;
and 3) the cost for a school year's worth of animodelers will be approximately
$3 per child per year. Most importantly, besides running on standard school
computers, animodelers will run on students' personal smartphones thereby
extending the school day and building on children's intrinsic interest in
exploring interactive media. Towards developing the Animodeler Library, a key
Phase I objective is to develop an 'engine' that can churn out, at very low-
cost, animodelers that address focused (micro) science processes. Inasmuch as
the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act now includes science, it is imperative that
new instructional strategies be developed for K-12 students develop that engage
and scaffold children as they develop a deep and integrated understanding of
science.

Science education needs a major refresh in America. New models are needed for
for teaching and learning that address the interests of today's youth, address
the enormous diversity that is a trademark of today's youth, and address the
stringent financial challenges of today's schools. In providing media-based
interactive learning at a very low price point that leverages the emerging,
personal, mobile communications technologies with which our youth are already
intimately engaged, the Animodeler Science Library is, we feel, an excellent
example of a fresh approach to science education. Given that the barriers for
schools to explore our Library are low (e.g., clear relationship to state
standards, easy teacher integration, intrinsic student interest, and low cost),
there is good reason to project its success in the marketplace. K-12 has been
slow to change and adopt computing & communications technologies; but with a
newly found sense of urgency, innovations such as the Animodeler Library are
coming along at a time when K-12 can finally appreciate and accept them - a
truly hopeful sign for America, its children, and its future.

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

