* 0912957
* An AP-MALDI-FTICR Mass Spectrometer for Proteomics Research
* NONE,NONE
* 12/08/2008,02/28/2010
* James Bruce, University of Washington
* Continuing grant
* Cort L. Anderson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 80,000.00

This award supports development of a novel high sensitivity, atmospheric
pressure, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (AP-MALDI) Fourier
transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance mass spectrometer (FTICR-MS) to advance
proteomics research capabilities. Specific areas of ion source development
targeted in this proposal will include matrix effects and reactivity, and
improved ion capture and transmission. Atmospheric pressure operation presents
the opportunity to investigate the functional requirements of MALDI matrix
materials and carefully characterize each component individually. The resultant
development of a high sensitivity AP-MALDI ion source, combined with the
accurate mass, tandem MS/MS capabilities of FTICR-MS will provide an ideal
platform for proteomics research and protein identification. These efforts will
result in an instrument that is capable of both APMALDI and ElectroSpray
Injection, giving accurate mass measurements for optimal peptide mass
fingerprinting and allowing coupling with on-line chromatography for analysis of
protein mixture digests. The intellectual merit of the following proposal
centers on three aspects 1) the development of improved sensitivity of AP-MALDI
sources through implementation of multiple ionization sources and matrix
optimization combined with advances in ion optics, 2) a new design for an FTICR
instrument compatible with lower cost wide-bore NMR magnets, and 3) new methods
to exploit accurate mass, tandem MS capabilities with APMALDI- FTICR-MS
technology for proteomics research. Such an instrument, when coupled with
automation and on-line chromatography will result in much higher throughput
protein identification capabilities than is currently achieved. As planned, the
instrument can make use of relatively inexpensive wide bore magnets currently
used for NMR, leading to significantly lower cost FTICR-MS instruments. This
will lead to increased training of graduate student researchers in the skills
involved in FTICR-MS, increased dissemination and adaptation of next-generation
proteomics research and increased collaboration with, and involvement of
graduate student education in industry, national laboratory and academic
research programs.