* 0912362
* SBIR Phase I:  Poly(ethylene carbonate) for Use in High Oxygen Barrier Films
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Anna Cherian, Novomer LLC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop high
oxygen barrier films from environmentally-benign polymers. High oxygen barrier
films are primarily composed of polymers derived from petrochemicals.
Poly(ethylene carbonate) (PEC) is an environmentally-friendly polymer, produced
from ethylene oxide and carbon dioxide (containing 50 wt% CO2). PEC has
excellent gas barrier properties, particularly for oxygen, but to date,
inefficient manufacturing techniques have prevented its use in high oxygen
barrier film applications. Novomer will synthesize PEC with improved gas barrier
properties using a novel and efficient catalyst system. The resultant polymers
will be formed into multi-layer films whose gas barrier properties will be
evaluated. Successful research will yield commercially viable poly(ethylene
carbonate) high oxygen barrier films.

The project will have broad impact and commercial potential. The research will
lead to improved manufacturing techniques that enable the use of nvironmentally-
friendly polymers in the high oxygen barrier market. The use of poly(ethylene
carbonate) films in this market will reduce use of petrochemicals in polymer
production (approximately 4% of world oil production is used as polymer
feedstocks). Further, poly(ethylene carbonate) uses carbon dioxide as a
feedstock - enabling the development of valuable product from what would
otherwise be a pollutant. Commercially, the efficient catalyst technology will
make environmentally-friendly polymers a cost-effective alternative to polymers
derived from petrochemicals.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).