* 0912709
* SBIR Phase I:  Crono: Personalized Agents to Save Users' Time
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Elisabeth Crawford, Crono, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the problem
of automating complex multi-step tasks and negotiations for computer users. The
focus is on developing representations and algorithms for a personal assistant
agent, and on contributing the incorporation of these algorithms into
negotiating meeting times. Personal assistant agents need effective models of
their users' and others' preferences, which can be highly discontinuous in time
and often complex. A key part of the research is on improving user preference
learning algorithms, as well as designing a representation of the learned user
model to facilitate interaction with the user.

Currently consumers waste significant time at work and at home interacting with
applications to find information, conduct their work, connect with others, and
generally organize their life. Personal assistant agents that automate tasks and
negotiations based on their users' preferences, have the potential save people
and businesses large amounts of time. By building a personal assistant agent
platform Crono plans to focus on automating tedious multi-step tasks and
interactions. The agent will, as it learns, completely remove the time burden of
meetings scheduling from its users. The research promises to yield an enhanced
understanding of how to learn about users, and how applications can interact
with them and act on their behalf, building trust over time. If successful, the
agents developed in this project will allow a new class of automated negotiation
services to be fielded.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).