* 0912711
* SBIR Phase I:  Pre-clinical Development of Device to Guide Heart Recovery via Assist and Support
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Michael Moreno, CORINNOVA INC
* Standard Grant
* Gregory T. Baxter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on a
novel therapy for heart failure that employs device mediated intervention to
guide cardiac growth, remodeling, and recovery. The CorInnova device is the
first to combine active cardiac assist and passive cardiac support. It is non-
blood contacting, adjustable post-implantation, and can be delivered via
minimally invasive surgical procedures. Hence, CorInnova's technology represents
a substantial advancement from both, existing cardiac assist and existing
cardiac support technologies. While the device has shown potential in limited
short-term animal studies, the full capabilities and limitations of the design
are as yet unknown. The research plan is aimed at determining these capabilities
and limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
important in the treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (CHF). CHF is a
debilitating condition that currently afflicts nearly 5 million Americans.
Treatment costs are estimated to be in excess of $50 billion per year. For the
300,000 Americans in "end-stage heart failure", transplant is the preferred
treatment option. However, the lack of donor hearts renders this treatment
option "epidemiologically trivial". For most of these patients, the potential
for cardiac rehabilitation is neglected. Thus, the proposed technology
represents a shift in the treatment paradigm - an intervention conceived to
stimulate restorative growth and remodeling processes - essentially providing
rehabilitative physical therapy for the heart muscle. The versatility of the
device empowers the cardiologist, providing the means for tactical intervention
via adjustments to the passive support component and application of active
cardiac assist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).