* 0912258
* SBIR Phase I:  Submerged Bridge Pile Inspection Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Thomas Hay, WavesInSolids LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2009
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will advance
the state-of-the-art in underwater bridge inspection through development of
novel long range ultrasonic technology (LRUT). The objective of this project is
to determine if the proposed technology can minimize the requirement to use
diving teams for underwater bridge inspection. This will be the first effort to
apply LRUT to inspection of steel bridge H-pile. The objective of this work is
to build upon the detection capability by studying how effectively and reliably
the technology can quantify bridge pile wall loss. This project will focus on
detection and classification of 25%, 50%, 75%, 100% wall loss. Inspection and
data interpretation procedures will be developed and studied to determine how
effective the technology classifies detected wall loss. The wall loss
information will be used by the bridge engineer to load rate the
bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are thousands of bridges supported by steel
pile in the U.S. The conditions of these H-piles are unknown due to the high-
costs of diving teams used to perform underwater bridge inspections. The
proposed technology will be low-cost and shall be performed above the water
line. The objective of the proposed technology is to inspect two orders of
magnitude (100X) more bridge piles at current inspection budget levels. The
technology will have a significant impact in bridge safety and reliability in
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).