* 0912976
* SBIR Phase I:  Coupling High-throughput Evolution and Expression Screening for Industrial Production of Biofuel Enzymes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Charles Emrich, Allopartis Biosciences
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses a key
challenge for cost-effective manufacturing of sustainable, cellulosic biofuels -
the rapid development of more efficient enzymes for biomass conversion and
scalable microbial expression systems for those enzymes. Cellulose is the most
abundant organic polymer on earth, the chief structural component of terrestrial
plant biomass, and because of its abundance is attractive as a renewable
feedstock for biofuels. Producing liquid fuels from cellulosic biomass rather
than starches offers compelling economic and environmental advantages. However,
converting cellulosic feedstocks, such as wood and perennial grasses, to glucose
presents challenges because the conversion of their cellulose to fermentable
sugars is inefficient and costly. We will apply a high-throughput microbial
protein expression screening system to a molecular enzyme enhancement platform
in such a way that optimized cellulose-converting enzymes can be generated and
screened for compatibility with industrial enzyme production techniques. The
first phase of the work will be to increase the efficiency of cellulolytic
enzymes which to be commercialized will need to be produced at low cost through
microbial fermentation. This innovation will reduce the total time and costs
necessary to develop new, high-activity enzymes for cellulosic biofuels to speed
the greening of transportation fuels.

Enzymes developed in this work can be commercially produced for cellulosic
biofuels manufacture and any other renewable chemistry that uses glucose as a
starting material. The industrial enzyme market is global, expected to grow by
9% per year, and the advanced cellulase market segment is still nascent. This
large market opportunity is augmented by the low performance and high cost of
current cellulase products (approximately 20% of total biofuel production cost).
By combining enzyme development and expression/production steps, we drastically
reduce the overall time necessary to take enzyme enhancement from the benchtop
to industrial manufacturing. Success of this technology will translate into a
profitable venture and, importantly, will help the country transition to a low-
carbon renewable liquid fuel source, providing a renaissance in agricultural
technology and rural development. Further, because the techniques are applicable
to any solid starting material, the technology can be used to rapidly develop
enzymes to degrade any solid material, opening further industrial and consumer
markets. Finally, analysis of successful enzymes may provide illumination to the
mechanisms of enzyme action and also to the structural or chemical basis for
successful production of these proteins in microbial fermentation systems.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).