* 0912338
* SBIR Phase I:  Adapting ATRP to Industrial Scale Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2009
* Wojciech Jakubowski, ATRP Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 12/31/2009
* USD 94,944.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed towards
adaptation of atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) to industrial scale
production. ATRP is among the most powerful controlled/living radical
polymerization techniques, and it is anticipated that many new products
containing polymers made by this technique will be introduced in the US within
the next several years. The major factors which constrain the commercial
application of ATRP are high copper catalyst concentration and the special
handling procedures which are required to avoid catalyst oxidation. Recently
developed catalytic systems, ICAR and ARGET ATRP, alleviate these problems but
were successfully applied only on the laboratory scale. Herein This project will
develop a new "feeding" method for ICAR ATRP which will have a much greater
potential to be used on industrial scale. There are several advantages of a
"feeding" method compared to currently used ICAR ATRP: a) lower amounts of
catalyst and radical initiator needed, b) precise temperature control over the
polymerization process not required, c) higher reaction temperature possible
which will allow reaching higher conversions in a shorter time, d) possibility
of automation of the whole process, e) safe process for exothermic
polymerization reactions.

Materials made by ATRP are slowly entering broad market segments which
collectively are estimated to be a $200 billion dollar US market opportunity.
However, production of polymeric material via normal ATRP process generates a
lot of chemical waste due to the need for catalyst removal. The amount of
chemical waste generated may be significantly decreased when ICAR/ARGET ATRP is
applied. These new systems, using ppm amounts of catalyst are significant
advancements on initial procedures which enable i) preparation of new polymeric
materials in an environmentally friendly fashion, ii) preparation of polymeric
materials at significantly lower cost, iii) better control over the
polymerization and iv) simple industrially viable synthetic procedures.
Successful accomplishment of the goals in this SBIR Phase I project will allow
straightforward scale-up of ATRP process and bring it much closer its potential
for use in commercial products across broad markets. More importantly, expansion
of the "feeding" method for ICAR ATRP will allow, in the near future, a
significant decrease in the generation of waste for all companies which are
going to use ATRP technology for producing new polymeric materials.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).