* 0912627
* SBIR Phase I:  A Simple, Robust, Low Cost Tool to Quantify Stable Isotopes in Organic Molecules: Enabling Easy Access to Compound Source, Pathway, and Biokinetic Studies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Nabil Saad, PICARRO INC
* Standard Grant
* Maria Josephine Yuen
* 06/30/2010
* USD 99,838.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will combine the
capabilities of Picarro's WS-CRDS (wavelength-scanned cavity ring down
spectroscopy) instrumentation with Gas Chromatography (GC) - Combustion (C)
technology. This new high-precision, but low cost analyzer will simultaneously
measure hydrogen (D/H) and carbon (13C/12C) isotope ratios of organic molecules
and provides critical insight into underlying biochemical processes. One
important application is the administration of deuterium- and/or 13C-labeled
organic compounds to a subject and the use of isotopic ratio monitoring to track
the fate of the labeled compound across time and body tissues. Such high-
precision measurements are currently obtained with Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometers (IRMS), which are too large, expensive, and laborintensive for
wide use. In addition, two separate IRMS systems are needed for simultaneous
hydrogen and carbon isotopic measurements. Picarro's GC-C-CRDS analyzer will be
a high-precision, small, and inexpensive single-system replacement for IRMS to
quantify both hydrogen and carbon isotopes.

The broader impact of this research is the cost reduction in health care through
the advancement of preventative medicine by enabling the large-scale use of
stable isotopes as tracers for metabolic research studies and medical diagnosis
(insulin resistance, for instance) through the availability of an inexpensive
and high-performance isotopic analyzer for clinical deployment and the
subsequent possibility of fast, local, advanced medical testing and diagnosis in
remote and economically disadvantaged communities. After establishing the GC-C-
CRDS analyzer in research laboratories with this grant, Picarro intends to
extend its presence to hospitals, clinics, and biopharmaceutical laboratories.

