* 0912132
* SBIR Phase I:  USV-Grain Refining
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Clause Xu, Hans Tech
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Walters
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project entitled "USV-Grain
Refining" aims at advancing the grain refining technologies for the production
of aluminum or magnesium alloy ingots or castings. Grain refining is usually one
of the first processing steps for the production of metal and alloy products.
The conventional methods use chemical grain refiners that contain foreign
particles. These methods have limited capability in reducing grain size, and
foreign particles added into molten metals lead to defect formation during
materials processing. This project will combine the latest technologies of
processing of lightweight materials using ultrasonic vibration (USV) and
continuous casting or direct chill casting technology, and to demonstrate the
feasibility of an enabling technology for producing metal ingots of ultrafine
grains without the use of foreign particles for grain refining. The new
technology will provide cost effective opportunities for producing metal and
alloy products with grain size much smaller than that obtainable using the best
commercial grain refiners, addressing issues related to the defect formation
associated with the use of grain refiners containing foreign particles and
increasing the production rates of metals and alloys.

The successful completion of this Phase I project will lead to a breakthrough
technology for grain refining of a vast array of metals and alloys to the grain
size level that are not capable to achieve using the conventional technologies.
Grain refining is important for maximizing ingot casting rate, improving
resistance to hot cracking, minimizing elemental segregation, enhancing
mechanical properties, particularly ductility, improving the finishing
characteristics of wrought products, increasing the mold filling
characteristics, and decreasing the porosity of foundry alloys. The commercial
implementation of the project results has the potential of achieving significant
cost savings, energy savings, and environmental benefits for the metal
manufacturing industry. In addition, students involved in the research will have
opportunities to interact with industrial partners.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).