* 0912503
* SBIR Phase I:  Nano-enhanced Fibrous Structures for Pathogenic Virus Elimination from Biopharmaceutical Products
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Kim Roberts, Alditri Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is an effort by Alditri
Technologies, Inc. to nano-enhance fiber materials in order to capture
parvoviruses. Specifically, Alditri will employ and seek to understand vapor-
phase deposition technology as it applies to fiber materials to convert low-cost
fiber materials into effective virus capture devices. Purification accounts for
a large portion of biopharmaceutical product cost. Further, the extremely
expensive parvovirus capture devices currently available are not suitable for
large-scale operations, such as those involved in biomanufacturing streams. This
work will build upon previous fundamental advances at Alditri regarding the
nano-enhancement of nonwovens. The successful completion of this project will
result in low-cost, efficient parvovirus removal membranes for use in aqueous
streams such those in biopharmaceutical production. The intellectual merit
associated with this project is Alditri's ultimate development of a fundamental
understanding of fibrous surface modification through vapor phase deposition
techniques, thus enabling the technology for use in other applications.

The surface modification technology targeted in this project could have
considerable broader impacts, for example, in bio-materials and bio-
functionalization. Alditri seeks to remove parvoviruses from aqueous streams
within biomanufacturing processes with the use of nonwoven base materials,
thereby drastically reducing the expense associated with virus filtration. The
improved understanding of cost-effective, fiber-based filtration materials and
devices has the potential to make parvovirus capture feasible within the water
purification industry and even address emerging issues in nanotechnology
processing, such as carbon nanotube or functional nanoparticle capture and
collection, to avoid potential toxic effects of materials engineered at the
atomic scale.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).