* 0913022
* The Role of Xanthophylls in the Mechanism of Nonradiative Energy Dissipation in Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Harry Frank, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2013
* USD 545,346.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic organisms contain
protective mechanisms that allow them to dissipate excess solar energy not
needed for photosynthesis. This protective process is called nonphotochemical
quenching (NPQ). Among its critical components are xanthophyll pigments, the
oxygen-containing derivatives of carotenes. These molecules are also thought to
play a role in regulating energy flow as solar energy absorbed by photosynthetic
organisms is converted into electrical potential. The molecular features that
control these processes are not well understood. In this research, biochemical
and spectroscopic experiments will be carried out to uncover the controlling
factors for NPQ and energy flow regulation in plants and algae. Various proposed
molecular mechanisms will be tested to see how the processes function. The
overall objective of the project is to examine these processes in detail in
order to understand how photosynthetic organisms protect themselves from high
light stress and how they regulate energy flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt; The educational and training contributions of the work are
that students will gain experience in the techniques for the isolation,
purification and characterization of complex biological materials and in
sophisticated molecular spectroscopic methods. The training will foster
organizational and problem-solving skills, writing reports and publications, and
making presentations at scientific meetings where the results of the studies
will be openly disseminated. The students will also travel to the laboratories
of our collaborators as needed to bring these studies to fruition as rapidly as
possible. Thus, the project provides exposure to a broad spectrum of
experimental methodologies and professional experiences which will be valuable
for the development of the participating students as independent scientists. The
outreach contributions of the project will include active participation in the
Northeast Alliance University of Connecticut Summer Research Program for
Underrepresented Minority Students in STEM Fields, the University of Connecticut
NSF REU program, the Northeast Middle School Science Bowl, and Odyssey Day for
Gifted and Talented Middle School Students. The intellectual merit and societal
benefits of the research program are that it will enlarge our view of how
photosynthetic organisms are protected from excessive light energy absorption
and respond to varying environmental conditions while maintaining efficient
energy flow essential for survival. Lessons learned from how photosynthetic
organisms function in this manner can be used in the development of novel solar
energy conversion devices.