* 0913283
* CAREER:    Multiphase Sediment Transport Modeling Framework
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,02/28/2013
* Tian-Jian (Tom) Hsu, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2013
* USD 300,546.00

OCE-0644497&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding and the ability to
predict coastal sediment transport processes are important in order to preserve
the nation's coastal resources from natural disasters and human impacts. Being
able to accurately predict large-scale coastal processes is dependant upon on
having a detailed understanding of small-scale sediment transport that takes
place along the coast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Accurate
prediction of large-scale coastal processes relies on detailed understanding of
small-scale sediment transport. This project will develop a 3D fullycoupled
multiphase LES (Large-eddy simulation) numerical modeling framework for sediment
transport. The modeling approach for fluid-particle system utilizes both
Eulerian-Eulerian two-fluid formulation to resolve 3D multiphase turbulent flow
and Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation for further detailed PDF description of
particles that are suitable for coastal sediment transport typical of millions
of sediment particles. The new framework resolves 3D flow turbulence, fluid-
particle interactions, inter-granular stresses and hence concurrently models the
bedload and suspended load. It improves upon existing Reynolds average two-phase
models for concentrated transport and single-phased 3D LES models for dilute
flow. The educational plan outlines a career goal to establish a diversified
Coastal/Oceanographic work force through developing a minority-oriented
undergraduate research and education program. The research internship and the
development of the undergraduate-level Coastal Engineering course will
facilitate effective connection between the existing graduate-oriented
Coastal/Oceanographic Program and undergraduate Engineering and Science students
at University of Florida (UF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: To preserve
the nation's coastal resources from natural disasters (e.g., hurricane) and
human impact, reliable predictive tools that allow long-temporal and
largespatial&lt;br/&gt;simulation of coastal/estuarine sediment transport
processes is vital. The proposed project emphasizes utilizing detailed models to
provide improved parameterizations of smallscale processes that can be further
utilized by large-scale modelers to develop predictive tools for
coastal/estuarine processes relevant to coastal planning and hazard mitigation.
Establishing a diversified work force is imperative for this country that has
been built upon multiculturalism. Coastal/Oceanographic discipline often deal
with hazard mitigation and land preservation, issues that are relevant to
economics, communities, and social justice. Hence it is especially vital to
ensure broad participation in Coastal/Oceanographic professions. The proposed
undergraduate research internship (2 non-UF minority students and 2 UF students
per year) joins in and benefits from the existing NSF-sponsored SEAGEP at UF
that is committed to increasing the number of minority students to pursue an
academic/professional career. The outreach efforts to middle/high school
students and teachers illustrate a theme based on "Coastal Hazard and Beach
Processes". It will not only promote environmental literacy but also serves as a
conduit to introduce to 8-12 grades students a fascinating science/engineering
discipline for their higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;