* 0913513
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of high-aspect ratio wollastonite using recycled material
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* H. Y. Sohn, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. H.Y. Sohn,
University of Utah, and Dr. Suzan S. Ibrahim, Central Metallurgical Research and
Development Institute of Egypt to investigate the use of various waste raw
materials such as recycled slag in the production of synthetic wollastonite (a
calcium silicate mineral) and to find the optimum conditions of flux,
temperature, and particle size. The research entails (1) upgrading the raw
material to remove unwanted components, (2) developing the wollastonite
production process (sintering) and (3) evaluating the resulting
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wollastonite has unique properties, making it an
important candidate to be used as an insulating material to replace asbestos in
addition to its usage in different industries such as ceramics, glass, coatings,
metallurgical, welding, and paper. This timely proposal addresses dwindling
supplies of natural wollastonite and the need for synthetic wollastonite of high
purity for industrial application. Its synthesis is a relatively simple process,
involving upgrading of raw materials to remove unwanted components and then
sintering, or heating, to an appropriate temperature. Various waste materials
can be used as the starting point for wollastonite synthesis. If successful,
this research project should have immediate economic impact in allowing waste
materials to be used beneficially and in providing a means to supply synthetic
wollastonite at a practicable cost. The collaboration between US and Egyptian
participants is an important aspect of this research, and graduate students will
participate in the effort. Industry involvement will strengthen the
applicability of the research, and notable environmental benefits may
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
undertake cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;