* 0913107
* SGER: Glacier sensitivity to climate change: Quantifying the influence of tributary glaciers
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Summer Rupper, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 10/31/2010
* USD 34,875.00

The Gornergletscher in Switzerland is the second largest glacier system in the
Alps, and it has been retreating rapidly since the turn of the century. The rate
of this retreat has varied greatly, Preliminary numerical mass-balance modeling
indicate that changes in tributary glaciers that feed the main valley glacier
may be the key to predicting the response of system to changes in climate.
Excluding these smaller, tributary glaciers from models underestimates the
magnitude and response time of the glacier terminus to changes in climate.
However, the model does not yet include ice dynamics. The physical and chemical
properties of ice within tributary glaciers may be drastically different than
those of neighboring tributaries and the main valley glacier. It thus follows
that physical properties of tributary glaciers will influence the dynamics of
the glacier system as a whole, influencing both the rate and magnitude of
glacier responses to changes in climate. This project will investigate the
influence of tributary glaciers on ice dynamics of the Gornergletscher system,
and how changes in tributary glaciers then influence the response time and
sensitivity of alpine glaciers to changes in climate. This will be accomplished
by analyzing the chemical and physical properties of ice in several shallow (~15
m) ice cores along a traverse through the tributary and main valley glaciers.
Together with ground-penetrating radar (GPR along the same transect, the ice-
core data will determine the physical and chemical ice properties within
tributary glaciers on the Gornergletscher, and to quantify the influence of
tributary glaciers on the internal ice dynamics of the main valley
glacier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential societal impacts of the near world-
wide retreat of glaciers over the past century has been of the focus of much
discussion in the scientific, economic, and political communities. Changes in
these glaciers will greatly affect freshwater resources, hydroelectric power,
tourism, local climate, and sea-level rise, among other things. Additionally,
past climate reconstructions from records of past glacier extent often serve as
the primary descriptor of the climate history of a region, and have proven
critical for quantifying natural climate variability. Numerical glacier models
are essential tools in studies of glacier sensitivity to climate change past,
present, and future However, glacier retreat over the last century has been
larger than was predicted by glacier models, challenging our understanding of
glacier sensitivity to changes in climate. Given the current thinning and
retreat rate of glaciers in many regions of the world, it is imperative that
accurate reconstructions and predictions of glacier response to climate
scenarios be provided. This project will greatly increase the knowledge of
glacier sensitivity to climate change and improve the accuracy of numerical
glacier models.