* 0913175
* RUI: The Baker Observatory Sub-minute Survey: Exploring the galaxy at high temporal resolution.
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* George Wolf, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2011
* USD 48,882.00

AST-0913175&lt;br/&gt;Reed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory project
for a limited survey for variability with time scales less than ten minutes. By
obtaining data on 40 sample fields known to contain a variable star, this
preliminary study will develop a reduction and analysis pipeline for variability
of differing types over many time scales, determine the sensitivity of various
survey cadences, search for new types of variability, and determine if a much
larger survey is warranted. The main goal is to sample the sky on timescales
less than one minute, to determine if new phenomena exist which have heretofore
gone unnoticed because of low temporal sampling. This trial will determine the
optimal temporal cadence to detect both short period and long period phenomena,
and provide accurate statistics correlating magnitude range with detection
limits so as to optimize exposure times. Since it is likely this survey will
discover many new variable stars of known types, it is important to understand
the temporal and brightness variation limits of the equipment and of any
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although this study will extend our knowledge of the
physical properties of known variable types, the most exciting prospect is the
chance to uncover new, previously unknown phenomena. A survey of this sort will
naturally uncover many types of mostly stellar variability, and all data for
these stars will be available on-line, so that interested astronomers can
perform their own studies. Undergraduate students (supported from other funds)
will take part in obtaining, reducing, and analyzing the data. They will also be
involved in establishing the reduction and analysis procedures and correlating
with known variable stars. This will give them a very rounded background in
stellar astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded from the Stellar
Astronomy theme of the Division of Astronomical Sciences, as a Small Grant for
Exploratory Research.