* 0913675
* The Signing Earth Science Dictionary for Grades 9-12 Track 1 Project
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jason Hurdich, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2012
* USD 189,557.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

TERC in partnership with Vcom3D will use the SigningAvatarÂ® assistive technology
to research and develop a unique, state-of-the-art, illustrated, interactive 3D
dictionary of at least 750 standards-based Earth science terms for high school
students who are deaf and hard of hearing and whose first language is sign. This
Track 1 project addresses the primary goal of the OEDG program, which is to
increase participation of students with disabilities in formal pre-college
geosciences education programs - in particular that of the approximately 36,000
students in grades 9-12 who are deaf or hard of hearing and are required under
the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and the No Child Left
Behind Act to have access to the same content as hearing students. To establish
effectiveness of the Signing Earth Science Dictionary (SESD), the partners will
investigate the kinds of learning gains that are possible when it is used in
specialized schools for the deaf and in mainstream settings. Their hypotheses
are that students in the target population will have an assistive tool that
helps them 1) increase their ability to sign, understand, and use the English-
based language of Earth science; 2) improve their Earth science content
knowledge; and 3) increase their ability to study Earth science independently.
At the end of the 18-month project, Vcom3D will release a CD-ROM version of the
SESD for use without an Internet connection. TERC will release a web-based
version for use with an Internet connection. Presentations and publication of
findings will be based on a Final Report. It is expected that this broad
dissemination will result in pre-college students who are deaf and hard of
hearing having a unique research-based tool that increases their access to
rigorous Earth science study that they can build on beyond high school and that
may lead to careers in the geosciences. It will also serve as a resource of
recognized signs for educators and professionals in the geosciences who
collaborate with Earth science education programs through real- world
experiences including field trips and internships. As such, the SESD promises to
increase their ability to communicate with deaf students and may improve their
practice.