* 0913080
* Collaborative Research:  Iron storage in diatoms and N2 fixing cyanobacteria: mechanisms, regulation and biogeochemical significance
* GEO,OCE
* 08/22/2008,08/31/2011
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 257,021.00

Most studies on the Fe physiology of phytoplankton have focused on the induction
of high affinity uptake pathways or the rearrangement of photosynthetic
machinery to decrease cellular demand. By contrast, little attention has been
given to the mechanisms of intracellular Fe storage. Proper handling and storage
of Fe on timescales of generations can ensure adequate Fe nutrition in episodic
environments. Furthermore short term storage of Fe is essential to "buffer" the
intracellular redox-labile Fe concentration and prevent Fenton production of
reactive oxygen species. Even though sufficient Fe can be stored for at least 4
cell divisions, much more than in the cases of P, N and (especially) C, our
understanding of Fe storage lags far behind what is known for those elements.
Since the biogeochemical cycles of Fe and C, N and P are linked via the Fe
quotas of phytoplankton, it is critical that we understand the environmental and
physiological controls of Fe storage. Fe can be stored in proteins such as those
of the ferritin superfamily or sequestered into intracellular vacuoles. Some
marine diatoms, such as Phaeodactylum tricornutum have ferritin genes. However
ferritin has not been detected bioinformatically or by evolutionary PCR methods
in other diatoms such as Thalassiosira pseudonana. The investigators have
measured the Fe-dependent regulation of transcript and protein abundance of
NRAMP, a protein likely involved in vacuolar Fe metabolism, an alternative
method of Fe storage found in Arabidopsis thaliana and yeast. It is proposed
that the regulation and biogeochemical significance of ferritin and vacuole-
mediated Fe storage may differ for different diatom groups. The filamentous N2
fixing cyanobacterium, Trichodesmium erythraeum, possesses three ferritin/
bacterioferritin genes, suggesting specialization of these proteins. Both Fe
storage and Fe buffering are likely critical functions in Trichodesmium, yet
nothing is known of either aspect of Fe homeostasis. This project aims to
elucidate intracellular cycling and storage of Fe in marine diatoms and N2
fixing cyanobacteria and the relationship between Fe storage and cell quota.
Specific objectives are to: 1) Determine the factors that regulate ferritin
transcription, apo-protein synthesis and ferritin iron content in P. tricornutum
lab cultures. The underlying hypothesis is that ferritins serve as Fe storage
reservoirs over long generational time scales. Because they are targeted to
chloroplasts, ferritins may also buffer Fe to prevent oxidative stress during
degradation and synthesis of photosynthetic components. 2) Determine the role of
storage vacuoles and NRAMP in Fe storage and mobilization in lab cultures of T.
pseudonana, based on the hypothesis that vacuoles store Fe and NRAMP helps
mobilize Fe in T. pseudonana, T. oceanica, and possibly other centric diatoms.
3) Evaluate the relationships between Fe storage proteins and cellular quota in
culture and field populations of Trichodesmium; it is proposed that one or more
of these proteins serve as Fe reservoir over long generational, time scales, in
which case they may indicate nutritional Fe status. It is hypothesized that one
or more of these proteins are co-localized in cells specifically responsible for
N2 fixation in Trichodesmium colonies as a mechanism to buffer the Fe released
through the diel degradation of the Fe-rich nitrogenase proteins. The above
objectives will be addressed using genetic, immunological, and synchrotron-based
approaches applied to laboratory cultures of P. tricornutum, T. pseudonana,and
Trichodesmium. Trichodesmium trichomes collected from the Sargasso Sea will also
be analyzed to determine the biogeochemical importance of (bacterio)ferritins as
a storage mechanism in this group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This
project combines state-of-the-art molecular biological and micro-analytical
techniques to address topics of significant oceanographic relevance.
Understanding of the response of marine ecosystems to pulsed Fe inputs
(including intentional fertilization experiments) requires understanding the
physiological response of phytoplankton. Further, storage of Fe by diatoms and
diazotrophs likely imparts a competitive advantage to these groups that may
impact C export and supply of 'new' N. This project will provide training and
support for two beginning investigators, a PhD student and three undergraduate
students, including a member of an underrepresented group. Both PIs will be
actively involved in training of undergraduates, and Kustka will continue on-
going community outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;