* 0913116
* International  Research Fellowship Program:  Unraveling Genetic and Nongenetic Causes of Sperm Precedence in Stalk-eyed Flies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Leanna Birge, Birge                   Leanna         M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2011
* USD 198,250.00

0913116 Birge

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Leanna M.
Birge to work with Dr. Andrew Pomiankowski at University College London in the
United Kingdom and with Dr. Gerald Wilkinson at the University of Maryland in
the U.S.

Female multiple mating creates an arena for competition to occur among
ejaculates. In response, males employ a variety of mechanisms to bias their
fertilization success, such as incapacitation. However, the importance of
incapacitation as a mechanism for sperm precedence is controversial because it
is unclear how a male can damage a rival?s ejaculate without also damaging his
own. To evaluate the utility of incapacitation and identify its agents, a system
is needed in which genetic differences between competitors? ejaculates can be
identified. Stalk-eyed flies provide such a system. In Cyrtodiopsis whitei,
sperm from males that produce unbiased sex ratios incapacitate sperm from males
that produce female-biased sex ratios caused by X chromosome meiotic drive. In
this project, we conduct two complementary studies using this system: a test of
the robust nature of incapacitation and a molecular characterization of proteins
associated with incapacitation. To assess the strength of incapacitation, adult
diet is manipulated using a population and protocols developed at University
College London and drive and non-drive males are competed in an in vitro sperm
viability assay developed at University of Maryland. Analysis of variance is
performed across treatments on live/dead sperm counts. A priori, drive males are
expected to overcome incapacitation in the low protein diet treatment due to
changes in protein composition caused by dietary stress to non-drive males. The
molecular portion of the project is conducted at the University of Maryland and
focuses on identifying changes in ejaculatory protein profiles associated with
incapacitation. A portion of this work includes the construction of expressed
sequence tag (EST) libraries from testes and male accessory glands. Tandem mass
spectroscopy is performed on three different combinations of seminal
vesicle/accessory gland samples as well as an internal standard to identify
protein profiles. Tandem mass spectroscopy results are compared to EST libraries
and differences between treatments in protein composition and expression are
quantified to identify candidate incapacitation genes.

Broader impacts of the proposed work include advanced training for the
postdoctoral fellow and University of Maryland undergraduate students. In
addition, the project fosters international collaboration between the
postdoctoral fellow and two senior investigators in the UK and US. Results from
this study have the potential to provide insight into sperm development and
dysfunction, which have biomedical relevance for understanding causes of male
infertility. Finally, a large amount of DNA sequence information is deposited in
online repositories, thereby enhancing the ability of other investigators to
conduct comparative genomic studies.



