* 0913048
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Simulation and Design of Analog VLSI Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Harish Bhat, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 95,452.00

New technologies in areas such as wireless communication, portable computing,
and handheld electronics have increased the demand for signal processing at high
frequencies. Part of the challenge in designing silicon integrated circuits that
can meet this demand is to overcome limitations in the efficiency and frequency
bandwidth of modern transistors. Here it is proposed to use two-dimensional
networks of inductors and capacitors to overcome these limitations. These high-
speed, high-efficiency networks have a cut-off frequency that is higher than
that for silicon-based transistors. Moreover, such networks can be incorporated
into standard silicon chips that can be fabricated at low cost. The proposed
research has the potential to revolutionize high-frequency analog signal
processing, leading to chips that operate up to 1000 times faster than current
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a large number of possible designs for such
networks, and only a small number of these possibilities have already been
explored. The proposed research seeks to develop algorithms that greatly assist
in the simulation and design of two-dimensional inductor-capacitor networks.
Simulating a large network involves the solution of a large, coupled system of
equations that can be simplified greatly through mathematical analysis. It is
proposed to use this simplification to develop fast, scalable algorithms and
codes for network simulation. This would enable engineers to quickly learn the
effect of changing one or more of the thousands of parameters in a typical
large-scale inductor-capacitor network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is also proposed
to use optimization methods to automatically design lattices that achieve
prescribed input-output relationships. The optimization work will use as a
foundation the prior results of the proposers, including, for example, the
development of a two-dimensional network that computes Fourier transforms in the
analog domain. Such physically motivated ideas will be coupled with modern tools
of parallel numerical computing such as PetSC (the Portable Extensible Toolkit
for Scientific Computation) and TAO (the Toolkit for Advanced Optimization).
This will result in fast, accurate tools that enable engineers to rapidly
optimize the design of a lattice to achieve desired performance
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expertise gained in carrying out the
proposed research will enable the investigators to train students and
researchers to solve problems in modern computational science and engineering.
The proposed research encourages multidisciplinary interaction between
scientists, engineers, applied mathematicians, and computer scientists spanning
the spectrum from developers to users of computational tools.