* 0913886
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Si3N4/SiC Nanocomposites Synthesized from Waste Silica Fume for High Temperature Structural Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Leon Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Leon L. Shaw,
University of Connecticut, and Dr. Mahmoud Farag Zawrah, National Research
Center of Egypt on the topic of using waste silica fume to produce silicon
nitride - silicon carbide (Si3N4/SiC) nanocomposites for use in high temperature
applications such as turbine or engine components. Waste silica fume will be
ball milled in order to reduce particle size and to achieve desired mixture of
components, with milling time a primary variable for the investigation. Control
of interfacial chemistry will involve experiments with and without sintering
aids in order to optimize results during sintering. For each of the resulting
samples, mechanical properties of creep strength, fracture toughness, and
thermal shock resistance will be measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
presents a creative mix of basic materials science and engineering to address
practical problems. The research has the potential to provide beneficial
outcomes such as the development of high temperature structural materials for
gas turbine propulsion systems and for power-producing energy systems. If
successful, this process of preparing nanocomposites would result in an
effective waste stream re-use, with significant environmental benefits.
Additionally, the collaboration with Egyptian scientists brings complementary
skills, as well as the opportunity for training of both US and Egyptian
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to undertake cooperative research.