* 0913373
* CAREER:  Scaled-Up Manufacturing of Nanostructured Refractory Ceramics for High-Temperature Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Olivia Graeve, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2012
* USD 157,352.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
establish a comprehensive research and education program focusing on the
processing and mechanical properties of nanostructured refractory ceramics in
order to extend the basic and practical knowledge of sintering as well as
mechanical behavior in these types of materials, while at the same time
producing materials that have a direct application in ultra-high temperature
environments. Graduate students, undergraduate students, high school teachers,
and high school students will be incorporated into research and educational
experiences possible with a project such as this one. Building on the principal
investigator's strengths in the synthesis and characterization of ceramic
materials, the specific objectives of the project are: (1) to synthesize
nanostructured carbide powders using a solvothermal synthesis approach; (2) to
characterize the process of solvothermal synthesis over a range of experimental
conditions (i.e., reaction time, reaction temperature, and cleaning solvents) in
order to optimize and scale-up the process; (3) to densify the nanostructured
powders into compacts via spark-plasma sintering; (4) to characterize the
process of densification over a range of experimental conditions (i.e., starting
crystallite size of the powders, starting agglomerate size of the powders,
pressure, temperature, heating rate, and time of densification); (5) to examine
the microstructural development during the densification process; (6) to
characterize the mechanical behavior of the densified compacts at room and high
temperatures and to determine the changes in mechanical behavior with changes in
SPS processing conditions; (7) to characterize the thermal shock resistance of
the compacts, since in their ultimate expected application the materials will be
undergoing cycles of very rapid heating and cooling; and (8) to enlist graduate
students, undergraduate students, high school teachers, and high school students
in the process of meeting the above research objectives.

Complementary to the research goals described above, a multi-objective education
plan is outlined. The plan contains the following four objectives: (1) to
involve graduate and undergraduate students from the USA and Mexico's National
Polytechnic Instittue in research experiences and collaborative activities; (2)
to involve undergraduate students of Hispanic descent from Southwestern College
in research experiences and collaborative activities; (3) to continue outreach
activities to northern Nevada high school students, and (4) to involve Hispanic
high school students and teachers from Hug High School (Reno) in summer research
experiences.