* 0913004
* Doctoral Consortium and Student - Author Travel for Petra '09 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2010
* USD 19,000.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium of approximately 12 promising
doctoral students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with 3
distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction with the Second
International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive
Environments (PETRA 2009), which will take place July 9-13 in Corfu, Greece. The
goal of the PETRA 2009 conference is to bring together experts from diverse
domains to address an important social and healthcare issue, namely that as the
world's population ages there is an urgent need to develop solutions for in-home
care of the elderly, as well as of people with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and
other disabilities or traumas. PETRA 2009 will provide a unique venue that
focuses on combining wireless computing, sensors, and other pervasive computing
technologies into assistive environments. The conference aims to span the
continuum from data involving genetic and brain imaging to behavioral patterns;
it will encompass and merge security and privacy issues with monitoring for both
physical and digital safety in assistive environments including the home, work
place, hospital, rehabilitation / nursing home, etc. Thus, PETRA 2009 will
create a channel for applying basic CS principles to the service of millions of
humans in need. More information about PETRA 2009 may be found at
www.petrae.org. The goals of the Doctoral Consortium are to increase the
exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the community, to help
establish a sense of community among this next generation of researchers, and to
help foster their research efforts by providing substantive feedback and
guidance in a supportive and interactive environment from a group of senior
researchers. Student participants in the Doctoral Consortium will make formal
presentations of their work and will receive feedback from a faculty panel; the
feedback is geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work
is positioned relative to other research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Doctoral Consortium attendees will have short papers on their work included in
the Conference Proceedings, and a summary report on the event will be posted on
the conference website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PETRA 2009
Doctoral Consortium will bring together some of the best students, researchers
and practitioners in relevant fields, and will thereby afford the younger
participants a unique opportunity to gain wider exposure for their innovative
ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value of
conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will also allow the
junior participants to create a social network both among themselves and with
senior colleagues. Since the conference is expected to host a diverse group
along several dimensions (such as nationality, scientific discipline, and
research specialization), participants' horizons will be broadened and new
collaborations will emerge, to the future benefit of the field. The organizing
committee will make a concerted effort to attract minority and disabled
participants to the event.