* 0913875
* RI: Small: A Computational Framework for Marking Physical Objects against Counterfeiting and Tampering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mikhail Atallah, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,883.00

The project?s goal is to create a science for embedding information in physical
objects whose manufacturing process is inherently imprecise. The team will reach
their objective through the investigation of a specific problem of significant
economic importance: thwarting counterfeiting, and the related problem of
physical tamper-detection. Counterfeiting is a growing economic problem that has
been called the ?crime of the century? by a recent manufacturing industry
report, and its cost is rapidly escalating (its yearly cost to the automotive
industry alone is in the tens of billions of dollars and the loss of about
250,000 U.S. jobs for the legitimate manufacturers). In terms of scientific
impact, the project has excellent potential for launching a significant new
field. While the marking of digital objects is a well-explored area, the
creation of algorithms for placing marks in physical objects is mostly
unexplored territory. In terms of industrial impact, the project also has
excellent potential for profoundly improving the current ?state of the
practice?, which is all too easily defeated by sophisticated counterfeiters.
This is because the project?s framework assumes an adversary with powerful
capabilities, such as greater manufacturing prowess than the legitimate
manufacturer, and full knowledge of the algorithms used to embed marks and to
read marks (i.e., no ?security through obscurity?). The project?s only
assumption is that the adversary does not know a secret key used to embed the
mark. The work focuses on the development of the computational algorithms
necessary to resolve several difficult issues and tradeoffs about what
information to embed in the object, and where/how to embed it. A solution must
not increase manufacturing cost and must be usable with the current
manufacturing pipeline. The approach is inherently multidisciplinary, combining
information hiding, computer vision/graphics, and robust algorithms. Hence,
students in the project will acquire a unique combination of skills.