* 0913459
* RI: Small: Qualitative Preferences: Merging Paradigms, Extending the Language, Reasoning about Incomplete Outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Miroslaw Truszczynski, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 424,685.00

The most common approach in decision theory involves preferences expressed
numerically in terms of utility functions, while optimization over different
choices takes into account the probability distribution over possible states of
the world. An alternative approach represents preferences in qualitative terms,
and is motivated, in part, by difficulties in building good utility functions,
ascertaining accurate probability distributions, and related problems.

This project is advancing qualitative decision theory by focusing on two
promising formalisms for representing and reasoning about qualitative
preferences: conditional preference networks (CP-nets) and answer-set
optimization (ASO) programs. Both CP-nets and ASO programs offer representations
for several classes of preference problems, but each has major limitations. This
project addresses these limitations by developing a formalism. ASO(CP) programs,
which extend both ASO programs and CP-nets by exploiting key properties of both.
The project's major objectives are: to introduce formally ASO(CP) programs by
integrating into ASO programs generalized conditional (ceteris paribus)
preferences of CP-nets; to establish expressivity of ASO(CP) programs, to study
properties of preorders that can be defined by means of ASO(CP) programs, and to
address relevant computational issues; to investigate a crucial problem of
preference equivalence, essential for automated preference manipulation; to
study an extension of ASO(CP) programs to the case of incompletely specified
outcomes, essential for practical applications; and, to extend ASO(CP) programs
to the first-order language extended with aggregate operators.

Representing preferences qualitatively and optimizing over such preferences is a
fundamental problem of qualitative decision theory. By integrating and advancing
understanding of major types of common preferences that are captured by ASO
programs and CP-nets, this project will produce theoretical and practical
advances in representation and reasoning about preferences, bringing it to the
point where it can be effectively used in practical decision support systems.