* 0913561
* Correlation of Atomic Level Growth, Characterization and Electronic Properties of Epitaxial Ferromagnetic Alloys on Compound Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Christopher Palmstrom, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2010
* USD 135,849.00

Technical: Theoretical studies have suggested that the spin polarization of
magnetic materials is very sensitive to compositional changes and defects at
surfaces and interfaces. This sensitivity to composition and defects is believed
to be responsible for limiting the performance of spin transport based devices
and the aim of this proposal is to experimentally determine these correlations.
Single crystal ferromagnetic alloys will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) on atomically clean, well characterized, MBE-grown semiconductor surfaces.
In-situ deposition and annealing will be used to modify the surface composition
and structure. In-situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), reflection high
energy electron diffraction, low energy electron diffraction, x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy and magneto optic Kerr
effect (MOKE) measurements will be combined with ex-situ Rutherford
backscattering, high resolution x-ray diffraction, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), vibration sample (VSM) and superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) magnetometry to obtain a detailed understanding of
the atomic level structural, chemical and magnetic properties. The spin
polarization will be determined by measurements of in-situ fabricated
superconductor-ferromagnetic metal tunnel junctions, in-situ fabricated
ferromagnetic metal tunnel junctions, and in-situ point contact Andreev
reflections (PCAR). In-situ PCAR is advantageous for determining the effect of
surface composition and structure, as it does not require deposition of a tunnel
barrier material on top of the ferromagnetic layer, which is likely to change
the surface properties. It also has the advantage that the spin polarization of
the same sample can be measured sequentially after surface modification. By
comparing the three spin polarization measurements, the influence the surfaces,
interfaces and tunnel barrier on the spin transport in tunnel junctions will be
determined experimentally. Non-Technical: The project addresses basic research
issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to new understanding and capabilities for potential next
generation electronic/spintronic devices. An important feature of the program is
the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. The interdisciplinary nature
of the project including magnetism, materials science, molecular beam epitaxy,
surface science, low-temperature physics, superconductivity, ultra high vacuum
technology, and electron microscopy provides a unique training ground for future
materials scientists at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Students will
have opportunities and be trained and educated in all aspects of these
interdisciplinary fields. The ability to gain a fundamental understanding of how
atomic structure at surfaces, interfaces and in the bulk of the materials
affects magnetic and spin properties of thin films will be a critical component
of their education. The PI has a strong commitment to assisting diversity and to
training students and postdoctoral associates to collaborate with other students
and scientists. Opportunities provided by collaborative projects make this
training unique and important to future materials scientists. Currently, the
PI's group consists of 4 graduate students and two postdoctoral associates from
different ethnic backgrounds, including US, Germany, Taiwan, India, and Korea.
Half of the students are women. Broadening the range of areas in which students
and postdoctoral associates have knowledge enhances their future career choices.
Students will gain invaluable exposure to state of the art atomic level
characterization techniques and learn what information may or may not be gained
through various techniques. The PI has been successful in involving a balance of
male (50%) and female (50%) undergraduate students from four-year colleges to
participate in summer research and training programs and will continue these
efforts. Emphasis is made on developing interactive and collaborative skills
through collaborations and research interactions with groups of complementary
expertise.