* 0913757
* Efficient numerical techniques of two-phase transport model in the cathode of hydrogen polymer electrolyte fuel cell
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Pengtao Sun, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is to develop advanced numerical techniques in order to perform efficient,
accurate&lt;br/&gt;and state of the art simulations for two-phase transport
model in the cathode of hydrogen&lt;br/&gt;proton exchange membrane fuel cell
(PEMFC). The computational efficiency and accuracy for&lt;br/&gt;solving two-
phase transport PEMFC model depends crucially on the partition of mesh for
precisely&lt;br/&gt;capturing the anisotropic interface of single- and two-phase
zones, the design of proper&lt;br/&gt;discretization schemes and efficient
iterative methods for solving a highly unstable nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;system due
to the discontinuous and degenerate diffusion coefficient. The PI proposes to
develop&lt;br/&gt;anisotropic adaptive mesh techniques, and advanced algorithms
in both discretization&lt;br/&gt;and iteration level in order to design a better
discretized model which can be solved more efficiently and accurately by
iterative methods on an optimal mesh. More precisely, for
anisotropic&lt;br/&gt;adaptive mesh method, the PI proposes an a posteriori
error estimator based on error equaldistribution&lt;br/&gt;by equalidistributing
edge length of finite element in Hessian matrix-metric. For
the&lt;br/&gt;discontinuous and degenerate diffusion coefficient, the PI
proposes Kirchhoff transformation to&lt;br/&gt;skillfully reformulate the
original PEMFC model to a linear Poisson's equation, and
Newton's&lt;br/&gt;method to efficiently solve the resulting inverse Kirchhoff
transformation. In particular, for the&lt;br/&gt;case of wet gas channel in
PEMFC, in which Kirchhoff transformation brings the discontinuity&lt;br/&gt;back
to the resulting Kirchhoff's variable on the interface of gas channel and gas
diffusion&lt;br/&gt;layer, the PI proposes Dirichlet-Neumann alternating
iterative domain decomposition method&lt;br/&gt;to resolve this interfacial
boundary problem. On the discretization level, the PI will design
a&lt;br/&gt;combined finite element-upwind finite volume method to overcome the
dominant convection in&lt;br/&gt;gas channel of PEMFC without losing the
benefits of FEM. For nonlinear iteration schemes,&lt;br/&gt;the PI will employ
either Picard's or Newton's method to linearize nonlinear PEMFC
model,&lt;br/&gt;combining with specifically preconditioned Krylov-type solver.
The PI hopes to develop more&lt;br/&gt;efficient and accurate numerical
simulations for two-phase transport model in the cathode of&lt;br/&gt;hydrogen
PEMFC by uniting modern numerical techniques of adaptivity and multilevel
solvers&lt;br/&gt;with standard numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuel
cells have been called the key to abundant energy from secure and renewable
sources,&lt;br/&gt;e.g., fuel cells promise to replace the internal combustion
engine in transportation due to their&lt;br/&gt;higher energy efficiency and
zero or ultralow emissions. Hydrogen proton exchange membrane&lt;br/&gt;fuel
cell (PEMFC) is presently considered as a potential type of fuel cells for such
application.&lt;br/&gt;Since PEMFC involves electrochemical reactions, current
distribution, two-phase flow transport&lt;br/&gt;and heat transfer, a
comprehensive mathematical modeling of multiphysics system and high
performance&lt;br/&gt;computing combining with the advanced numerical techniques
shall make a significant&lt;br/&gt;impact in the development of fuel cell
technology. However, because of the complexity of the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model, current numerical techniques are far
from being satisfactory due&lt;br/&gt;to poor performances on both efficiency
and accuracy. Hence, advanced numerical techniques&lt;br/&gt;are urgently
required to significantly improve the efficiency and accuracy of fuel cell
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed numerical techniques in this project will
challenge a number of critical numerical&lt;br/&gt;difficulties, which are
caused by large discontinuity, degeneracy, nonlinearity, dominant
convection&lt;br/&gt;and anisotropy, by designing and analyzing the efficient
numerical methods toward fast&lt;br/&gt;convergence and precise solutions. The
PI will utilize the proposed efficient numerical methods&lt;br/&gt;to eventually
develop an efficient and robust in-house code for PEM fuel cell
simulations&lt;br/&gt;by achieving one to two orders of magnitude improvement on
the existing commercial fuel cell&lt;br/&gt;packages in computational
performance. The PI hopes that the proposed numerical techniques&lt;br/&gt;and
numerical package for PEMFC will lead to a significant progress and likely
breakthrough in&lt;br/&gt;the field of computational fuel cell technology,
substantially impacting the commercialization of&lt;br/&gt;fuel cells and
further helping in the transition to hydrogen economy.