* 0913197
* US-Jordan Workshop on Middle Eastern Research And Educational Advances In Structural Health Monitoring And Control
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Ali Nayfeh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleen Maitland
* 02/28/2011
* USD 49,885.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: OISE-0913197&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ali Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: US-Jordan Workshop on Middle Eastern
Research and Educational Advances in Structural Health Monitoring and
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to hold a workshop on structural
health monitoring and control (SHMC) at Jordan University in the spring of 2010.
The objectives of the workshop are threefold: (1) to host a three-day workshop
in Amman, Jordan to discuss research and educational issues and trends related
to SHMC, (2) to offer opportunities for the initiation of collaborative research
projects between the American and Middle Eastern participants, and (3) to
address issues related to the needs of local industry in SHMC. The workshop will
be focused on theoretical, numerical, and experimental developments in SHMC and
their application to many types of structures. The workshop will provide a forum
to disseminate new scientific, technical, and experimental concepts in SHMC. The
workshop is expected to have a broader impact on the advancement of SHMC
education and to help young faculty initiate SHMC programs. This workshop will
bring together many experts in the field of SHMC to discuss current issues and
trends related to new theoretical, numerical, and experimental methods. This
interaction will create synergy between American faculty and partners from
Middle Eastern countries. They can mutually benefit by establishing
collaborative research work in the field of SHMC with an international
dimension. It is anticipated that this workshop will give the SHMC education
issues greater international exposure. The funds requested will provide travel
support for US participants who will meet with participants from Middle Eastern
countries including Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Palestine, and Lebanon.
Among the benefits to the US are (1) familiarizing the regional participants
with US practices, software, actuators, instrumentation networks, and sensors
produced in the US, and (2) advancing the knowledge and expertise of US
participants in the area of applying SHMC techniques to historical monuments and
archeological sites.&lt;br/&gt;