* 0913018
* Collaborative Research: Measurement and Modeling of Aerodynamic Interactions between Tree-Sway Motion and Turbulence in and above a Forest Canopy
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,03/31/2011
* April Hiscox, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2011
* USD 147,524.00

Turbulence in the canopy roughness sublayer (CRSL) is the primary driving force
of the exchange processes between terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere.
These exchanges are vital components in global carbon and water cycles and
climate change research. Previous studies of short crops have shown that the
aeroelasticity of plants has a significant impact on CRSL turbulence structure.
The aeroelasticity of trees, however, has not been formally considered in most
turbulence models of CRSL, including state of the art large-eddy simulation
models (LES). This is largely due to a lack of field experiments to quantify the
elastic properties of trees and their complex damped sway behaviors, which
differ from those in short crops. Improved understanding and modeling of the
aerodynamic interactions between forest canopies and CRSL turbulence are also
significant in order to investigate the multifaceted effects of winds on the
structure and function of terrestrial forest ecosystems and their responses to
and interactions with future climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This collaborative project is an interdisciplinary effort built upon the
experimental and numerical modeling expertise of forest ecologists and
micrometeorologists at the University of Connecticut, East Carolina University
and Louisiana State University. The research consists of a novel but labor
intensive field experiment campaign over a period of 1.5 years at an established
AmeriFlux forest site at Howland, Maine, and a computationally intensive
modeling component to incorporate tree sway motion physics into a current LES.
The investigators will develop improved numerical models of tree-sway and their
coupling with the LES. The overall goal is to improve understanding and modeling
of the mechanisms underlying the aerodynamic interactions between CRSL
turbulence structures and tree sway motions in and above forest canopies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field campaign will measure the sway motions and the
elastic and aerodynamic properties of a large array of trees and turbulence wind
fields simultaneously. These measurements will be used to quantify the temporal
and spatial characteristics of tree-sway motions and their aerodynamic
interactions with coherent gusts in a forest canopy. The coupled LES-tree-sway-
model will be used to quantify the influences of tree sway motions on airflow in
and above a forest over a range of atmospheric conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PIs will conduct systematic
investigations, using the coupled LES-tree-sway-model, to quantify the effects
and the relative significances of atmospheric boundary layer height and
stability, external horizontal pressure gradient force, canopy morphology and
elastic properties of trees, on the characteristics of tree-sway motions and
CRSL coherent structures and their interactions. The PIs will carry out a
thorough and comprehensive set of analyses of field measurements and LES outputs
to create both qualitative and quantitative descriptions of the spatial and
temporal characteristics of the tree-sway motions and canopy-scale coherent
structures, including their relations and interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This collaborative project will integrate
teaching and research at multiple levels of education. To cultivate and nurture
the pursuit of science at the grass roots, the PIs will carry out an education
program specifically designed to engage primary school children with interactive
instructions on how basic data are collected, analyzed and shared, and
demonstrations of the linkages between weather, climate and forested ecosystems.
This outreach via family public education program will excite future generations
about scientific understanding of the world, and will utilize some of the
knowledge, instruments and models applied in the research portion of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide support to graduate
students who will receive formal training in multiple research areas
(micrometeorology, boundary-layer meteorology, forest meteorology, forest
ecology), learn and practice important field measurement and numerical modeling
and data analysis techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results from this
project will be used to develop undergraduate and graduate course modules in
micrometeorology, forest meteorology and forest ecology at both universities,
and made available through a project web site.