* 0913071
* Collaborative Research: Agent-Based Modeling and Observation of Intra-Population Variability in Phytoplankton
* ENG,CBET
* 08/25/2008,08/31/2010
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2010
* USD 137,756.00

Ferdinand L. Hellweger, PI&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern
University&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0730239&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benjamin S. Twining,
PI&lt;br/&gt;University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;CBET-0730061&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
Agent-based Modeling and Observations of Intra-Population Variability in
Phytoplankton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
investigate and evaluate the agent-based modeling (ABM) approach for simulating
intra-population variability in nutrient contents for phytoplankton. Cultural
eutrophication, which results from inputs of excess nutrients into water bodies,
is an important environmental problem in the US and other countries. The
effective management of a water body's trophic state requires an accurate
biogeochemical (water quality, eutrophication) model. Present models use a
lumped-system modeling (LSM) approach that assumes average properties of a
population within a control volume. For modern biogeochemical models that
formulate phytoplankton growth as a nonlinear function of the internal nutrient
concentration (e.g. Droop kinetics), this averaging assumption can introduce a
significant error. Agent-based modeling does not make the assumption of average
properties and can simulate intra-population variability in nutrient content.
The hypotheses to be tested are (1) intrapopulation variability in nutrient
content plays an important role in phytoplankton dynamics in a real system; (2)
Accounting for the intra-population variability of nutrient content improves
model performance; and (3) Agent-based models can reproduce the observed intra-
population variability in nutrient contents. The model will be tested on a real
system consisting of a portion of the Charles River in
Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The expected benefits of the work included
improved support for making management decisions for aquatic systems affected by
excessive nutrient input. The ABM approach has not been used to explore
hypotheses in environmental engineering research. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in the research. Undergraduate students from under-
represented groups will be involved. Dissemination of the results will occur
through short courses, on-line resources, conferences, and journal
papers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;