* 0913001
* DRMS-Evaluating Aquaculture Partnerships
* SBE,SES
* 08/16/2008,12/31/2011
* Christopher Weible, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2011
* USD 282,362.00

This research examines the effectiveness of ten marine aquaculture partnerships
measured by the emergence of new social capital, learning and consensus on
scientific and policy issues, formal policy agreements, policy adoption by
higher authorities, and projected socioeconomic and ecological outcomes. Marine
aquaculture is the cultivation of fish and shellfish in ocean waters under
controlled conditions. Advocates of marine aquaculture tout its potential to
provide a reliable and nutritious food source while easing the United States'
seafood trade deficit, which exceeds $7 billion per year. Critics of marine
aquaculture worry that it might deplete wild fish stocks, pollute marine
environments, displace fishing-dependent communities, and produce seafood that
is chemically and genetically tainted. The debate is still in its formative
stages with hundreds of stakeholders from government agencies, tribes,
universities, and the private sector vying to influence policy decisions. Much
of the current debate about promoting and regulating marine aquaculture is
taking place within multi-stakeholder partnerships that have convened around the
country to collaborate on research, demonstration projects, and policy
proposals. The long-term fate of the industry hinges partly on the ability of
these partnerships to avert prolonged policy stalemates.

The study will test hypotheses from the Advocacy Coalition Framework regarding
how attributes of the stakeholders interact with the structure and operation of
the partnership to influence success. Of particular interest is documenting the
relative success of partnerships that include aquaculture skeptics versus those
that mainly seek to promote the industry. The investigators will use a
combination of quantitative and qualitative techniques to analyze case-study
data garnered from interviews, partnership documents, and a stakeholder survey.
They will compare results with previous research on 76 terrestrial watershed
partnerships. The study will contribute to our understanding of best management
practices in collaborative governance, particularly for policy disputes marked
by high conflict and technical uncertainty.