* 0913663
* Collaborative Research: Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Turbulent Transport Control via Shaping of Radial Plasma Flow Profiles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrew Ware, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 88,600.00

This award is made in response to a collaborative proposal submitted to and
reviewed under the NSF/DoE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering
joint solicitation NSF 08-589. This award funds the research component of the
project being conducted by Dr. Andrew Ware at the University of Montana. The
research components of Dr. Ware's collaborators, Dr. Eugenio Schuster of Lehigh
University and Dr. Mark Gilmore of the University of New Mexico, are funded by
the DoE under contract number DE-FG02-09ER55022 and DE-
FG02-09ER55062&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to investigate active
control of unstable fluctuations, including fully developed turbulence and the
associated cross-field particle transport, via manipulation of flow profiles in
a magnetized laboratory plasma device. Fluctuations and particle transport will
be monitored by an array of electrostatic probes, and flow profiles controlled
via a set of biased concentric ring electrodes that terminate the plasma column.
The goals of the proposed research are threefold. &lt;br/&gt;1. to develop a
predictive code to simulate plasma transport in the linear HELCAT (HELicon-
CAThode) plasma device at the University of New Mexico (UNM), where the
experimental component of the proposed research will be carried out.
&lt;br/&gt;2. to establish the feasibility of using advanced model-based control
algorithms to control cross-field turbulence-driven particle transport through
appropriate manipulation of radial plasma flow profiles. &lt;br/&gt;3. to
investigate the fundamental nonlinear dynamics of turbulence and transport
physics. &lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed research, although focused on
basic plasma physics, will have a strong impact on the scientific advancements
that are needed to make nuclear fusion a viable source of energy, and will
therefore produce a profound impact on an area of immense importance to the
welfare of society. The proposed research will advance discovery while promoting
teaching and learning. Due to its multidisciplinary nature, the proposed
research plan brings together concepts from plasma physics, computational
methods, and controls, with emphasis on experimental validation of the proposed
modeling and control solutions. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit
from this unique multidisciplinary experience that will enhance their ability to
conduct advanced research, think creatively, take advantage of unique facilities
making good use of collaborative arrangements, and work in an individual
capacity and as members of a team. The infrastructure for research and learning
will be enhanced in each one of the collaborating institution. This
collaboration will grant access to graduate and undergraduate students to the
HELCAT experimental facility, where they can conduct experiments to validate the
modeling and control solutions that result from their research, and will expose
each one of the participating students to new research areas.