* 0913391
* Symposium: Domain Microstructures and Mechanisms for Advanced Properties in Phase Transforming Materials; Pittsburgh, PA; October 25-29, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2009,10/31/2009
* Yu Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan J. Ardell
* 10/31/2009
* USD 12,000.00

Symposium: Domain Microstructures and Mechanisms for Advanced Properties in
Phase Transforming Materials; Pittsburgh, PA; October 25-29,
2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: Domain microstructures and their behaviors
are central to several different research communities, and, historically, the
understanding of domains in ferroelectric materials, magnetic materials, and
shape-memory alloys has evolved independently in these communities, despite
important commonalities among the underlying physical phenomena. Recently
discovered nanoscale domains in these materials play an important role in the
way these materials respond to various applied fields. This 3-day MS&amp;T 2009
Conference symposium brings together researchers from these communities to
present recent research in their fields with the following objectives: (1) To
explore recent advances in experimental observations, theory and modeling of
domain microstructures and the mechanisms for achieving advanced
thermomechanical, magnetostrictive, and piezoelectric properties in phase
transforming materials; (2) To discuss the role of nanoscale domains in
improving the properties of ferroelastic, ferroelectric, and ferromagnetic
materials; and (3) To consider the use of domain microstructures, domain walls,
and crystal defects to design new functional materials with advanced properties.
NON-TECHNICAL: The symposium includes experimentalists, theoreticians and
computational scientists from different research communities with overlapping
interests to facilitate discussion, debate and collaboration. It exposes young
researchers (students, postdocs, junior faculty) and members of underrepresented
groups (minorities, women, persons with disabilities) to the exciting field of
phase transforming materials. It encourages new collaborations across
disciplines and generations. The NSF funds are directed to the support of young
researchers and underrepresented groups to encourage their participation.
Availability of the financial support will be announced together with the
symposium announcement and invitation through websites and emails. Invitations
will be sent to researchers active in ferroelectrics, ferromagnetics,
ferroelastics and shape-memory alloys to ensure symposium success and broad
participation. The symposium focuses on emerging aspects of nanodomains, and the
technical discussions should provide new insights into how domain engineering
may be exploited in the creation of new materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;