* 0913017
* Algebraic hierarchical matrix preconditioners for two- and three-dimensional saddle point problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Sabine Le Borne, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 137,149.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with the
development, analysis and implementation&lt;br/&gt;of novel techniques for the
solution of large, sparse linear systems&lt;br/&gt;of equations of saddle point
type. Despite much recent progress,&lt;br/&gt;the solution of large systems of
equations remains one of the main&lt;br/&gt;bottlenecks in many numerical
simulations. Applications include&lt;br/&gt;fluid dynamics,
magnetohydrodynamics, image processing, and many more.&lt;br/&gt;This project
deals with the further development of the &lt;br/&gt;technique of hierarchical
(H-)matrices. H-matrices &lt;br/&gt;provide an efficient technique for
computations&lt;br/&gt;involving approximations to fully populated
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;The standard construction of an H-matrix is
based&lt;br/&gt;on the underlying geometry of the application. Similar to the
generalization&lt;br/&gt;of geometric to algebraic multigrid methods, the PI
proposes to &lt;br/&gt;develop an algorithm for the algebraic construction of
H-matrix &lt;br/&gt;preconditioners for saddle point problems. Sequences of
three-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;Oseen problems that result in the numerical
solution of the Navier-Stokes &lt;br/&gt;equations will serve as the major
application of the novel techniques.&lt;br/&gt;An additional topic to be
considered in this project is&lt;br/&gt;the application of H-techniques in only
recently developed&lt;br/&gt;Kronecker product preconditioners. The techniques
of this proposal &lt;br/&gt;have a high potential to lead to robust and scalable
blackbox solvers &lt;br/&gt;for large, linear systems arising in the simulation
of scientific and &lt;br/&gt;technical problems of increasing size and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H-matrices have first been
introduced in 1998 and &lt;br/&gt;since then entered into a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The approach of H-matrices is of significant importance
&lt;br/&gt;within its own field of numerical analysis and also with respect
to&lt;br/&gt;practical large-scale computing challenges that scientists are
&lt;br/&gt;currently facing. Examples for applications include models for
&lt;br/&gt;magnetic fusion, accelerator design, electrochemical processes
&lt;br/&gt;or the growth of ceramic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the
areas targeted in this proposal will have a &lt;br/&gt;positive impact on
science and engineering by allowing for faster&lt;br/&gt;and more accurate
computer simulations.