* 0913099
* A Workshop for Scientific Issues on Medical Applications of Micro/Nano Powder Injection Molding-Molding, Sintering, Modeling, and Commercial Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2008,02/28/2011
* Randall German, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jong-on Hahm
* 02/28/2011
* USD 33,030.00

OISE-0738021 (German, R.M. - Mississippi State University)&lt;br/&gt;U.S. -
Korea Workshop for Scientific Issues on Medical Applications of Micro/Nano
Powder Injection Molding: Molding, Sintering, Modeling, and Commercial
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a U.S.-Korea workshop on
the forming research for nanoscale powders applied to powder injection molding
for sub-micron medical and dental device manufacturing. The workshop will focus
on the materials processing aspects of composite consolidates in extrusion,
powder injection molding, and sintering. Topics will include materials science
and medical devices, nanoscale powders, medical and dental device science and
engineering, powder injection molding, research and development gap between
academic and industrial research, international collaborations and
commercialization. The workshop will bring together approximately 33 U.S. and
Korean researchers, postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students. The
key Korean collaborator is Dr. Young-Sam Kwon, President of CetaTech. Korean
participants come from the Korea Institute of Industrial Technology (KITECH),
Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Ajou University,
Hangyang University, KINORY, Inc. Research Institute of Industrial Science and
Technology (RIST), Sung Kyun Kwan University (SKKU), Pheonix Korea, Misosmile
Dental Clinic and CetaTech, Inc. &lt;br/&gt;