* 0913570
* Eco-epidemiology of Leptospirosis in Latin America:   Understanding the Dynamics of Transmission Within a Community
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Gerardo Acosta, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,398,997.00

Leptospirosis, an infection of worldwide public health importance, is caused by
Leptospira bacteria that can be transmitted from animals to humans. Human
infection can occur after contact with infected animals or with a Leptospira-
contaminated environment usually associated with agricultural practices,
contamination of household or recreational water, poor housing and waste
disposal, and changes in the density or proximity of infected animal (rodents,
domestic animals, and wildlife). The mechanisms involved in the transmission of
the bacteria and the ecological and sociological factors that affect the
likelihood of human infection are poorly understood. The objective of this
project is to clarify how leptospirosis is transmitted in a community and to
quantify the relative importance of the multiple sources of infection. The
research team will study the ecological and sociological elements that influence
human infection in rural, peri-urban and urban communities in southern Chile in
order to identify effective intervention strategies for reducing the impact of
leptospirosis on human health. This research is significant because it will aid
in the control of leptospirosis and other serious human infections of animal
origin. Broader impacts of this project include training of professionals in the
area of emerging infectious diseases and global health, development of
methodologies for studying the environmental sources of human infections, and
the establishment of multinational and multidisciplinary partnerships for
combating infectious diseases of global health importance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;