* 0913025
* Hybrid Flexible Electronics Workshop for an International Study.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* Robert Shelton, World Technology Evaluation Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2010
* USD 40,000.00

Project Summary This project includes organization of a workshop to be conducted
by NSF with support from WTEC for a preliminary assessment of U.S. and
international R&D activities in hybrid flexible electronics. This topic has been
identified by NSF?s Engineering Directorate as the focus of a potential NSF/ENG
international research study. The purpose of the workshop, to be held December
3, 2008, is to gather facts and opinions from experts from the U.S. research
community on how this emerging area of research should be defined for purposes
of such a study, to provide an overview of U.S. and international R&D activities
that fall within this definition. This information presented at the workshop
will be distilled into a report for NSF/ENG. Intellectual Merit
Inorganic/organic hybrid electronic devices can provide the advantages of both
materials, including flexible devices like electronic newspapers and patient-
friendly implants. The field is an active area of R&D with exponentially
increasing numbers of technical papers being published. There is an opportunity
to plan a research agenda that could ensure that American scientists and
engineers continue to lead this field, by assessing what is now being done in
the U.S. and abroad. WTEC's program of assessment of international R&D uses a
peer review methodology that many believe is the best single method of assessing
the quality of R&D. It augments this with appropriate quantitative methods--
bibliometric indicators. With the experience of over 60 such studies, WTEC is
uniquely qualified to provide the public and private sector with information on
the status and trends of research and technology development abroad. Broader
Impacts The first large scale manufacturing plants for hybrid flexible
electronics are just now being built, demonstrating that the field has
commercial promise, not just research interest. Thus better knowledge of the
field?s status and trends can contribute to NSF?s mission, ?To promote the
progress of science, to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare??
This study will provide information on the international aspect of the science
and technology in this field, which generally has proven to be useful in the
education of engineers and scientists, in transfer of technologies from abroad
for the benefit of American science and industry, and in linking for
international networking and collaboration. WTEC studies also link Federal
agencies across disciplines and offices; this study is likely to ultimately
involve NIST, AFOSR, ONR, and several offices at NSF. The expert panel
conducting the study will be chosen to encourage participation by all; a special
effort will be made to recruit participants from under-represented groups. WTEC
will disseminate panel findings broadly through electronic and paper media. The
public downloads thousands of reports from the wtec.org website weekly. The WTEC
series of more than a dozen international research assessment books from some of
the world?s leading scientific publishers demonstrates that its findings are
highly valued.