* 0913623
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of nano-fillers from waste materials and their application in papermaking industry
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Yulin Deng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2011
* USD 50,000.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Yulin Deng,
Georgia Tech Research Corporation at the Georgia Institute of Technology, and
Dr. Said El-Sheikh, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute of
Egypt, on the topic of preparing nano-fillers from waste materials for use in
the paper industry. The research will determine whether inclusion of nano-filler
particles in paper can improve the mechanical properties (e.g. smoothness,
increased surface area) without compromising paper weight or processing
characteristics. Further, tailoring the shape and structure of the nano-fillers
to increase surface area should reduce the overall amount of filler needed
without adversely impacting tensile strength. The prepared nano-fillers will be
characterized in terms of size and phase structure, surface morphology and
structural properties, bond types, and nanostructural surface charge. The
prepared paper with incorporated nano-fillers will be characterized in terms of
optical, physical, mechanical properties. Printability will be also investigated
focusing on print density, print gloss and ink
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific community and paper industry will
benefit from the results of the proposed research to explore alternate materials
for influencing key properties of paper processing. Nano-fillers may offer
special properties of value in specific industry applications. The results may
also offer insight into the dispersion behavior of fine calcium carbonate
particles and how surface chemistry can be controlled to create nanoscale
morphologies. There is a reasonable likelihood that useful, low-cost mineral
products can be produced and that such use can help alleviate a waste disposal
issue and displace more expensive mineral products. Further, the international
exchange, involving green technology, may foster future progress in related
fields in both countries. The collaboration is taking place between two highly
skilled research institutes and involves US and Egyptian junior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to undertake cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;