* 0913700
* Proyecto Dinosaurios: A Track 2 Project for Enhancing Geoscience Education and Awareness Among Hispanic Community College Students Through Paleontological Research
* GEO,GEO
* 06/15/2010,12/31/2012
* Luis Chiappe, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2012
* USD 191,084.00

The Dinosaur Institute of the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
(NHMLAC) aims to establish a multi-year comprehensive program of paleontological
research and training for American Hispanic undergraduates of community colleges
in Los Angeles. The project builds on the core strengths of the NHMLAC's dynamic
programs in paleontology and evolutionary biology, extensive reference
collections, and broad experience in the education of scientific discovery, and
uses the appeal of dinosaurs and other Mesozoic vertebrates to increase the
interest and enhance the education of students of Hispanic background in
vertebrate paleontology. Students are being recruited from the culturally and
ethnically diverse metropolitan area of Los Angeles for a year of research, data
collection, analysis, and public presentation of results. Research activities
and workshops will be designed to explore a diversity of topics germane to the
study of vertebrate fossils and careers within the geosciences. A series of
comprehensive workshops and the opportunity to participate in weekly seminars
will supplement the research activities of the participants. A two-week field
trip to dinosaur localities of the American West will provide students with
hands-on experience about how fossils are discovered and collected, and expose
them to the fundamentals of field research (e.g., stratigraphy, GPS navigation,
data collection). This project will expose 6 participating students to a wide
range of academic activities as well as career and schooling options within the
geosciences, encourage them to transfer to a 4-year college and to continue onto
graduate studies, and increase their understanding about the nature of science,
particularly as applied to paleontology and evolution. This award provides a
1-year extension of activities initiated through a previous Track 1 OEDG project
(GEO-0703506).