* 0913230
* US-Africa: Workshop for the Evaluation, Monitoring and Communication of Volcanic and Seismic Hazards in East Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Meghan Miller, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 59,675.00

This Workshop, led by Meghan Miller of UNAVCO, will be convened at the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy, for US, African,
and European participants designed to develop and enhance plans for
investigations of processes leading to volcanic eruptions and large earthquakes
in continental rift zones, with emphasis on the evaluation, monitoring and
communication of volcanic and seismic hazards in East Africa. The two-day
workshop is planned to precede a two-week professional development course for
African geoscientists supported by ICTP, the International Council for Science
(ICSU), the African Union, the Royal Society/Natural Environment Resource
Council of the UK, and UNAVCO; to provide strategic guidance to the
international community based on lessons learned from natural hazards in Africa
and elsewhere. The goals of the NSF-funded pre-meeting workshop are to establish
a new initiative for cooperation in East Africa, to design programs to
comprehensively evaluate and monitor the time and length scales of plate
boundary and volcanic deformation, and to develop networks for exchange of ideas
and expertise. In so doing, participants will augment and strengthen research
plans, ensuring the broadest impact with future volcanic and seismic hazard-
related projects. The results of this two-day meeting will feed directly into
the international workshop. ICTP, whose mission is to foster advanced studies
and research in developing countries, has provided core support for a two-week
workshop and to defray the cost of attendance for African scientists. UNAVCO
will receive support for 12 U.S. volcanologists, seismologists, geodesists, and
remote sensing experts and 3 graduate students for the two-day, multi-
disciplinary NSF workshop and associated two-day business meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The East African Rift is a classic
example of the early stages of continental rifting above a fertile mantle,
providing scientists with fundamental insights into early rift evolution and
mantle composition. Taken with associated seismic and volcanic hazards, this
feature promises to advance our understanding of divergent plate boundary
evolution and its relevance. Scientists from three continents will share
important recent advances in characterizing the rift and develop an
international plan to advance scientific studies using modern tools of geodesy
and seismology. This plan and the new collaborations established during the
workshop will further also refine the focus on societal impact of volcanic and
seismic hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact This workshop will provide
support for the professional development of an international mix of scientists
and students, and address issues of enhancing sustainable science infrastructure
for developing countries. Further, it will provide a forum for inter-continental
collaboration that will seed future projects. It is expected that the workshop
will nurture exchange among scientific organizations and student programs.
&lt;br/&gt;