* 0913367
* Collaborative Research: Transmissibility of infections caused by intermittently shed pathogens capable of environmental persistence. Relating theory and empirical data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Renata Ivanek Miojevic, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2013
* USD 406,885.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transmission cycle of many
important infectious agents includes not only the hosts but also their
environments. After infection of a host with a pathogen like Escherichia coli,
Listeria monocytogenes, or Salmonella spp, large numbers of the pathogen may be
intermittently shed into the environment where they may survive, multiply, and
infect new hosts. These pathogens have thus retained a combination of two
traits: 1) intermittent shedding and 2) environmental persistence. The
widespread occurrence of this combination of traits indicates that they optimize
pathogen transmissibility, i.e., their ability to spread infection. There is a
critical need to understand the evolution and ecology of the two traits, their
effects on pathogen transmissibility, and their implications for the control of
pathogens that carry this combination of traits. The current project will
address this need by providing mechanistic insight into the tradeoff between
intermittent shedding and environmental persistence traits through strategic
pairing of mathematical modeling and empirical studies, using E. coli
transmission among cattle hosts and their environment as a theoretical and
empirical model system. Furthermore, the project will establish a general
organizing principle for the systematic characterization of all infectious
agents in terms of their aptitude for within-host replication and survival, and
between-host replication and survival, all of which jointly define pathogen
transmissibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The educational impact
of this project arises from extensive involvement and interdisciplinary training
of undergraduate and graduate students in experimental, epidemiological,
molecular, microbiological and mathematical modeling efforts as part of the
multidisciplinary project. The anticipated benefits of this project include the
advancement of animal and public health through a better understanding of the
intermittent shedding and environmental persistence traits that characterize
many infectious agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;