* 0913491
* Study on Algorithms and Applications of Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Xiaoqiang Wang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Centroidal
Voronoi tessellations (CVTs) are special Voronoi tessellations having the
property&lt;br/&gt;that the generators of the Voronoi tessellations are also the
centroids, with respect to a &lt;br/&gt;given density function, of the
corresponding Voronoi cells. In this project, we will continue &lt;br/&gt;to
investigate algorithms for computing CVTs and CVT-based applications for
scientific &lt;br/&gt;and engineering problems. Topics of the proposed project
include: study of single limit-point &lt;br/&gt;convergence analysis for the
Lloyd's algorithm; development and analysis of nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;conjugate
gradient methods for computing CVTs; study and implementation of parallel
CVT/CVDT &lt;br/&gt;mesh generation on the distributed systems; improving
existing CCVT-based techniques for &lt;br/&gt;surface meshing; incorporating
these meshing schemes in adaptive solutions of partial &lt;br/&gt;differential
equations, especially for the convection-dominated problems; and further
&lt;br/&gt;investigation and improvement of the edge-weighted CVT model and
corresponding algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;image segmentation that combines the
intensity information in the color space of the image &lt;br/&gt;and the local
edge information in the physical space.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CVT-based
methodologies have been proven to be very useful in diverse applications in the
past &lt;br/&gt;decade, including but not limited to, image processing, vector
quantization and data &lt;br/&gt;analysis, resource optimization, optimal
placement of sensors and actuators for control, cell &lt;br/&gt;biology and
territorial behavior of animals, high-quality point sampling, mesh generation
and &lt;br/&gt;optimization, numerical partial differential equations, climate
and atmospheric science, &lt;br/&gt;model reduction, computer graphics and
vision, mobile sensing networks, logistics system &lt;br/&gt;design, and etc.
The application list is still growing. The proposed project has a
&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive coverage of algorithm design and analysis,
implementation and applications of &lt;br/&gt;CVTs to diverse problems in
science and engineering. Mathematical tools are used to analyze &lt;br/&gt;these
techniques to give guidelines for their applicability; practical considerations
&lt;br/&gt;including parallel implementation issues are addressed to make the
algorithms competitive in &lt;br/&gt;real applications and large scale
computations. The proposed investigation will offer new &lt;br/&gt;insight into
the understanding of the elegant Lloyd's algorithm and it will also lead to
&lt;br/&gt;exploration of transformative concepts and renovation of
computational algorithms for many &lt;br/&gt;important applications involving
mesh optimization, adaptive algorithms, energy minimization&lt;br/&gt;and image
processing based on the CVT methodologies. In addition, this project will also
offer &lt;br/&gt;a unique educational opportunity for graduate students with
interests in computational and &lt;br/&gt;applied mathematics, engineering and
information technology by having them participate in an
&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research program.