* 0913695
* Numerical methods for elliptic systems with complex interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* John Strain, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 409,863.00

The proposed research builds general theory, fast new algorithms and efficient
open-source implementations for three computational methods in elliptic
interface problems: 1. Locally-corrected spectral methods solve general elliptic
systems with complex interfaces by the following new techniques. Distributional
potential theory converts stable first-order formulations into bounded
invertible operator equations. Ewald summation splits elliptic fundamental
solutions into singular local corrections and smooth global terms. Off-diagonal
low-rank structure couples with singular quadrature and graded meshes to enable
fast direct solvers. 2. Geometric nonuniform fast Fourier transforms evaluate
sparse sets of Fourier coefficients for distributions in elliptic solvers,
invert boundary integral operators, and address a variety of computational
problems. 3. Efficient contouring and distancing algorithms convert between
convenient explicit and robust implicit interface representations. They employ
fast computational geometry, global topology resolution, and high-order local
piecewise-polynomial parametrizations. Solvers for elliptic systems with complex
3D piecewise-smooth interfaces convert explicit CAD formats to implicit
representations for robust topological analysis.

A vast array of technological processes, from global warming to cancer therapy,
from shape optimization to crack propagation, are modeled by elliptic systems of
partial differential equations with complex material interfaces. Efficient
general computational techniques for elliptic systems are essential in designing
better models. Many existing codes for specific systems and interfaces use
computational resources efficiently, but require excessive reprogramming to
investigate new models and thus hamper scientific inquiry. The proposed research
will develop, analyze, implement and disseminate a collection of robust,
efficient and accurate new computational methods for the solution of general
elliptic systems with complex interfaces. This interdisciplinary enterprise
involves researchers and students in mathematics, physics, engineering and
computer science, and benefits a wide range of scientific endeavors.