* 0914827
* Computational Methods for Studying Heterogeneous Pulse-Coupled Network Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Aaditya Rangan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 270,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this proposal is to develop analytical and computational tools
capable of addressing the architecture-specific dynamics associated with
heterogeneous pulse-coupled dynamical systems. There are two major components to
this proposal. First, the development of a diagrammatic subnetwork expansion
will provide a systematic way of analyzing dynamic observables (such as activity
rates or correlations) for the long-time dynamics associated with any pulse-
coupled network. Due to the pulse-coupling of the network dynamics, each term
within this diagrammatic expansion corresponds to a causal sequence of events
spanning a subnetwork of the original network. Second, the development of
numerical algorithms for solving delay-differential population-dynamics
equations will provide a natural method for computing the terms within the
subnetwork expansion, as well as for solving more general delay-differential
equations.

Pulse-coupled networks are a very general, and important, type of dynamical
system which are often studied within the physical sciences. Indeed, any system
which can be represented using a network of connected nodes which interact
through instantaneous bursts of information can be formally described as a
pulse-coupled network. For example, the internet, networks of neurons within the
brain, and many neural networks used in computer science can all be thought of
as pulse-coupled networks. One of the major questions associated with the study
of any pulse-coupled network is "what does it do?" How can a complicated pulse-
coupled network's dynamics be understood? The techniques to be developed within
this proposal will provide a framework for analyzing the dynamics of pulse-
coupled networks, casting a detailed picture of the relationship between any
given pulse-coupled network's structure (i.e., how the network is built) and how
that network behaves. The proposed research will aid in understanding the
function of many important pulse-coupled networks studied in a variety of
fields, ranging from image-processing and pattern detection to robotics and
circuit design to neuroscience.