* 0914546
* Enhancing Diversity Track 1: Experiencing the Chesapeake Bay: Pathway from High School to the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kelton Clark, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 198,829.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morgan State University, in
collaboration with W. E. B. Dubois High School for Environmental Science at
Baltimore, is working to increase the diversity in geosciences for
underrepresented students in Baltimore City, Maryland. 95% of the student body
at W. E. B. Dubois High is African American. This project will ensure a
consistent, supportive and sustainable pathway from high school to university in
the geoscience disciplines through an array of integrated activities:
Environmental science curriculum between W. E. B. Dubois High and Morgan State
University will be revised and aligned to ensure a seamless transition from high
school to college. Hands-on teacher workshops at Morgan State University
Estuarine Research Center (ERC) will be offered to provide high school teachers
necessary knowledge and experience in environmental education that can be
transferred to classroom teaching. Large numbers of students and teachers will
also be engaged in inquiry-based field trips focused on environmental issues
related to the Chesapeake Bay. Finally, a summer intern program at ERC will
further provide mentored research experience to students with geosciences
interests and potential. It is expected that this project will impact more than
300 underrepresented high school and college students, and promote a pathway to
geoscience careers through activities that can eventually be institutionalized
and sustained.