* 0914336
* Efficient Algorithms for Electronic Structure Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Weinan E, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

The main objective of the present proposal is to develop efficient algorithms
for electronic structure analysis that are applicable for both metals and
insulators. This will be done by developing multipole representation of the
Fermi operator, which is a fundamental object in electronic structure analysis
and more generally quantum theories of matter. In addition, the PI also proposes
to develop efficient algorithms for representing and computing the Green's
functions that arise in this context. A second component of the project is the
numerical analysis of the algorithms in electronic structure analysis. Topics to
be studied include the accuracy of linear scaling algorithms, convergence and
convergence rates of self-consistent iterations. This will be done by developing
and using simple but canonical model problems that capture the essential aspects
of the problem but allow explicit analytical
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic structure analysis is
at the foundation of chemistry and material science, as well as some aspects of
biology. Our ability to understand chemical reactions and fundamental aspect of
materials relies heavily on efficient numerical algorithms for solving models
from quantum chemistry or density functional theory. Existing algorithms are
much more effective for insulators than for metals. This is particularly true
for the recently developed linear scaling algorithms which relies heavily on the
exponential decay property of the wave functions or density matrices, a property
that holds for insulators but not for metals. The present project is aimed at
bringing powerful mathematical tools to bear on the problem of electronic
structure analysis. The proposed work will explore the mathematical features of
the electronic structure problem in a way that has never been done before. By
doing so, new insights and new algorithms will result that greatly advance our
ability to analyze the electronic structure of matter.