* 0914578
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Human Behavioral Responses to Middle Holocene Climate Changes: A Pilot Study in Mendoza Province, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Raven Carper, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2012
* USD 16,876.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Bettinger, Raven Garvey will perform a
regional archaeological survey in southern Mendoza Province, Argentina. The
survey is designed to address a puzzling four thousand year gap in the record of
human occupation in Mendoza. Climate scientists have shown that this same four
thousand year period, referred to as the middle Holocene (between 8000 and 4000
years ago), was a time of hotter, drier conditions in a number of regions
worldwide. Indigenous populations living in areas affected by these large-scale
environmental fluctuations were undoubtedly impacted by the resultant changes in
resource availability. The apparent break in the Mendoza record implies that the
people living there were either incapable of adapting to a deteriorating
environment and largely abandoned the region, or that they responded to it in
ways that made them less visible archaeologically, giving the misimpression of
abandonment. Interpretations of similar gaps observed in middle Holocene
archaeological records elsewhere in the world remain controversial due to
precisely these alternative possibilities. In Mendoza, there are simply too few
data available to interpret the observed gap. This survey will sample a broader
range of environment types than have been sampled previously to distinguish
natural from behavioral factors contributing to the break in the record.

Mendoza is a particularly effective "laboratory" for a study of this kind
because the region is geographically and climatically comparable to the Great
Basin of North America where an analogous middle Holocene gap has been
documented. A comparative study of these two regions allows environmental
setting to be held relatively constant while complex responses to resource
fluctuations are teased apart. Understanding behavioral responses to major
climatic events in Argentina will clarify larger trajectories of hunter-gatherer
adaptive change that are relevant to many regions worldwide. Moreover, a deeper
appreciation of prehistoric problem-solving strategies contributes to an
understanding of the rise of modern humans.

In addition to its contributions to empirical and theoretical issues in
anthropology, this project will have broader impacts for both the intellectual
and the local host communities. Close consultation among interdisciplinary
scientists from US and Argentine institutions will result in both mutual
intellectual benefit and a healthy collaborative relationship between
international researchers. Furthermore, field technicians for this project will
be recruited from Argentine universities, providing students of archaeology the
opportunity for field experience and training. Finally, the results of this
project will be shared with the host community through a formal display at a
local museum, a mock archaeological dig, open to public participation, and a
series of age-appropriate classroom presentations designed to generate both
excitement about archaeology and a sense of stewardship towards cultural
heritage.

This award has been jointly funded by NSF's Archaeology Program and Office of
International Science and Engineering.