* 0914401
* The Southern Arizona Geosciences Union for Academics, Research, and Outreach (SAGUARO): A Track 1 Program for Enhancing Diversity at the University of Arizona
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Karl Flessa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 154,610.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arizona (UA) is
replicating components of a successful outreach, mentoring, networking and
research program that engages underrepresented high school and undergraduate
students in the geosciences. The Southern Arizona Geosciences Union for
Academics, Research and Outreach (SAGUARO) project, modeled after the Buffalo
Geosciences Program, is recruiting 5 undergraduate interns each year to
participate in independent research projects and conduct outreach activities
about geoscience careers at nearby Pima Community College and select high
schools in the Tucson area. In Arizona, less than 8% of geosciences
undergraduate degrees are awarded to Arizona students from traditionally
underrepresented groups. This figure is disproportionate when compared to the
ratio of these groups in the state population (approx. 35%). On a related but
often overlooked issue, many public colleges and universities struggle to
recruit local students from within their surrounding communities. As a solution
to this conceptually broad issue, UA is incorporating several best practices
from a range of previously funded diversity programs. These successful projects
have included broad bases of program participants, networks of support faculty
and staff, unique outreach activities, research experiences for participants,
and both quantitative and qualitative self-assessment. In order to serve
underrepresented groups for the long term, a model program is being organized to
self-sustain beyond the lifetime of the initial grant. A support network
involving geoscience faculty, graduate student mentors, and undergraduate
interns at the University of Arizona is being established.