* 0914585
* Workshop on Electrification of Water Drops and Ice Particles:  Simulations in the Laboratory and in the Natural Environment; Telluride, CO; August 10-14, 2009
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* George Ewing, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 04/30/2010
* USD 20,000.00

Electrified water drops and ice particles play an important role in many natural
phenomena. The most obvious example is the lightning that accompanies
thunderstorms, tornadoes and active volcanoes. The key to this electrification
is the charge separations that occur upon the breakup of water or ice surfaces.
Recent experimental and theoretical advances by chemists and physicists at water
and ice interfaces are opening up the possibility of understanding
electrification on a molecular level. These advances have inspired a workshop to
be held in Telluride, Colorado during August 10-14, 2009. Scientists from the
diverse communities of engineering, chemistry, physics and physical meteorology
will convene to develop a deeper understanding of the phenomena of
electrification in the natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One conference
participant will present a public lecture to a few hundred visitors and
residents of Telluride. This is a regular feature of the Telluride Science
Research Center, which will host the workshop. This educational outreach may
inspire other participants to offer similar popular lectures in their own
communities. Lightning has fairly obvious impacts on structures and anything
else that it strikes. An improved understanding of water and ice electrification
may also lead to insights into the influences of human activity (e.g., increases
in atmospheric carbon dioxide and other pollutants).