* 0914974
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Multilinear Algebra Computations with Higher-Order Tensors
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Carla Martin, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 113,229.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many real world applications need to
compress, sort, and otherwise &lt;br/&gt;manipulate large volumes of
multidimensional data arrays (i.e., higher-&lt;br/&gt;order tensors), so there
is an increasing need for theoretical and &lt;br/&gt;computational tools to deal
with multiway data. The subject of &lt;br/&gt;multilinear algebra and tensors
has gained increasing prominence in &lt;br/&gt;the past decade due to a surge in
applications such as approximation &lt;br/&gt;of Newton potentials and
stochastic PDEs, image compression and &lt;br/&gt;deblurring, network traffic
analysis, biological assay interpretation, &lt;br/&gt;unmixing of signals, and
many more. Such applications with higher-order&lt;br/&gt;tensors involve
factorizations of the tensor. There are multiple &lt;br/&gt;possible extensions
of matrix factorizations to higher-order tensors &lt;br/&gt;(e.g. extensions of
the matrix SVD), with some more amenable to certain&lt;br/&gt;applications. The
investigators are advancing the state-of-the-art in &lt;br/&gt;both theoretical
and computational multilinear algebra via several newly&lt;br/&gt;developed
tensor constructions based on new notions of tensor &lt;br/&gt;multiplication,
orthogonality and diagonalizability. Algorithms with &lt;br/&gt;compression
schemes based on these new constructions are being &lt;br/&gt;implemented by the
investigators and tested on several datasets from &lt;br/&gt;various
applications including handwritten digit identification, &lt;br/&gt;genomics,
the spectral unmixing problem, video compression, and computer&lt;br/&gt;image
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current applications in the sciences can
involve &lt;br/&gt;analysis, classification, searching and compression of large
volumes of &lt;br/&gt;data that is "multidimensional" in nature. Consider, for
example, the &lt;br/&gt;problem of facial recognition, used to identify a
terrorist from within &lt;br/&gt;a database of images of known terrorists. The
database can be considered &lt;br/&gt;multidimensional data in the sense that
for each individual there &lt;br/&gt;corresponds a specific viewpoint,
illumination, and facial expression. &lt;br/&gt;It is critical in this scenario
to have an accurate and fast algorithm &lt;br/&gt;to match an unknown image
against a database of images of known &lt;br/&gt;terrorists. Another example
where a multidimensional representation is &lt;br/&gt;useful is genomic data.
Here, DNA microarray two-dimensional tabular &lt;br/&gt;data from different
experiments is concatenated into a multidimensional &lt;br/&gt;array. Recently
published results have indicated that so-called &lt;br/&gt;'factorizations' of
this multidimensional data can be used to discover &lt;br/&gt;new molecular-
level interactions. Hence, along with advances in &lt;br/&gt;computer
architecture to store large datasets must come mathematically &lt;br/&gt;sound
models for the compression and/or analysis of such data. &lt;br/&gt;Development
of new concepts and ideas is therefore required to deal with&lt;br/&gt;the
different geometries that arise in the multidimensional case. The
&lt;br/&gt;investigators are contributing directly to this effort by developing
&lt;br/&gt;innovative mathematical theory for multidimensional objects that is
&lt;br/&gt;consistent with two-dimensional proven ideas. With theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;constructs in place, the investigators are able to create
computational&lt;br/&gt;tools and algorithms to analyze and compress
multidimensional data. A &lt;br/&gt;significant component of the proposal is the
involvement of &lt;br/&gt;undergraduates, graduate students, and researchers.
The investigators &lt;br/&gt;are leveraging the strengths of both universities
in a novel, &lt;br/&gt;inter-institutional vertical integrative experience for
all students &lt;br/&gt;(undergraduate and graduate) involved in the research.
This arrangement&lt;br/&gt;allows students at all levels, mentored by leading
researchers in the &lt;br/&gt;field, to advance the state-of-the-art in the
analysis and compression&lt;br/&gt;of multidimensional data.