* 0914877
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Flexible, Efficient, and Trustworthy Proof Checking for Satisfiability Modulo Theories
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Aaron Stump, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 299,986.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software bugs cost the U.S.
economy over $60 billion each year. Promising bug-detection technology depends
on high-performance logic solvers for Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT),
which employ sophisticated algorithms to check large formulas efficiently.
Sophistication has a price: the solvers themselves exhibit bugs, and are not
trustworthy enough for safety-critical applications. To increase confidence,
some SMT solvers can emit formal proofs for valid formulas. Checking these
proofs with a simple proof checker confirms the solver's results. SMT's rich
logic poses challenges for standardizing a single proof format for all SMT
solvers. Furthermore, proofs produced by SMT solvers can be gigabytes long,
requiring an optimized proof checker. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project is developing a verified proof checker supporting a flexible format
called the Edinburgh Logical Framework with Side Conditions (LFSC). LFSC is a
meta-language for describing different proof systems, thus providing
flexibility. Verification techniques are being applied to the proof checker
itself to verify its optimizations, by writing it in a verified programming
language called Guru. Support is also being added for LFSC proofs to the CVC3
solver. This research will greatly increase confidence in solver results through
proofs, thus increasing the power of bug detection. &lt;br/&gt;