* 0914718
* Mentoring, Education, Training, Research and Outreach (METRO): A co-ordinated approach to increase diversity in the Geosciences (OEDG Type II)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Alam Hasson, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,398,706.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geoscience Mentoring, Education,
Training, Research and Outreach (METRO) Center is a collaboration between a four
year institution (California State University Fresno), and two community
colleges (Fresno City College and Reedley College). The overarching aim of this
center is to create a seamless pipeline of minority students from the K-12
school system through to advanced degrees and careers in the geosciences within
the critically underserved region of Central California. Students are being
recruited from Fresno State, local community colleges and high schools into the
METRO program, where they participate in geoscience research, receive faculty-
and peer-mentoring, attend workshops to prepare them for careers and/or graduate
studies, and participate in summer research/internships at state and federal
facilities over a three-year period. In parallel with these activities, the
students are involved in outreach activities that educate K-12 students about
opportunities within the geosciences and provide professional development
opportunities for K-12 teachers. During the project, over 100 teachers and 2,500
school students will be reached through the outreach and professional
development efforts. Twenty-four undergraduate students will participate in
research projects each year, and the majority of these students will attend and
present at academic conferences. A large proportion of these students will be
Hispanic, a critically under-represented group in the geosciences.