* 0914008
* International Workshop:  Toward Understanding the Effects of the Wenchuan Megaquake of 12 May 2008; Guangzhou, People's Republic of China; February 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Mete Sozen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 01/31/2010
* USD 38,328.00

Abstract 0914008 Mete Sozen Purdue University

The Wenchuan event of 12 May 2008 was a tragedy for humanity: it is reported to
have caused over 80,000 fatalities and left a population of 5,000,000 people
without shelter. At the same time, it was a grand experiment for science and
engineering: it was a megaquake (Ms =8) that broke through to the ground leaving
a surface rupture extending 270 km, it damaged a region of approximately 250,000
km. A magnificent new array of 398 strong-motion records is recorded in the
affected region. Study of these data in conjunction with well documented
geotechnical and structural damage is bound to result in new technology that
will enable improved planning to protect society from such events in the future.

This proposal is to provide travel support for of a US delegation to attend an
international workshop to be held in Guangzhou, China, in February 2009. The
main goal of the workshop is to set a new research agenda to make optimum use of
the Wenchuan Experience. The outcome of the workshop could guide the research
communities to develop collaborative projects that would have positive impacts
on the life and economic safety. . The specific goals of the workshop are: 1. To
specify research initiatives that will lead to major improvements in the
technology for the protection of society from earthquakes. 2. To assure a
thorough documentation of the available information on the effects of the
Wenchuan Earthquake. 3. To identify the data that may be missing and arrange for
the missing data to be obtained and documented. 4. To develop a mechanism for
maintaining the momentum and the quality of the selected research initiatives.
5. To plan procedures for timely exchange of information during the conduct of
the research.

