* 0914715
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Leaders- Developing Diverse Leadership for the Next Generation of Geoscientists. A Proposal for Track 2 Funding
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Zhi-Yong Yin, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2013
* USD 206,870.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of San Diego (USD) and
Ocean Discovery Institute (ODI) are collaborating to develop a new generation of
Ocean Leaders by engaging students from low socio-economic communities in marine
and environmental science education and career paths. Many of the project
participants are students traditionally underrepresented in the geosciences, as
well as students from immigrant communities. The initiative objectives are to:
1) increase participation and achievement of underrepresented students in
informal geoscience education, 2) increase the number of underrepresented
students that pursue a Bachelors degree in the geosciences, 3) recruit and
retain underrepresented students into geoscience programs at USD and foster
their successful pursuit of geoscience careers, and 4) attract more well-
prepared and culturally aware teachers and mentors into the field of geoscience
and geoscience education. Ocean Leaders is providing students with a
comprehensive research-based program of geoscience education, from middle school
through college; university students participating in the program are provided
training and participation in teaching and mentoring these students in the
geosciences. This project builds on a successful pilot effort, facilitated by
ODI, that demonstrated academic and attitudinal gains at every level, including
a significant increase in students attending college and majoring in the
geosciences. The initiative includes a series of programs that act as building
blocks in the students' geoscience education development as they grow from sixth
to twelfth grade, providing experiential learning and participation in
scientific research. Beyond programmatic components, the initiative is multi-
systemic and provides sixth grade through college students with a support
structure to ensure their ability to pursue an education and career in the
geosciences. Select Ocean Leaders graduates will be recruited into geoscience
programs at USD. These "USD Ocean Leader Scholars" will be supported through a
full-ride scholarship from USD, individual faculty mentorship, and an intensive
program of undergraduate research and internship. The project also seeks to
attract more talented and prepared teachers and mentors into the field of
geoscience and geoscience education by integrating USD geoscience and education
undergraduate and graduate students as instructors, mentors and coordinators.
The project includes partnership with the City Heights Educational
Collaborative, which includes the San Diego Unified School District, and the
project is expected to engage approximately 25 middle school, 40 high school,
and 25 college students from underserved communities, as well as 20
undergraduate and graduate students from USD each year.