* 0914516
* OEDG Track 1 Proposal: Laulima A 'Ike Pono - Community Collaborations in Geosciences and Place-based Education
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kathleen Ruttenberg, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2013
* USD 197,854.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists and educators at the
University of Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB), the Department of
Oceanography, and Paepae o He'eia Fishpond on Oahu are working to develop a
community-based research and education partnership that seeks to integrate
fundamental research on the biogeochemistry and ecology of Native Hawaiian
Fishponds with community education and career training opportunities. The
Laulima A 'Ike Pono ("Working Together for the Collective Vision") project will
build an inclusive, collaborative mechanism by which scientists work in a
socially relevant context and community members obtain training in geoscience
research and learn about career opportunities in the geosciences. By providing
Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders opportunities to explore geosciences
through community-based research internships, Laulima A 'Ike Pono integrates
scientific methodologies and technology with traditional knowledge and practices
to create a holistic educational experience in geoscience research. Mentoring of
interns in college and career pathways will be offered through workshops and
discussion groups. The project also provides a framework for training young and
established scientists in the integration of their research with community and
educational outreach programs. Further, the study of nutrient dynamics with the
impacts of invasive algae on Fishpond geochemistry will provide information on
how the pond functions today and may reveal options for remediation actions that
could restore the pond to a more original state. This project will directly
provide geoscience research opportunities for 60 Native Hawaiians and Pacific
Islanders, geoscience career awareness for 60 high school counselors and
community college faculty, and outreach training seminars for 20 university
research faculty. Dozens more community members and K-12 school students will be
reached by integration with an existing community visitor program at He'eia
Fishpond. Graduate student-created podcasts and education products will be
distributed to public audiences via the Internet and other networking tools.