* 0914891
* Economy, Monumentalism, and Paleoecology at Huaca Prieta, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 240,362.00

Interdisciplinary research, headed by the field of archeology and directed by
Dr. Tom D. Dillehay of Vanderbilt University and a team of Peruvian
archeologists and paleo-ecologists, will study the long-term interaction of
humans and environments on the desert north coast of Peru. The research team is
comprised of archeologists, geologists, geneticists, botanists, zoologists, and
other scientists who will study the long-term dynamics of the socio-economic and
environmental systems of mixed maritime/inland hunters and gatherers and
horticulturalists at the middle Holocene (ca. 7,000-4,000 years ago) site of
Huaca Prieta. This site not only contains a well-preserved archeological and
paleo-ecological record that offers insights into varied early social and
ecological interactions of ancient hunters/gatherers/farmers but also into the
beginnings of early Andean civilization. How people at this early coastal site
adapted to drastic environmental changes (i.e., droughts, El Nino floods,
earthquakes, tsunamis), and what factors led to increased social and economic
complexity and to a complementary maritime/inland foraging and horticultural
economy are the specific subjects of study. A better understanding of these
issues will afford comparison with similar and dissimilar human and
environmental interactions in other areas of the world during other time
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will document hunter-gatherer
and early farmer subsistence, social organization, mound-building, and
technology of a human population during the middle Holocene period. It is during
this period that gradual adaptation to varied environmental resource zones
(Pacific littoral, desert plains, foothills of the Andes) are believed to have
set in motion events that gave rise to early social and economic features, which
laid some foundations for later Andean civilizations. Among the key research
questions are the following: How are intensive landscapes shaped by such key
factors as temporal and spatial climate variation? What kinds of cumulative
impacts to natural resources arise from the intensified use of the
maritime/terrestrial ecosystems? How do maritime and terrestrial intensification
and human demography interact and influence each other in this context? How does
long-term maritime and terrestrial food production relate to social systems of
behavior, especially mortuary practices and the construction of a monumental
landscape? Finally, how can we assess the potential sustainability of this
particular socio-ecosystem over time? These questions are not only of widespread
anthropological interest; they also lie at the center of long-standing debates
in economic, human ecological, and agricultural histories and in our
understanding of human and environmental interactions
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has broader impacts as well.
Publications will be prepared and submitted to academic journals in English and
Spanish, but additional information will be presented in electronic form. A
bilingual database for the site will be linked to Vanderbilt University's web
site. The training of Peruvian (Universidad Nacional de Trujillo and Pontificia
Universidad Católica Perú) and other students and a community outreach program
with the nearby town of Magdalena de Cao is planned to help develop ecotourism
and archeological tourism.