* 0914404
* Collaborative Research:   GARNET (Geoscience Affective Research Network)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2008,12/31/2010
* David McConnell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 12/31/2010
* USD 145,736.00

GEOSCIENCE (42)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GARNET (Geoscience Affective Research
Network) is examining the impact of the affective domain on student learning in
introductory physical geology. GARNET institutions represent a cross-section of
the higher education spectrum and include the University of Akron, University of
Colorado-Boulder, California State University-Chico, North Hennepin Community
College, Macalester College, and the University of North Dakota. GARNET's goals
are: 1) To use two instruments, the Motivated Strategies for Learning
Questionnaire (MSLQ) and the Science Value Inventory (SVI), to investigate how
aspects of the affective domain, in particular student motivation and values,
vary for students in introductory physical geology; and 2) Identify if and how
those aspects vary with instructor and specific aspects of the learning
environments. The key hypotheses are that: 1) The affective domain is a major
control on student learning; and, 2) How we teach can significantly change
students' affective behavior. The outcome of this research will be pedagogical
resources and strategies that guide the development of more effective
introductory geoscience classes. The GARNET project results on the influence of
the affective domain on geoscience learning and the pedagogical best practices
identified begin to fill a largely underappreciated, little studied, yet highly
significant gap in our understanding of student learning of science. The project
focuses on a way to explore student learning in the geosciences that to date,
has received almost no consistent attention at the college level, and no broad
analysis within a single discipline. GARNET builds on an existing knowledge base
in educational psychology that has been applied in a limited way to some college
science classes but there is a paucity of information on the affective domain in
introductory geoscience courses that hinders the potential of instructors to
engage students and enhance science learning processes. The GARNET assessment
plan measures outcomes that provide a foundation for subsequent research and the
collaborative nature of this project has the potential to result in the creation
of small teams of investigators exploring specific aspects of the affective
domain. Results of the evaluation program will reveal which pedagogical
strategies are most effective in creating learning environments characterized by
more motivated students, with good attitudes about learning geoscience, and
greater confidence in their ability to learn class material.