* 0914839
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation and Dissemination (PAID): Advancing Gender Equity -  Lessons from a National Program of Change in Higher Education
* EHR,HRD
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Diana Bilimoria, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly M. Mack
* 03/31/2010
* USD 73,300.00

This proposal will support the research and writing of a monograph about the NSF
ADVANCE Institutional Transformation (IT) program. The book will focus on how
ADVANCE IT institutions have systematically engendered transformation of their
structures, processes, policies, and practices and their effectiveness in
enhancing gender equity in science and engineering (S&E). We propose to
intensively examine the first and second round ADVANCE IT award recipients,
analyzing equity outcomes across diverse academic institutions and in specific
disciplines.

Dr. Diana Bilimoria (PI for this proposal) and colleagues (Bilimoria, Joy and
Liang, 2008) analyzed the 19 first and second round ADVANCE institutions and
found that equity-related university transformation entails a dual (individual
and organizational) focus: empowerment of faculty and administrators through
enhanced mentoring, coaching, networking, training and development as well as
systematic improvement of structures, processes, policies and practices related
to evaluation, workload distribution, resource and opportunity allocation, and
compensation at each career stage in the academic pipeline. Since this earlier
research was conducted in 2006, the IT projects at most of the 19 institutions
were still in process and their transformation outcomes had not yet been fully
documented. Expanding this earlier research into a monograph will enable us to
delve more deeply into the specific outcomes of the now completed projects, as
well as enable access to a more general audience. The specific aims of the
proposed book are to: (1) provide a comprehensive, stand-alone source of data on
the specific organizational change initiatives undertaken at ADVANCE
universities, (2) investigate the equity related outcomes (for women faculty and
for underrepresented minority faculty where possible) generated by the ADVANCE
universities? transformations, taking into account contingencies such as the
type and size of the university, (3) where feasible, undertake discipline-
specific analyses regarding the outcomes of ADVANCE initiatives, and (4) propose
an empirically-derived model of organizational change to serve as a template to
academic and other organizations seeking transformation related to gender
equity.

To accomplish this research project we will rely primarily on published or
available data including the many websites, annual reports, quarterly reports,
and research reports and publications of the first 19 ADVANCE IT awardees. For
each ADVANCE IT award recipient, we will review the initiatives undertaken and
examine various measures of transformation outcomes (e.g., changes over a 5-year
period in the representation of women faculty in S&E overall and in all academic
ranks, tenure and promotion outcomes, women in leadership and power positions,
resource distribution, etc.) to derive ADVANCE program-wide conclusions. Given
the similarity of data reported across these institutions (e.g., annual ADVANCE
indicators, climate studies) we propose to conduct multiple cross-institution
analyses as well as comparisons within disciplines as feasible.

Intellectual Merit: The proposed book will present findings and offer a
framework for institutional transformation in higher education. It will serve as
a comprehensive, stand-alone description of successful approaches to increase
the participation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering.
It will document the effectiveness of the NSF ADVANCE IT funding. It will
provide specific insights for university administrators and faculty members
engaged in promoting change.

Broader Impact: The proposed book will disseminate knowledge about systemic
change to achieve equity for women and underrepresented minorities in S&E
disciplines. It will broaden the impact of the work carried out by two cohorts
of ADVANCE institutions, allowing dissemination of ideas and practices from
various NSF ADVANCE IT awardees. It will have impact on both ADVANCE and non-
ADVANCE universities, as well as inform organizations outside of higher
education, as it will provide a general model of gender equity related
institutional transformation.