* 0914513
* A Track 1 Proposal for Creating a Pipeline for Diversity in the Geosciences: A Sustainability-based Approach
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* William Hansen, Worcester State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,710.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worcester State College (WSC) is
working with the local school district in the City of Worcester, MA, to increase
diversity in undergraduate geoscience programs through the creation of an
integrated pipeline for engaging students at a variety of levels. In this
district, 35.7% of the students are Latino, 12.9% are African-American, and 7.8%
are Asian-American giving the program particular impact on under-represented
populations. Key to this project is a strategic partnership with the Worcester
Vocational Technical High School Environmental Technologies
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish these connections
through a series of interlinked curricular programs, internships, and
facilitation agreements between WSC and surrounding schools. The first
initiative is to develop a curriculum enrichment program for middle schools
teachers, the only level in public education where the geosciences are an
explicit part of the curriculum in Massachusetts. The next phase in our project
is to establish an internship project that will pair minority youth in Worcester
with sustainability based organizations and enterprises. We have partnered with
Worcester Mass Audubon, Harvard Forest in Petersham, MA, the Regional
Environmental Council and youth groups like Toxic Soil Busters to develop this
program. The culmination of the high school internship program will be to
encourage successful interns to take advantage of an articulation agreement
between WSC and area high schools that will allow them to take college level
courses in the geosciences. Gaining exposure to the college environment and
earning college credit will give these students a significant experiential and
economic advantage should they chose to pursue an advanced degree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to create a pathway from the public schools to
the WSC Earth Science program. Most students who graduate from Worcester State
College remain in the area after graduation so this endeavor we will produce
graduates who will go on to teach geosciences at the secondary level in the
surrounding communities, further cementing these institutional
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;