* 0914923
* Collaborative Research: Computational and theoretical approaches for the morphological control of material microstructures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Xiaofan Li, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 260,300.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The investigator and colleagues study the prediction and morphological control
of two-phase microstructures in solid/liquid and solid/solid diffusional phase
transitions. Much of the research in this area is concerned with detailed and
extensive studies of complex patterns such as dendritic growing shapes. In many
applications (e.g. castings), it is desirable to control the formation of
dendrites and grow compact shapes, which, however, has been much less studied.
This project helps to fill the gap and aims to develop guidelines by which
microstructures with desired shapes may be grown. The research team plans to (1)
develop a suitable nonlinear theory of compact precipitate growth including
existence, uniqueness, and stability of self-similar shapes; (2) develop and
employ state-of-the-art adaptive 3D numerical methods to test the validity and
limitations of theory; (3) compare theoretical and numerical results with
existing experiments to test the validity of the mathematical assumptions and to
verify the accuracy of predictions derived from the theory and simulations.

Diffusional phase transformations deal with transformations of melts into
precipitates (and vice-versa) as well as the separation of solids (e.g. metal
alloys) into distinct phases. These phenomena have importance for a variety of
processes including casting, welding and soldering, crystal growth, and related
problems concerning protein and macromolecular crystallization. For example,
crystal growth processes for technological applications began in the late 19th
century, and form the cornerstone of virtually all modern semiconductor
electronics and photonics today. The research activities will provide new
mathematical theory and numerical simulations that can be used to develop
guidelines for controlling the morphology of certain solidified materials. The
new mathematical theory and adaptive numerical methods developed in the project
have applications to a broader set of related problems including multiphase
flows, biostructures and growth of solid tumors. In addition, this project will
provide valuable interdisciplinary training opportunities for young researchers.