* 0914783
* RI:Small:Collaborative Research: Infinite Bayesian Networks for Hierarchical Visual Categorization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Max Welling, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Humans possess the ability to learn increasingly sophisticated representations
of the world in which they live. In the visual domain, it is estimated that we
are able to identify in the order of 30,000 object categories at multiple levels
of granularity (e.g. toe-nail, toe, leg, human body, population). Moreover,
humans continuously adapt their models of the world in response to data. Can we
replicate this life-long-learning capacity in machines?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PIs build hierarchical representations of data streams. The
model complexity adapts to new structure in data by following a nonparametric
Bayesian modeling paradigm. In particular, the depth and width of our
hierarchical models grow over time. Deeper layers in this hierarchy represent
more abstract concepts, such as ?a beach scene? or ?chair?, while lower levels
correspond to parts, such as a ?patch of sand? or ?body part?. The formation of
this hierarchy is guided by fast hierarchical bottom up segmentation of the
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To process large amounts of information, the PIs
distribute computation across many CPUs /GPUs. They develop novel fast inference
techniques based on variational inference, memory bounded online inference,
parallel sampling, and efficient data-structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technology under development has a large number of potential applications
ranging from organizing digital libraries and the worldwide web, building visual
object recognition systems, successfully employing autonomous robots and
training a ?virtual doctor? by processing worldwide information from hospitals
about diseases, diagnosis and treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results are
disseminated through scientific publications and publicly available
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;