* 0914597
* Collaborative proposal: Track 1 Increasing Diversity in the Geosciences Through Experiential Learning
* GEO,GEO
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2013
* USD 99,646.00

The broad goal of this two-year project is to increase the enrollment of
African- and Hispanic-American students in geosciences at Howard University and
Pennsylvania State University. The core objective is to develop strategies to
recruit and retain minority students with the goal to enter doctoral programs in
geosciences or join the professional ranks. Throughout the academic year,
undergraduate students will participate in supportive peer and faculty mentoring
activities. Peer mentors will include resident graduate students and senior
undergraduates, including majority students. Faculty mentors will work with
undergraduates on research activities involving hands-on and inquiry-based
approaches. Joint research projects will be carried out involving both minority
and majority students. Symposia will be organized during the spring semester to
allow students to practice how to present scientific results. Likewise, summer
research workshops will be organized to engage students in research activities
under the guidance of senior graduates and faculty members. Emphasis of the
summer workshops will be on engaging undergraduates to pursue experiential
research methods utilizing modern technologies. Retreats will be organized to
discuss opportunities in graduate school and professional ranks. By working with
students for a full calendar year, it will be possible to evaluate the most
suitable approaches to attract minorities to pursue geosciences as their
potential career.