* 0914821
* Quantifying the Duration and Impact of Human-Megafauna Overlap in Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 285,674.00

With support from NSF's Archaeology Program, Prof Gifford Miller and Australian
collaborators will conduct fieldwork in NW Australia to define the human context
surrounding eggshell fragments from two giant bird species, the extinct
megafaunal bird Genyornis, and the extant Australian emu (Dromaius). The Western
Australia field campaign offers a unique opportunity to firmly establish the
interactions between humans and extinct giant animals, and to quantify the
duration of human-megafauna overlap. Previous fieldwork by Miller's team
documented early human use of Genyornis eggs as a food source, cooking, and
later burning some of the eggshells in their fires. This is the first secure
evidence of human predation on the Australian megafauna. Australian
archaeologists experienced in early human occupation sites will accompany the
team to derive secure relations between the burnt eggshell and human activity.

A central goal of this project is to apply four independent dating methods to
firmly define the duration of human-megafauna overlap; a team of US and
Australian dating experts has been assembled to accomplish this goal. A major
innovation is development of a protocol to measure trace levels of uranium
isotopes in eggshells, capitalizing on recent developments in mass spectrometry
that have greatly improved detection levels. In conjunction with these
measurements, the stable isotopes of oxygen, carbon and nitrogen contained in
the mineral and organic constituents of the eggshells allow characterization of
the status of climate and the birds' diet. By analyzing Dromaius eggshells from
birds living long before human colonization of Australia up through the present
day it will be possible to evaluate independently changes in both climate and
any dietary shifts that may have occurred. Such datasets allow the separation of
impacts related to climate change from those due to human colonization.
Comparing the dietary feeding strategies of the extinct Genyornis with co-
existing Dromaius will help understand why one giant bird became extinct whereas
the other adapted to the same stressors and remains extant.

The colonization of Australia is an important element in the larger story of
World prehistory. More generally, it is essential to understanding the footprint
of human colonization of landscapes never before visited by humans, and the
adaptability of humans to alien environments. This research has the potential to
resolve long-standing disputes whether human dispersal was along the coasts to
southern Australia and then inland, or through the continental interior. The
dispersal pattern from a founding population provides constraints on both
adaptation and social structures. Dating these events in early human history has
been hampered by a lack of reliable dating tools. A key aspect of the proposed
research is to test and refine U/Th dating of avian eggshell. If successful, the
addition of this powerful dating tool will reinvigorate not only the study of
early human sites in Australia, but it also will have profound effects in
archaeological studies across Africa and Eurasia where ostrich eggshells are
common elements of many archaeological sites beyond the range of 14C dating.
This research captures the imagination of the general public. Miller has already
facilitated related TV and popular media outreach activities, and will continue
to do so.