* 0914704
* Track 2: Developing a Sustainable RESESS Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Susan Schwartz, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,866,155.00

The Research Experience in Solid Earth Science for Students (RESESS) program has
established itself as a successful program for multi-year summer research
internships for Earth science undergraduates from populations underrepresented
in science. Students are recruited in their sophomore or junior year and
complete 10-week internships that include research, leadership training, an
eight-week communication workshop, multi-faceted mentoring, and a final
colloquium. Additional funding through this award is being used to take RESESS
to the next level of success by expanding the number of interns, extending the
scientific content and geographic reach of the program, and building a model for
sustainability based on a program infrastructure with disseminated mentoring.
The expanded program will support a minimum of 12 interns per year, with
students spending their first two years in Boulder and then transitioning to
work with research mentors throughout the United States during their 10-week
summer experience. RESESS will continue a successful collaboration with the
award-winning Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science
(SOARS) program. Expansion into a more distributed model of mentoring -
necessary because there is no central research facility analogous to the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) for the geology and geophysics
community - is being achieved through expanded partnerships. These partners
include scientists in the United States Geological Survey (USGS) in Golden,
Colorado, at the University of Colorado, Boulder, staff at UNAVCO, and
scientists of the UNAVCO and Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
(IRIS) research consortia, along with new partners in the Colorado Diversity
Initiative and the University of California at Santa Cruz. Intern research
projects are expected to include topics such as the technical aspects of GPS,
analyzing the seismicity of Asian earthquakes, modeling volcanic magma movement,
installing GPS networks to monitor regional tectonics, paleoclimate analyses of
insect damage to fossil leaves, lineaments in Antarctica, and others. To sustain
the program beyond NSF funding, RESESS is exploring the utility of the Business
Performance Excellence model, while engaging the community for increased
scientific and financial resources and exploring diversified funding sources.