* 0914688
* Geoscience and Native American Culture: A field experience for Native American High School Students
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Lewis Brown, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 198,761.00

Lake Superior Sate University (LSSU) will design and conduct new geoscience
activities, including a one to two-week summer geoscience field experience
targeting Native-American high school students. Lake Superior State University
is located in Michigan's eastern Upper Peninsula where there is a substantial
Native American population, e.g., approximately one third of the local high
school students are Native American as is nearly 10% of the LSSU student body.
Students participating in this new program will be engaged in activities that
integrate selected geoscience concepts with indigenous cultures, knowledge, and
native ways of knowing. The field based studies developed will require students
to problem-solve, think critically, utilize methodologies that model scientific
endeavors, and provide a focus for the acquisition and application of geoscience
concepts. Students will use technology including computers to assist their
learning of geologic concepts and the solving of geologic problems along with
developing their technological expertise. Geoscience field studies will be
conducted at a variety of localities, including a number of sites selected
because of their interesting geologic features in addition to their having
special significance to Native American's (such as: Bear Butte, SD; Pipestone,
MN, Devil's Tower, WY; Bandlands and Black Hills, SD; Great Lakes and river
systems; etc.). Students will integrate Native American explanations of physical
phenomena with scientific explanations so that they individually construct the
linkage between ways of thinking scientifically and ways of knowing from within
their culture. Students will develop an understanding of the relevance of
geoscience in their lives and in their communities. The selected activities will
promote students' self confidence in pursuing geoscience knowledge and its
applications to actual geologic problems. These High School students will work
directly with Lake Superior State University faculty and students to
successfully solve geologic problems. An objective of developing this program
for Native American High School students is to increase their interest in and
understanding of the geosciences, increase their interest and confidence in
attending university and to increase their enrollment in university-level
geoscience programs.