* 0914618
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Improving Rainfall Estimation over the Nile Basin Using Merged Multi-Channel Infrared and Microwave Satellite Observations
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Emad Habib, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2012
* USD 58,500.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Emad Habib,
University of Louisiana at Lafayette, and Dr. Mohamed Abdel-Motaleb, Egyptian
Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation. Egypt is expected to face increasing
water needs due to rapidly growing population, economic growth and urbanization.
To prepare for such challenges, the Nile Forecasting Center (NFC) in the
Egyptian Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation operates a suite of
hydrologic simulation models and analysis tools that support current and future
strategies for sustainable water resources management and planning. NFC relies
on satellite infrared (IR) imagery to estimate rainfall information over the
Nile Basin, which is the main input to NFC hydrologic models. Due to the
inherent limitations of IR-based rainfall estimates, the proposed project aims
to improve on the current NFC rainfall estimation algorithms. Two types of
enhancements are proposed for improving the current NFC algorithm: (1) adding
more infrared channels that have become recently available to NFC from the
Spinning Enhanced Visible Infrared Imager (SEVIRI) onboard a Meteosat Second
Generation (MSG) satellite, and (2) integrating other valuable satellite data
from passive microwave sensors which are not currently used by the NFC algorithm
(the Special Sensor Microwave/Imager (SSM/I) and the Advanced Microwave Sounding
Unit (AMSU)). These enhancements will be implemented within a self-calibrating
satellite-rainfall estimation algorithm to be configured and tested over the
Nile basin. The project activities will be conducted as collaboration between
researchers at NFC and the University of Louisiana (UL) at Lafayette. Satellite
data and algorithm support will be contributed by the NOAA's National
Environmental Satellite Data and Information Service (NESDIS). The new rainfall
estimates developed in the project will be statistically validated using surface
gauge measurements and will be evaluated in comparison to infrared-only
estimates that are currently produced at NFC.

The research will inform the scientific community regarding the accuracy of
satellite rainfall products in understudied regions, and it will also provide
feedback on the added benefit of incorporating additional satellite sensors
which are only available in Europe and Africa. The outcome of the project has
significant implications for water resource management in Egypt and has the
potential to validate algorithms for use in the US. Additionally, the project
will present opportunities for US undergraduates and graduate students to obtain
international research experience in Egypt.

The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to undertake cooperative
research.