* 0914873
* High-performance computations with rational generating functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Matthias Koeppe, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 142,779.00

This is a research project in Discrete Computational Mathematics. The
investigator and his students will use and significantly advance the technology
of short rational generating functions introduced by Barvinok (1994). In short,
this technology allows to efficiently count the integer points in families of
polytopes, which has numerous applications. Research in this project will
involve methods from mathematical optimization, discrete geometry, convexity,
and computer-based search. The PI has written and maintains the open-source
software "LattE macchiato", which is one of the two state-of-the-art
implementations of short rational generating functions. Past and current
research of the PI has established, by introducing algorithms and proving
theorems on their computational complexity, that short rational generating
functions have a large computational potential that goes beyond what has been
achieved so far in practice. This potential relates to applications in many
fields, including combinatorics, mathematical optimization (nonlinear mixed
integer programming), and algorithmic game theory. The general theme of the
research project is to find new theorems on decomposition schemes with special
properties, generalizing the signed decomposition of simplicial cones in the
primal or dual space. The PI's research will involve, among other techniques,
computer-based search for optimal decomposition schemes. There is a deep
theoretical interest in this, independent of algorithmic consequences. On the
basis of the new decompositions and other new techniques (such as exploiting
symmetry), the PI expects to develop and implement new efficient algorithms,
including a parallel implementation for use on multi-core systems and clusters.
The overall goal is to expand the range of applicability of short rational
generating function methods significantly. The success of these methods will be
measured by specific computational challenges listed in this proposal, which are
intractable by current computer
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical optimization is the
science of making the best decisions possible, when resources are limited. In
the past 10 years it has become clear that a wide array of key technologies,
ranging from biotechnology to chemical engineering and healthcare, depend on the
ability to solve a complicated type of mathematical optimization problems,
called "nonlinear mixed-integer programs". The PI and collaborators have shown
recently that a mathematical technique called short rational generating
functions is very powerful to solve these optimization problems, surpassing all
other known techniques, at least in mathematical theory. However, there still is
a huge gap between theory and practice. This research project is about
fundamental research on this technique of short rational generating functions,
to help bridge the gap. This will lead to new mathematical insights and more
efficient algorithms and new, more powerful open-source mathematical software.
This project also has a strong educational impact. The PI plans to train several
undergraduate and graduate students in this research area. One component of the
training will be to create new course material on the topics of this proposal,
and to use it for new classes for undergraduate and graduate students. The
second component of the training consists of direct involvement of students in
this research project, involving theoretical work, computer experimentation, and
software implementation, all of which lead to undergraduate and graduate
theses.&lt;br/&gt;