* 0914788
* Computational methods for the suspensions of deformable and rigid particles and their applications to modelling of blood flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Roland Glowinski, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 340,454.00

This project focuses on developing computational methods for simulating the
suspensions of deformable and rigid particles and their applications to modeling
the microcirculation of blood flow and cell separation in microchannel flow. It
is computationally challenging to simulate directly the three-dimensional motion
and dynamics of hydrodynamically interacting red blood cells in a fluid. We will
use a spring network model with its associated energy potential to model the
membrane of the red blood cell. &lt;br/&gt;We propose to combine the spring
network model with the immersed boundary methods, finite element methods and
operator splitting techniques to simulate the cell-fluid and cell-cell
interactions in three dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;We also want to combine the above
proposed methodology with the distributed Lagrange multiplier/fictitious domain
methods, which are closed related to the immersed boundary methods, to simulate
the suspensions of cells and solid particles. Through the computational
methodologies proposed by the PIs, efficient three-dimensional simulations of
the red blood cells in microvessels will be performed to study the rheology of
red blood cells in microcirculation, the margination dynamics of solid particles
in microvessels and the cell separation in
microchannels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microcirculation, which takes place in
the smallest blood vessels (i.e., arterioles, capillaries, and venules), is
responsible for regulating blood flow in individual organs and for exchange
between blood and tissue. Since blood contains about 40-45% red blood cells by
volume, as well as platelets and leukocytes, the interactions of these formed
elements play a crucial role in determining blood characteristics. Because of
their large volume fraction and their aggregation capacity, red blood cells are
the most important determinant of blood flow characteristics. While theories of
suspension rheology generally focus on homogeneous flows in infinite domains,
the important phenomena of blood flows in microcirculation depend on the
combined effects of vessel geometries, cell deformabilities, wall compliance,
flow shear rates, and many micro-scale chemical, physiological, and biological
factors. We concentrate on the rheological aspects of flow in microcirculation
involving deformable cells, cell-cell interactions and vessel geometry, which is
particularly challenging theoretically and computationally. The first main
application is to study the margination dynamics of solid particles in
microvessels. The intravascular delivery of rigid particles for biomedical
imaging and therapy is being recognized as a powerful and promising tool in
cardiovarscular and oncological applications. These particles can be loaded with
drug molecules and contrast agents and transported by the blood flow through the
circulatory system. They are generally decorated with ligand molecules which are
able to interact specifically with antigens expressed over diseased cells (or
target cells). The effect of particle shape, size and density on margination
propensity is needed to be analyzed in order to find the optimal design. The
second main application is to study cell separation in microchannel flow. The
main focus is to gain inside in the separation of healthy and sick red blood
cells due to their deformability and size on a microfluidic biochip platform.
Separation of soft objects is of enormous relevance in medical and biological
applications, since very often a loss in deformability comes along with diseases
such as malaria, diabetes mellitus or cancer, just to name a few. Hence, a
microfluidic system to sort or separate cells would be of tremendous importance
for both diagnostic and dialysis applications.