* 0914921
* Collaborative Research for Developing ATD: Bayesian Methods in Syndromic Surveillance: CAR Models and Computational Implementation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* James Lynch, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 27,592.00

The collaborative team develops and implements computationally of a
Bayesian&lt;br/&gt;formulation of syndromic surveillance targeted at early
detection of disease&lt;br/&gt;outbreaks. The research spans statistical theory
and methodology, as well as&lt;br/&gt;issues of algorithms and computational
science. Conditional autoregressive&lt;br/&gt;models, or CAR models, form the
basis of the formulation, in order to&lt;br/&gt;accommodate spatial as well as
temporal effects. The principal challenges are&lt;br/&gt;scalability (7,500
major U.S. hospitals are linked into the reporting&lt;br/&gt;network),
multivariate reports, complex dependence structure in the data,
low&lt;br/&gt;data quality, and incorporation of regional and other covariates.
The unifying&lt;br/&gt;theme is principled calculation of
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is framed by an application of
national significance. There is&lt;br/&gt;enormous social and economic benefit
from early discovery of disease. The&lt;br/&gt;stakes are immense: the US Office
of Technology Assessment estimates that a&lt;br/&gt;release of 100 KG of anthrax
spores upwind of Washington, DC would, if not&lt;br/&gt;detected rapidly, lead
to as many as three million deaths and a trillion&lt;br/&gt;dollars of economic
losses. The research produces actionable, easily&lt;br/&gt;interpretable
information that supports decision makers: a clear statement of&lt;br/&gt;the
probability that a particular disease is present somewhere in the US,
or&lt;br/&gt;present in a particular city, together with the associated
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;False alarm rates are controlled, making them
commensurate with resources&lt;br/&gt;available for post-signal investigation
and taking into account&lt;br/&gt;consequences such as the psychological and
financial impacts of a false alarm.