* 0914377
* Track 1: Creating a Diversity Climate Network (D-ClimNet) to enhance the climate sciences pipeline of minority students from high school to graduate levels
* GEO,GEO
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Marilyn Raphael, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2013
* USD 199,519.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Diversity Climate Network
(D-ClimNet) represents a new national partnership among the University of
Vermont (UVM), the University of California - Los Angles (UCLA) and the
University of Georgia (UGA) to create a pipeline of under-represented students
from the high school to graduate degree levels. The network is unique in its
focus on the climate sciences as well as its commitment to training the next
generation of racially and gender diverse climate scientists with an explicit
focus on climatology, climate change, and climate policy. Students will be
recruited from the rural and urban areas of New York City, Los Angeles and
Georgia. The three-year pilot study will use longitudinal tracking of Earth
Science students from Grade 9 through graduate studies to pinpoint best
practices for student recruitment and retention in the climate sciences, which
many under-represented students do not view as a viable career option. In
addition to receiving climate science academic content, participating students
will also interact with faculty and other students across the three campuses via
electronic workshops and present their research at regional conferences. One of
the transformative aspects of the D-ClimNet is its involvement of the support
system needed to facilitate student learning and academic success. This will
take the form of Climate Days on weekends at participating high schools as well
as allowing high school teachers to participate in the PI's NSF-funded
Satellites, Weather and Climate program, where they will gain climate content
knowledge to effect change in their curricula. Finally, three of the four PIs
are African-American mid-senior career scientists who will serve as mentors and
role models. &lt;br/&gt;