* 0914489
* Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling of Disease Dynamics:   A Case Example Using Chronic Wasting Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Michael Antolin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2015
* USD 2,499,881.00

Chronic wasting disease (CWD) afflicts members of the deer family. Similar to
diseases in sheep (scrapie) and cattle (bovine spongiform encephalopathy or "mad
cow disease"), CWD is caused by misfolded proteins that resist breakdown by
enzymes within cells. These proteins cause inevitably fatal, neurological
damage. CWD poses grave threats to deer populations in North America and, in the
fullness of time, throughout the world. Understanding and managing CWD depends
on developing predictive models that represent how the disease spreads. The
investigators will conduct field studies on wild populations of mule deer to
develop models addressing three questions: 1) What is the mechanism of
transmission? 2) How many susceptible individuals are infected by a single
infected one? 3) How does an individual's genetic make-up interact with its
exposure to CWD to determine its risk of infection? Animals will be captured and
marked with radio transmitters to allow the investigators to recapture them at a
later date. The disease status of marked individuals will be determined and
samples will be taken from them for genetic analysis. Using methods based on
histories of captures and the animals disease status at each capture, an
individual's risk of infection will be estimated based on its genetics, movement
patterns, and associations with other individuals. This project will support
decisions on management of a disease that, left unchecked, is likely to cause
grave harm to ecosystems and to rural economies. Broader impacts of the project
include 1) innovative training of graduate students, 2) curriculum development
and research experience for K-12 teachers, 3) outreach to citizens visiting
Rocky Mountain National Park, 4) support for decisions on disease management by
wildlife agencies in western North America, and 5) training for the research
community in the modeling methods used by the project.