* 0914743
* The Twenty-Fifth Fungal Genetics Conference, Asilomar Conference Center; Pacific Grove, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Marc Orbach, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 05/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

The Twenty-Fifth Fungal Genetics Conference will be held at the Asilomar
Conference Center from March 17-22, 2009. Approximately 850-1,000 scientists and
students from around the world will attend. The conference focuses on the
molecular biology, genetics, genomics, biochemistry and cell biology of
filamentous fungi. This biennial conference is considered by most to be the pre-
eminent meeting in the area of fungal biology, and promotes interaction between
researchers interested in plant pathogens, medical pathogens, saprobic fungi and
symbiotic fungi. Having everyone staying at one site facilitates the type of
informal discussions that often lead to the development of new collaborations
and research directions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formal meeting will consist
of four plenary sessions, four sets of concurrent sessions devoted to
specialized areas, and three poster sessions. The topics to be covered in the
plenary sessions are 1) genome evolution and dynamics, 2) pathogenic and
symbiotic interactions, 3) gene regulation and metabolism, and 4) signaling,
development and sex. Topics to be covered by the 27 concurrent sessions include
1) associations between fungi and humans, 2) associations with plants, 3)
dimorphic transitions and morphogenesis, 4) secondary metabolism, 5) sex and
development, 6) evolutionary genetics and genomics, 7) RNA functions,
epigenetics and chromosome biology, , 8) natural products and small molecules,
9) metabolomics and proteomics, and 10) teaching fungal biology and genetics, to
name a few. Based on previous meetings, the organizers expect around 700 poster
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a broader perspective, fungi are model
eukaryotes that have aided in the understanding of basic biological processes
beginning with Beadle and Tatum's 1940's work demonstrating, for the first time,
the relationship between genetics and biochemistry. Fungi have also been
important as models to help elucidate disease in animals and plants. This
meeting places a strong emphasis on the participation of young scientists and
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups. For many, this
meeting is their first opportunity to attend a major international conference
and present their research findings; such presentations are a critical part of
scientists' training and professional development. Funds from this award will
help defray the participation costs for students, postdoctoral researchers, and
young scientists for whom these costs would otherwise be a hardship. Special
emphasis will be placed on supporting women and other researchers who belong to
groups underrepresented in this field of research. Funds will be distributed to
successful financial aid applicants on the basis of need.