* 0914643
* Collaborative Project Track 2, METALS: Minority Education Through Traveling and Learning in the Sciences
* GEO,GEO
* 05/15/2010,04/30/2015
* Lisa White, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 04/30/2015
* USD 822,652.00

The METALS (Minority Education Through Traveling and Learning in the Sciences)
represents a multi-institution collaboration to broaden participation in STEM
fields by creating meaningful geoscience experiences among groups typically
underrepresented in the geosciences and to motivate these groups to choose
academic and career paths in the geosciences. The METALS program aligns four
universities with strong field geology programs, an institutional history of
emphasizing teaching and mentoring in the geosciences, and a commitment to
providing access to college for large populations of underrepresented
minorities. A strategic alliance of active geoscience diversity programs at San
Francisco State University, the University of Texas at El Paso, the University
of New Orleans, and Purdue University is being used to engage minority high
school students in experiential learning opportunities through field-based
settings. Project activities include: (1) Four 10-day instructional field trips,
each for 40 high school students selected from each of the four university
regions. The field trips take place in a different region each year: California
and the Pacific Coast, the Colorado Plateau and Southwest, the northern Rocky
Mountains and Great Plains, and the Gulf Coast. (2) Professor and graduate
student-led field seminars and colloquia designed to connect underrepresented
students with a deeper understanding of how Earth science processes impact local
communities, how place-based understanding of landscapes varies among cultures,
and the geological configuration of the U.S. (3) The building of pathways and
support systems among the universities, first through students traveling and
learning together in the geosciences, and second through social networking and
'virtual' sharing during the academic year resulting in an expanded network of
mentor friends and a broader connection to faculty outside their department that
will encourage and support student effort throughout their careers. (4)
Engagement of minority graduate and undergraduate students in the program
through field and research projects that grow out of data collected during the
summer programs. The METALS program is expected to: significantly affect the
academic choices of minority students as it relates to their choice of major and
course selection in college; promote excitement about geology in a field setting
while gaining a mutual respect, interdependence and trust among individuals of
different ethnicities; and, strengthen the collaboration and knowledge base
among partners toward encouraging diversity in the geosciences.