* 0914829
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) on Surfaces, Interfaces, and Catalysis; Sao Pedro, Brazil, April 9-19, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place on April 9-19th,
2010, in Sao Pedro, Brazil. Organized by Dr. Francisco Zaera of the University
of California at Riverside, the PASI will address the topic of surfaces,
interfaces and catalysis. The principal objective of the Institute is to:
facilitate interactions among scientists interested in surface science and
catalysis; promote new international research collaborations across continents;
provide a venue to share and discuss cutting-edge advances; and promote cultural
exchanges among scientists in U.S., Europe and Latin
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will consist of training sessions,
before and after a five-day symposium that will bring together research groups
from Latin America, the United States, and Europe. The training sessions are
intended to introduce beginning scientists to modern experimental techniques in
surface science and surface-chemical phenomena, and to help optimize the
educational value of the symposium. It is expected that this PASI will explore
experimental and theoretical issues surrounding studies of adsorption,
reactivity, and heterogeneous catalysis. Results from the PASI will be published
as a special issue of a major international scientific journal and will be
accessible via a website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;