* 0914959
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Mapping of the Gluon's Polarization through Global QCD Analyses Using the COMPASS Detector
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Astrid Morreale, Morreale                Astrid
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2011
* USD 137,800.00

0914959 Morreale

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Astrid
Morreale to work with Dr. Fabienne Kunne at the French Atomic Energy Commission
(CEA) in Saclay, France.

The proton is a composite particle made of more fundamental subatomic entities
which are called quarks and gluons. While experiments can't study quarks and
gluons directly, they can be studied within the confines of other particles,
furthermore, the behavior of these internal constituents generates the observed
quantum mechanical spin ½ properties. It is known now, that the spin of the
quarks contributes surprisingly a very small fraction to the proton's spin, yet
a puzzle still remains to be solved. Questions that linger in the field of
nuclear spin physics, include the role played by the strong force mediators
(gluons), the role of the virtual quark?antiquark pairs originating from the
gluons' strong interaction field (sea quarks) and lastly the role of angular
momentum to the nucleon spin. Discovering what contributes to nuclear spin,
could lead in the future to discoveries on ways to better control matter, as
spin ½ is one of the most important cases to explain electronic structure of
atoms, and nuclear matter interactions. We would probably not exist, if nucleons
would have different spin quantum number. This project aims to add more pieces
of the puzzle of the quark and gluon contributions to the proton spin, and thus
learn more about the matter we are made of, at the sub-atomic level. The
objective of this research is to contribute to the the world data of nuclear
spin studies while using data from a fixed target experiment presently in
operation at CERN (European Laboratory for Particle Physics): the COmmon Muon
and Proton Apparatus for Structure and Spectroscopy(COMPASS). The quest is to
make the connection on how the nucleon's spin is distributed among the quarks
and gluons (partons) by measuring final state hadrons (bound state of quarks
held together by the strong force) coming from photon-gluon fusion processes
from the COMPASS detector. The proposal is a new method of measuring these
abundant and fully measurable processes at COMPASS by the calculation of spin-
dependent asymmetries of final state hadrons in several intervals of transverse
momentum. This new method allows for experimental comparisons to existing models
and full incorporation to world efforts on solving the nucleon spin puzzle.

The results of the proposed measurement are long awaited, as much is still
unknown of the internal constituent contributions to the proton's spin. Current
world spin data have accessed gluon probes in a very limited kinematic region,
thus only giving an emerging, partial picture of the proton. Clear knowledge of
the proton spin can emerge, by a global effort on the analysis of the world data
where many channels are studied across a wide kinematic region.