* 0914927
* RI: SMALL: LexE: Using Two-part Lexical Entrainment for More Efficient and Reliable Spoken Dialogue Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2014
* USD 430,000.00

When humans speak to each other and want the dialogue to go well, they adapt to
each other?s manner of speaking, using the same words, grammatical constructions
and expressions. In order to make fundamental improvements in the performance of
spoken dialogue systems, LexE is using subtle techniques to model this
adaptation, which is called lexical entrainment. LexE is getting users to adapt
their speech to the system, as well as getting the system?s speech to adapt to
what the user says. To do this, LexE studies human-human dialogues to find the
words and constructions (the ?primes?) that are often adopted by dialogue
participants. The spoken dialogue system then uses these primes in its output.
The system also detects the expressions that its user employs to refer to
objects uses them in its synthetic speech. &lt;br/&gt;Two real-user spoken
dialogue systems are being used as test platforms for LexE. The first is a bus
information system for the Port Authority of Allegheny County; the second is the
City of Pittsburgh 311 non-emergency service. By making these publicly-available
spoken dialogue systems easier to use, LexE makes them (and other spoken
dialogue systems) more accessible to a large part of our population, many of
whom, the elderly, for example, get much of their information over the
telephone. The techniques developed in this project also provide insights for
the education of non-native speakers and for speech therapy, where tutoring
systems can imitate the way humans implicitly correct errors in what their
interlocutors say.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;