* 0914876
* Special finite element methods based on component mode synthesis techniques: analysis and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ulrich Hetmaniuk, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 141,001.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The research objective is the development of new discretization methods for
complex models driven by partial differential equations. These new
discretization methods will enable the accurate, efficient, and robust solution
of such complex models. For example, existing discretization methods are
challenged by multi-scale problems due to the range of scales (spatial,
temporal) present in the problem. Here the objective would be to design an
improved discretization method that captures the small-scale spatial and
temporal effects while avoiding the cost of a fully resolved simulation. The
focus will be on special finite element methods, denoting methods of finite
element type that employ special shape functions. These functions, typically
non-polynomials, can incorporate specialized knowledge about the governing
equation (via eigenmodes or particular solutions). The approach will supply a
systematic procedure for defining accurate, robust, and efficient special finite
element methods. The theoretical frame combines knowledge from the theories of
domain decomposition and component mode synthesis, of spectral decomposition for
linear operators, and of finite elements.

The tools developed in this project will apply to a wide range of complex
problems of strategic importance. Examples include understanding the elastic
behavior of heterogeneous structures, modeling tumor growth, and simulating flow
through porous media. These problems are fundamentally multi-scale and remain
mathematically and computationally challenging. The proposed research is also
expected to be a fertile ground for graduate education in computational
mathematics. A graduate student will be involved in the analysis and design of
state-of-the-art discretization method and be trained in practical engineering
techniques, like domain decomposition and component mode synthesis. He or she
will get a rare perspective that combines knowledge from mathematical theory and
practical engineering.