* 0914484
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Role of Environmental and Direct Transmission in Chronic Wasting Disease Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Samuel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 392,205.00

Prion diseases are fatal brain wasting diseases of mammals and include
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans, 'mad cow' disease in cattle, scrapie in
sheep and goats, and chronic wasting disease (CWD) in North American deer, elk,
and moose. Chronic wasting disease is the only prion disease affecting wild
animal populations. First recognized in Colorado in the late 1960s, CWD has
since been detected in wild and farmed deer and elk across large areas of North
America. The infectious agent persists in the environment for years, and this
reservoir contributes to the spread of the disease among animals. To date, the
relative importance of direct animal-to-animal vs. indirect animal-environment-
animal transmission has not been determined for wild animals. This issue has
important implications for management of CWD in wild deer and elk populations. A
prerequisite for the study of direct vs. indirect transmission of CWD is a
method to reliably and efficiently measure the infectious agent in environmental
samples. Such a method does not exist at present.

As an initial step toward the goal of determining the importance of direct vs.
indirect CWD transmission, this project will develop a sensitive, rapid, and
reliable method for measuring infectious prion protein in soil and other
environmental samples. The approach taken is to adapt a novel, recently
developed biochemical method for environmental samples. This work requires
careful examination of how soil properties and environmental factors affect the
ability to recover and measure prion protein from soil samples.

Broader Impacts Potential losses to the economy, hunting, wildlife viewing, and
farmed deer and elk from CWD are significant. Increased frequency and geographic
distribution of CWD in North America, environmental reservoirs of infectivity,
resistance to environmental degradation, and potential for disease transmission
between species raise concerns about risks to humans and other species.
Development of these new methods will facilitate scientific understanding of
environmental contamination, identify routes of disease transmission, improve
disease management, and determine long-term risks to humans and ecological
systems. The development of a method to measure the disease-associated prion
protein in the environment will enable future, critical research on the
transmission and spread of CWD.