* 0914312
* CSR: Small: An Information Accountability Architecture for Distributed Enterprise Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Angelos Keromytis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 470,000.00

Personally identifiable or sensitive information (PII) has become a target of
attackers seeking financial gain through its misuse. With the trend toward
storing and processing PII on complex and insecure systems, the need for
improved protection has become a goal of enterprise policy and legislative
efforts. In this project, we investigate Concatenated Dynamic Information Flow
Tracking (CDIFT), an architecture for performing dynamic information &#64258;ow
analysis at various system levels and across multiple processes in a distributed
enterprise. CDIFT will allow administrators to ?map? the enterprise business
logic (applications, network, storage) and determine where information of
interest is stored or transmitted. The same mechanism can also be used to
enforce an information &#64258;ow policy, restricting where and by whom such
information can be viewed. CDIFT will complement and enhance current compliance
and auditing efforts, which require considerable recurrent effort and a large
number of man-hours spent by administrators and auditors on understanding
existing systems.

We will develop and experimentally evaluate novel techniques for conducting
fine-grained tracking of information of interest (as de&#64257;ned by the system
operator or, in the future, by end-users, in a flexible, context-sensitive
manner) toward mapping the paths that such information takes through the
enterprise and providing a means for enforcing information &#64258;ow and access
control policies. Our hypothesis is that it is possible to create efficient
fine-grained information tracking and access control mechanisms that operate
throughout an enterprise legacy computing infrastructure through appropriate use
of hypervisors and distributed tag propagation protocols.