* 0914365
* WORKSHOP: Ecology and Time Systems in Australasia and the Americas: New Approaches to Value Systems and Calendrical Transformations Across the Pacific Rim
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Frederick Damon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Ahearn
* 01/31/2011
* USD 18,618.00

This award will support a research workshop to be convened at the University of
Virginia by Dr. Frederick H. Damon, of the Department of Anthropology, and Dr.
Carlos Mondragón of the Centro de Estudios de Asia y Africa, of the Colegio de
Mexico (with which the University of Virginia has a collaborative relationship).
The workshop will bring together an international set of researchers who do not
normally work together: anthropologists working in the areas of anthropology of
time, ecology, and indigenous knowledge systems; mathematicians; and ethno-
astronomers. The goal is to advance the study of the relationship between
environmental behavior, seasonal cycles, and cultural value systems to guide
future research on how social systems are organized and made manifest in local
temporal constructs in the context of specific climates and ecologies. The
substantive geographic areas of focus will be Australasia and the equatorial
Americas.

This workshop will make a timely contribution to understanding the relationship
between material and cultural environmental systems. Participants will include
researchers from universities around the world (including Singapore, Malaysia,
Australia, Mexico, China, and the United Kingdom, as well as the United States),
whose expertise includes mathematical modeling, ethnography, and indigenous
knowledge systems. The workshop papers and proceedings will be made publicly
available via a website. The workshop will include graduate students to foster a
new generation of international intellectual collaborations and contributions to
issues of contemporary social and scientific significance.