* 0914444
* Collaborative Research: Track 2: Enhancing Diversity in the Geosciences through the AfricaArray Educational Alliance
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* David Bice, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2013
* USD 479,742.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AfricaArray will create a preeminent
and sustainable pipeline program for increasing the representation of African-
American and Hispanic students within the geosciences. The centerpiece of the
program is a broad and diverse educational alliance between North Carolina
A&amp;T State University, Penn State University, Fort Valley State University,
University of Texas El Paso, and California State University Northridge. The
program is helping to establish an Earth Systems Science Institute at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University, and will, by 2014, graduate up to 25 students
per year with BS degrees in STEM fields. The students are being prepared to
matriculate into geoscience graduate programs across the country, and be able to
compete for normal forms of graduate support provided by most research
institutions. The program goals are being achieved by coordinating, supporting,
and expanding many activities/interventions within the Alliance partners that
are proven to attract underrepresented minority students into the geosciences.
The activities/interventions within the Alliance partners already helping to
develop a pipeline of minority students include: 1) a summer workshop for high
school teachers, 2) a summer field course in Africa to recruit and mentor
undergraduate students, 3) scholarship funds to support undergraduate students,
4) opportunities for students to participate in research in Africa, 5)
opportunities for students to participate in professional meetings, 6) a postdoc
to teach introductory geophysics courses, 7) an articulation agreement, and 8)
high school outreach programs. The pipeline program will expand the number of
participants reached by these activities/interventions and add to them: 1) a
full time coordinator/recruiter who will be the "face" of the program at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University, 2) high school Earth science exercises linked
to AfricaArray research, 3) opportunities for high school students, high school
counselors and college access advisers to participate in a summer workshop, 4) a
monthly webinar and web forum, 5) an annual "all hands" meeting, and 6)
promotional material about careers in the geosciences to be distributed widely
to high school and undergraduate students.