* 0914595
* Direct and Inverse Scattering Problems in Near-Field Optics Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Peijun Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 84,852.00

The research objective of this proposal is to examine mathematical issues and
develop computational methods for solving important classes of direct and
inverse scattering problems that arise in near-field optics modeling. The
approach is to treat first the direct scattering problem and then the inverse
scattering problem, and increase the complexity of the modeled system as far as
possible. The proposed research concerns the following topics: (1) based on a
global model for scanning tunneling microscopy, develop an adaptive coupling of
the finite element and boundary integral method with error control by an
a-posteriori error estimate to solve the direct problem; (2) extend the adaptive
coupling of the finite element and boundary integral method to the vector theory
of electromagnetic scattering; (3) develop an adaptive treecode algorithm to
accelerate the boundary integral evaluations and thus to provide more efficient
direct solvers; (4) develop a novel continuation method to solve the inverse
problem at a fixed wavenumber. The proposed research will result in a suite of
nice modeling and computational techniques, suitable for qualitative and
quantitative study of various experimental configurations in near-field optical
systems. Particularly, these techniques will contribute towards better
understandings of the complex physical and mathematical problems in near-field
optics, and provide valuable information for industry to design and fabricate
new optical devices.

Near-field optics has developed dramatically in recent years as an effective
approach to breaking the diffraction limit and obtaining images with
subwavelength resolution, which leads to vast applications in modern science and
technology, including biology, chemistry, materials science, and information
storage. Guided by the increasingly accurate and realistic numerical
simulations, the significant advances of the near-field optical microscopies
have led to integration and miniaturization of optical devices, and many
original and reproducible measurements in the vicinity of complex
lithographically designed nanostructures. Reciprocally, the practical
applications and scientific developments have driven the need for rigorous
mathematical models and analysis to describe the scattering of complicated
structures, and to accurately compute electromagnetic vector fields and thus to
predict the performance of a given structure in near-field and nano optics, as
well as to carry out optimal design of new structures. The research lies at the
interface of mathematics, physics, engineering, and materials science. It has
significant potential for advancing the frontiers of applied and computational
mathematics, and for evolving new mathematics and science.

