* 0914543
* SHF:SM: A Time-Predictable Multicore/Manycore Architecture for Real-Time
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Wei Zhang, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Ahmed Louri
* 10/31/2010
* USD 291,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Real-time systems ranging from aircraft and nuclear power plant
controllers to video games and graphics animations have become an increasingly
important part of our society. For real-time applications to harness the full
potential of multicore chips, the execution time of multicore processors must be
predictable, which is particularly crucial for hard real-time and safety-
critical systems. Unfortunately, current multicore architectures are designed
for maximizing average-case performance, and some architectural features such as
shared caches can significantly affect the worst-case performance, making
accurate WCET (Worst-Case Execution Time) analysis extremely difficult, if not
impossible. This harmful impact on time predictability will become even more
severe in emerging manycore processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
attempts to design a time-predictable yet high-performance multicore/manycore
architecture to provide scalable and predictable performance for future high-
performance real-time applications. In addition to systematic analysis of
existing multicore architectural features that can severely affect time
predictability of computing, this project will develop a variety of time-
predictable cache and memory architectures to ensure time predictability. This
project will also implement TMulticore on a FPGA to develop deep understanding
of real design constraints for time-predictable multicore/manycore
chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project is expected to enable
the safe and reliable use of multicore/manycore processors for a wide variety of
real-time applications to enhance their performance and energy efficiency with
deterministic computation time. This project will involve both undergraduate and
graduate students in the design, implementation, and evaluation of the proposed
TMulticore processor. In particular, the PI is committed to attracting
underrepresented students into this project. In addition, funding of this
project will greatly facilitate the growth of the new Ph.D. program in
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Southern Illinois
university.&lt;br/&gt;