* 0914591
* Supporting Students Attending IUI 2009 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Daniel Weld, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2010
* USD 14,400.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 15 graduate students
currently enrolled in Ph.D. programs in the United States and abroad in the 2009
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2009), to be held
in Sanibel Island, Florida, on February 8-11, 2009. Sponsored by ACM, the annual
IUI conferences are the premier forum where researchers from academia and
industry, who work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and
Artificial Intelligence (AI), come together to exchange complementary insights
and to present and discuss outstanding research and applications whose goal is
to make the computerized world a more amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the
focus is not so much on making the computer smart all by itself, but rather on
making the interaction between computers and people smarter. Unlike traditional
HCI, there is a focus on solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and
emerging technologies such as natural language understanding, brain computer
interfaces, and gesture recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions
not only from computer science but also from related fields such as psychology,
cognitive science, computer graphics, the arts, etc. IUI 2009 will be the 12th
conference in the series; topics of interest this year include user input,
generation of system output, ubiquitous computing, help, categories of
intelligence, IUI design, and user studies. NSF funds will be used to support
two groups of participants: students who are the primary author of a submission
that has been accepted as a full paper or poster but whose institution is either
unable to provide any funding for conference attendance or able to provide only
partial funding that is insufficient to cover the student?s expenses; and other
students who would benefit from the conference but who would be unable to attend
due to restrictions by their department on funding conference travel for non-
authors. The IUI 2009 organizing committee has undertaken to proactively recruit
student participants from schools that have not traditionally been well
represented in the IUI community, and also that the bulk of students supported
(70-80%) will be from U.S. institutions.

Broader Impacts: This funding will enable attendance at this conference by
students who might otherwise be unable to do so for financial reasons. It will
enhance the educational experience of funded participants, by bringing them into
contact with leading researchers in the field and by exposing them to the lively
discussion during the course of the conference that often leads to opportunities
for career advancement. The quality of the conference itself will be enhanced as
well, thanks to a broadening of the base of institutions represented and
increased diversity of participants. The rich exchange of ideas at IUI has
previously proven to be a valuable source of ideas for future research, as well
as leading to collaborative efforts; this funding will extend the opportunities
for collaboration and provide intellectual stimulus to programs that have
previously sent few or no representatives to this conference.