* 0914724
* Track 1: Incorporate Traditional Ecological Knowledge of Marine Geosciences into Native Environmental Science Program for Native Americans
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Joel Green, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 151,828.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Marine Geoscience Education
Project is enhancing the geoscience content within the new Native Environmental
Science program, the first Bachelors degree program to be established at
Northwest Indian College (NWIC). This place-based project integrates Western
Science's value of rigorous observation and testing with Native Science's value
of connectedness and deep human development. In partnership with the Center for
Coastal Margin Observation and Prediction (CMOP), the project is providing
Native American students from NWIC and the Lummi Nation High School with a
deeper understanding of the coastal environment on which they depend. A team of
college faculty, 2 undergraduates, a CMOP graduate student, and 2 high school
students are working to: (1) gather oral histories and traditional ecological
knowledge from at least five Lummi commercial fishers and two Lummi canoe
familes; (2) compile locally relevant marine geoscience data from Federal,
state, and Tribal agencies; (3) develop educational resources that can be
incorporated into the college and high school curriculum. Once the program has
been developed and tested at the Lummi campus of NWIC, it will be disseminated
to other coastal communities served by the college.