* 0914708
* SGER: IODP Site Survey participation YK-0905, Tectonic and petrologic evolution of Godzilla Mullion
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jonathan Snow, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William I. Ridley
* 08/31/2010
* USD 6,773.00

Low angle detachment faulting can initiate crustal accretion at slowly spreading
magma-starved ridges, producing structures known as Ocean Core Complexes (OCC).
The OCC in the Parece Vela Rift (PVR) is one of the largest known and formed in
a magma-starved backarc basin. These unique features at PVR provide relatively
easy access to the lower crust and upper mantle of the oceanic backarc. The
primary objective of this study will be obtaining preliminary data on the nature
of the footwall block beneath the detachment surface. The research will advance
the understanding of core-complex style ocean crustal formation, offering
comparisons with that observed in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. This type of
crustal formation is poorly understood and can not be easily predicted using
existing ophiolite models of ocean crust genesis. Consequently, investigations
of OCC can be best achieved through direct ocean floor observation as planned
for this cruise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a strong international collaboration between US and Japanese scientists
and thus promotes the cross scientific exchange within the greater IODP
community. It may serve as an important site survey for IODP proposal 640-Full
that is currently under consideration. It involves 2 US scientists and 2
students from two universities. The project will assist the research of two
graduate students, and provide them a hands-on opportunity for sample collection
and direct exchange with an international team of scientists. It also provides
modest summer support for one of the students.&lt;br/&gt;