* 0914825
* Numerical Methods for Inverse Problems of the Linear Boltzmann Transport Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Kui Ren, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,584.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop fast and robust numerical reconstruction methods for linear and
nonlinear inverse transport problems appeared in many application areas. The
main approach proposed is to incorporate a priori information into optimization-
based algorithms that have been developed in the past. The a priori information
includes both knowledge on the unknowns to be reconstructed and knowledge on
numerical methods for forward transport problems. More precisely, the proposed
research include: (1) to develop methods that utilize a priori information to
reduce the number of unknowns in the reconstruction, and to reconstruct features
in the object of interests; (2) to accelerate the reconstruction process by
analyzing the structure of the forward transport problem so that larger set of
data can be used in the reconstruction process; and (3) to develop efficient
Bayesian computational methods for uncertainty quantification in transport-based
imaging problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research lies between
numerical mathematics and applications. From computational point of view,
developing fast, robust and accurate reconstruction algorithms for ill-posed
transport-based inverse problems is very challenging, not only because of the
advanced numerical optimization, numerical partial differential equations
techniques it involves, but also because of the fact that a deep understanding
of the theory of ill-posed inverse problems is required. Many ideas developed in
this proposal should have straightforward applications in numerical solutions of
other model-based inverse problems. From application point of view, inverse
transport problems find applications in various areas such as medical imaging
(mainly optical tomography and optical molecular imaging), detection and imaging
in random media, and atmospheric optics. The proposed research can potentially
has long-term impacts in those application areas, improving both the stability
and the accuracy of those imaging methods. Some of the ideas and techniques
developed in this project will be incorporated into a graduate level class on
numerical methods for inverse problems which presumably will benefit graduates
who are interested in applying mathematical and computational techniques to
solve real world problems.&lt;br/&gt;