* 0914416
* Collaborative Research: A Linked Initiative for Developing Minority Doctoral Scholars in Ocean Sciences, Phase 2
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Benjamin Cuker, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2014
* USD 390,587.00

Hampton University, Old Dominion University, and the College of William and
Mary's School of Marine Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, are
teaming together to produce significant numbers of Ph.D. marine scientists and
oceanographers from underrepresented minority groups through the Hall-Bonner
Program for Minority Doctoral Scholars in Ocean Sciences program. The H-B
program builds upon an established record of successful cooperation in training
minority students in the ocean sciences. The concept is that a highly
concentrated, interacting group of minority students will foster more individual
success than isolated individuals dispersed among a variety of institutions. The
structured program supports the students through coursework and dissertation
research. Support includes: a stipend, tuition, an extensive orientation, some
shared course work, regular group meetings, special seminars, near-peer
mentoring, and exposure to minority mentors. Additional professional development
activities include participation in K-12 outreach activities and mentoring of
younger students, participation in national meetings, and guidance in
grantsmanship and the process leading to the first post-doctoral positions.
Renewal funding for the H-B program is being used to reach a critical mass of
minority students in graduate marine science programs at the partner
institutions and achieve sustainability of the program infrastructure.