* 0914903
* Collaborative Research for Developing ATD: Bayesian Methods in Syndromic Surveillance: CAR Models and Computational Implementation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Francisco Vera, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 30,900.00

The collaborative team develops and implements computationally of a Bayesian
formulation of syndromic surveillance targeted at early detection of disease
outbreaks. The research spans statistical theory and methodology, as well as
issues of algorithms and computational science. Conditional autoregressive
models, or CAR models, form the basis of the formulation, in order to
accommodate spatial as well as temporal effects. The principal challenges are
scalability (7,500 major U.S. hospitals are linked into the reporting network),
multivariate reports, complex dependence structure in the data, low data
quality, and incorporation of regional and other covariates. The unifying theme
is principled calculation of uncertainties.

The research is framed by an application of national significance. There is
enormous social and economic benefit from early discovery of disease. The stakes
are immense: the US Office of Technology Assessment estimates that a release of
100 KG of anthrax spores upwind of Washington, DC would, if not detected
rapidly, lead to as many as three million deaths and a trillion dollars of
economic losses. The research produces actionable, easily interpretable
information that supports decision makers: a clear statement of the probability
that a particular disease is present somewhere in the US, or present in a
particular city, together with the associated uncertainty. False alarm rates are
controlled, making them commensurate with resources available for post-signal
investigation and taking into account consequences such as the psychological and
financial impacts of a false alarm.