* 0914330
* CSR: Small: A Unified Reinforcement Learning Approach for Autoconfiguration of Virtualized Resources and Appliances
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chengzhong Xu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 433,917.00

URL: A Unified Reinforcement Learning Approach for Auto-configuration
of&lt;br/&gt;Virtualized Resources and Appliances&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public
Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing, unlocked by virtualization, is
emerging as an increasingly important service-oriented computing paradigm. The
goal of this project is to develop a unified learning approach, namely URL, to
automate the configuration processes of virtualized machines and applications
running on the virtual machines and adapt the systems configuration to the
dynamics of cloud. The URL approach features three innovations: First is a
reinforcement learning (RL) methodology for auto-configuration of virtual
machines (VMs) on distributed computing resources in a real-time manner. Second
is a unified RL approach for auto-configuration of both VMs and multi-tier web
appliances. It is able to adapt the VM resource budget and appliance parameter
settings in a coordinated way to the cloud dynamics and the changing workload
for the objective of service quality assurance. Third is a distributed,
cooperative RL approach that allows the RL-based learning and optimization
agents running on different servers and with independent action choices to make
an optimal joint configuration policy in large-scale systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables that emerge from this project will advance
discovery and understanding of autonomic management of large-scale complex
systems with profound technical, economic, and societal impact. In addition,
this project has an integral educational component. It will raise the level of
awareness of system management issues and the power of machine learning
technology, and prepare the students to enter the industry with adequate
understanding of the challenges and opportunities in cloud computing.
&lt;br/&gt;