* 0914387
* The Digital Universe and Web 2.0: Proposal for Studying the Construction of Synergistic Expert/Non Expert Knowledge Networks for Human Rights
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2008,02/29/2012
* Hector Postigo, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 02/29/2012
* USD 88,632.00

This research, sponsored by the Science & Society Program, seeks to examine the
development of expertise (and non-expertise) in a digital discussion network.
Server-side social network and knowledge management technologies (also known as
Web 2.0 technologies) represent a social space in which researchers and general
publics can potentially come together to collaboratively generate knowledge on a
variety of topics. This research project involves a collaboration with ManyOne
Networks, makers of a suite of Web 2.0 technologies called Digital Universe, to
oversee content development for a new community-driven web portal on the topic
of Human Rights.

This project employs participant observation, interviews, and analysis of
quantitative data to investigate: 1) the implications of this Web 2.0 technology
for coordinating and generating expert and "non-expert" knowledge in the Human
Rights portal, and 2) the network relationships that form as research and lay
knowledge communities that create and distribute information on human rights
issues and activism take shape. In addition, this project seeks to inform the
design of novel technological approaches for increasing the input from diverse
knowledge communities.

This project stands to contribute to scholarship on the societal issues
intertwined with Web 2.0 social network technologies and digital information
communication technologies (ICTs). The project promises greater understanding of
the ways emerging digital network systems influence knowledge formation and
communication between research experts and general publics. Additionally, the
focus of this project on a discussion network on Human Rights issues means the
results can speak to scholarship on the use of ICTs in social movement activism.
The project results will be disseminated in articles and a book. A potential
broader impact of this work is better understanding of Web 2.0 technologies in
communication on human rights topics and of how to facilitate civil society in
bringing together, experts, activists, and other citizens.