* 0914705
* Track 1: Geoscience Research at Storm Peak Lab (GRASP)
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Jimena Lopez, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2012
* USD 198,216.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geoscience Research at Storm Peak
(GRASP) creates a field research experience for a diverse group of undergraduate
students with the goal of helping participants develop skills in critical
thinking and research techniques. This program has been designed to help
students cultivate enthusiasm for scientific inquiry, self-esteem, self-
discipline, and commitment while building relationships with Earth scientists.
Future students will be assembled from a growing number of partnership
institutions (Howard University, Tennessee State University, Colorado State
University at Pueblo, Adam State College, Hampton University, Bronx Community
College of CUNY, Mesa State College, and York College), including several
Historically Black Universities and Hispanic Serving Institutions. A new strong
asset for GRASP is our link with the Pathways to Earth Science Education
program. On the summit of Mt. Werner near Steamboat Springs, Colorado, Storm
Peak Laboratory (SPL) provides an ideal location for hands-on experiences in
atmospheric science. While at SPL, students will work in small groups pursuing
research projects of their own choosing under the guidance of an individual
instructor. Data collected will be the basis for continuing student research
projects. Additional components include a tour of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR), meeting with student participants of the
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research (SOARS) program, and
presentation of continuing research projects. A reunion workshop will be held
for all GRASP participants at Howard University each winter. New strategies -
including social networking sites, an ambassador program, and on-line videos -
will be employed to recruit students. A full evaluation of GRASP will be
conducted to explore effectiveness of the proposed strategies.