* 0914866
* Predicting spatial variation in West Nile virus transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 09/30/2008,09/30/2013
* A. Marm Kilpatrick, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,612,023.00

Spatial and temporal variability in the transmission of vector-borne pathogens
can be caused by a large array of factors. These include the community
composition and dynamics of the host and vector and their interaction with the
pathogen. West Nile virus, a multi-host vector-borne pathogen, has infected over
a million people in North America in the past 7 years and caused over 22,000
documented human cases of fever and neurologic disease and 820 deaths. Enormous
spatial and temporal variability in West Nile virus activity has been evident at
local and regional scales. The general hypothesis is that changes in key
characteristics of mosquito and bird communities associated with anthropogenic
land use cause spatial variation in West Nile virus transmission. Data will be
gathered to test this hypothesis through experimental laboratory studies on
avian host competence and mosquito vector competence and field research on local
scale virus transmission in birds and mosquitoes on an urban-to-rural land-use
gradient.

Understanding the mechanistic drivers of virus transmission and the influence of
urbanization on zoonotic disease dynamics is critical to improving surveillance
and control programs and ultimately reducing the impact of this and other
viruses on human and wildlife health. This research will provide a mechanistic
understanding and predictive model of the factors that create variability in
West Nile virus transmission and will provide a critical framework for the
generation of risk maps based on remote-sensing and mosquito surveillance data.
A key component of this research is extensive teaching and training of graduate
and undergraduate students in ecological veterinary, public health, and medical
sciences. The results will be broadly disseminated to the public, policymakers,
and other scientists.