* 0914647
* Radial Basis Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bengt Fornberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 318,923.00

Most phenomena in nature are either entirely or to some significant extent
described by partial differential equations. Although finite differences had
been used earlier for the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations,
the proposal in 1910 by L.F. Richardson to use them also for partial
differential equations (PDEs) is now recognized as a landmark event in the
history of computing. In the nearly 100 years that has followed, there has been
vast progress on many fronts in this area of numerically solving PDEs, including
faster algorithms, higher accuracies, easier implementations, greater
robustness, improved geometric flexibility, better scaling for massively
parallel computer architectures, etc. No single method excels in all these
respects, and the best choice of method varies between application areas. In
cases requiring very high accuracy over long times (such as many convection-
dominated equations, for example arising from weather, climate, or turbulence
modeling), pseudospectral (PS) methods have been found to perform especially
well, as long as local refinement is not needed, and the overall geometry is
quite simple. Radial basis functions (RBFs) were first proposed by Rolland Hardy
(in the different context of multivariate scattered node interpolation) in the
early 1970's, and were tested for solving PDEs by Ed Kansa in 1990. Much
subsequent development on using RBFs for solving PDEs have come from earlier
NSF-supported works by the present investigator and his research group at
University of Colorado. In particular, RBFs were found to reduce to PS methods
in a certain limit, and it has also become clear that this limit is less than
optimal in several respects. A particularly important aspect is that RBFs can
maintain spectral accuracy also in meshfree settings, allowing both general
domain shapes and easy-to-implement local node refinements. The presently
proposed research aims towards still unexplored new opportunities in the RBF
area, both with regard to algorithmic aspects, such as numerical stability and
speed, as well as extending the method to new applications. For example, there
now appears to be excellent chances of achieving spectral accuracy also for a
wide range of free boundary problems.

While the rapid advances in computational hardware during the last decades are
well known, the similar and equally favorable trend in terms of numerical
algorithms might be less widely appreciated. Both aspects combine to make
numerical computations an increasingly important approach for exploring a wide
range of issues with great societal impact, such as weather and climate
modeling, tsunami early warning calculations, etc. The main topic of the present
work is a numerical methodology known as Radial Basis Functions (or RBFs for
short). It has been found to be either very promising or already competitive
with the best previous alternatives in all of the areas just mentioned. When
formulated in mathematical terms, the key challenge becomes how to most
effectively solve something known as partial differential equations. RBFs offer
here numerous new opportunities, which are increasingly pursued also by other
research groups. The long term goal of the present research to advance the RBF
methodology to the point that it becomes still more readily applicable for tasks
such as those outlined above.