* 0914706
* Hybrid Gaskinetic Computation Scheme for flows with Multi-scales and Multi-physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Chunpei Cai, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 184,220.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The accurate and efficient computation of complex gas flows is a very
challenging task that requires significant computing resources. Hypersonic flows
around an entry vehicle, for example, can experience a full range of Knudsen
(Kn) numbers, and can include thermochemical nonequilibrium (NE) effects, with
radiation heat transfer. Essentially, these flows require modeling from atomic,
mesoscopic and macroscopic scales, employing quantum, statistical and classical
fluid mechanics. Because of associated large rarefication effects, traditional
computational schemes based on continuum Navier-Stokes equations cannot always
simulate those complex flows. New computation schemes are preferred. The
investigators propose a consistent time-accurate Hybrid gaskinetic Bhatnagar-
Gross-Krook method (H-BGK) scheme, valid in the full Kn number range to simulate
hypersonic aerothermodynamics flows. H-BGK method provides automated sub-domain
solutions by direct BGK method and by the gaskinetic BGK method of Xu (BGKX) in
the high and low Kn regimes, respectively. Direct BGK employs the Shakov model
using quadratures for discrete velocity integration. The BGKX solution can
produce accurate heat rate prediction for near-continuum thermochemical NE
flows. The proposed work focuses on developing general, accurate and efficient
gaskinetic schemes which can compute complex gas flows with multiphysics,
multiscales, multispecies, multidimensions and a wide range of Kn numbers. These
new hybrid BGK schemes are original in design and implementation. The proposed
method, with pertinent modifications, can be applied to a variety of flows with
multiple Kn numbers. The investigators will compare their simulation results
with those obtained by different numerical methods and experiments.

The investigators propose a powerful hybrid computational scheme which can
simulate complex gas flows (with multiscales, multispecies, multidimensions, and
multiphysics, especially with a large range of rarefication effects). Once
developed, this unique new scheme can both accurately and efficiently simulate
many challenging complex gas flows. Traditional gas simulation schemes are much
inferior because they deal with dense gas flow situations rather than diluted
ones. With its powerful capabilities, this new scheme can be applied in many
fields and events. It can address gas flow problems in physics, astronomy,
aerospace and mechanical engineering, and is also relevant to vacuum and semi-
conductor industries. There are numerous possible space related scenarios. For
example, NASA must consider the drag and heat flux of hypersonic flows over a
re-entry space shuttle. The new scheme addresses the drag and heat flux at high
altitude regions with low atmospheric density as the spacecraft returns to
earth. Another low-density application involves materials processing inside
vacuum chambers.