* 0914676
* CAREERS (Channeling Atmospheric Research into Educational Experiences Reaching Students
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Vernon Morris, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2011
* USD 181,377.00

The CAREERS program is aimed at establishing a network of 2-week, live-in,
summer science camps for middle and high school students that are focused on
meteorology and climate science. This award is being used to develop a
coordinated design strategy that will allow the program to move beyond initial
efforts to host coordinated high school weather camps in two locations and
implement a more comprehensive program to foster minority involvement in
geoscience education and longer-term geoscience career paths. Seven academic
institutions geographically distributed along the east coast, Gulf Region,
Puerto Rico, and US Southwest are participating in this planning and expansion
effort. The overarching theme of the science camps will be to convey to the
students that weather and climate concerns permeate all facets of society
including public policy, human behavior, energy sectors. All participating
students will be exposed to weather, society and careers opportunities. The
program has these primary objectives: 1) encourage young scholars, especially
those from traditionally underrepresented groups (African American, Hispanic,
Native American, and Pacific Islanders) to pursue studies and careers in weather
and climate sciences; 2) attract and enlighten motivated middle school students
early enough in their education about career opportunities in climate and
weather sciences beyond traditional careers; 3) stimulate interest in weather
and climate science through immersive and interactive experiences with
professionals from various geoscience disciplines and related careers that rely
upon geoscience expertise (e.g., forensic meteorology, forest management,
transportation services, energy companies, environmental organizations); 4)
provide early exposure to the college experience through live-in camps and
hands-on laboratories in the University setting; 5) provide professional
development training emphasizing effective technical expression (written and
oral) and leadership; 6) provide immersive teacher training in atmospheric
sciences/meteorology by utilizing middle school and high school teachers as camp
mentors at each location; 7) build realistic workplace frameworks into the
learning model, including team-building, development of technology skills,
enhancing communication abilities (written and verbal), and enhancing personal
dynamics by creating an environment that will be as diverse as the future
workforce. Planning for this larger initiative is being conducted through face-
to-face meetings of project partners held in conjunction with the annual meeting
of the American Meteorological Society, and a 2-day retreat in Washington, DC.
When fully implemented, it is anticipated that the weather and climate camps
will reach annually over 500 high school and middle students and 40 K-12
teachers.