* 0914576
* Diversity Enhancement of Geosciences through Research Experiences (DEGReE): Mentoring African Americans through Research and Professional Development (Track 1)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Giselle Thibaudeau, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 190,100.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geosciences and the
Electron Microscopy Center at Missississppi State University (MSU) in
partnership with Delta State University (DSU) and East Mississippi Community
College (EMCC) share the goal of increasing the number of African-American
students in the geosciences by using participation in research as the catalyst
for cultural transformation. This OEDG project has two desired outcomes: 1) to
attract African-American students who might not have considered geoscience
careers by increasing their perceived relevance of the geosciences, and 2) to
encourage outstanding African-American students to major in geoscience-related
fields. The first phase of the project will inform students about programs of
study and career paths in the geosciences through dynamic, hands-on geoscience
demos presented to students in introductory geoscience courses at MSU and/or
basic science courses at DSU and EMCC as well as in K-12 classrooms across the
region. This will increase the perceived relevance of the geosciences to the
students. The second phase of the project is to involve students in real
research. During an intersession course at MSU students from MSU, DSU and EMCC
will participate in and contribute to an ongoing research project, take field
trips, prepare a presentation, and submit an abstract for publication. Students
at MSU will also participate in a weekly one-credit-hour seminar designed to
introduce them to faculty members who are part of broad-based interdisciplinary
geoscience research network. Seminar participants will also be informed about
career paths in the geosciences and, through carefully designed exercises, they
will be taught critical skills needed for professional success. Participants at
MSU will be matched with research groups across campus where they will
participate in research projects and be mentored by faculty as well as near-peer
upper classmen and graduate students. Involving students in research will
encourage them to further their education and pursue careers in geoscience while
providing them with skills to achieve such goals. During each phase of the
project, assessments will be carried out to determine how to best achieve the
long-term goal of establishing an effective, sustainable program.