* 0914524
* Sparse and Regularized Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stephen Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 274,000.00

Most algorithmic research in optimization has focused on
models&lt;br/&gt;consisting of a single objective together with a number
of&lt;br/&gt;constraints, all defined precisely and deterministically, where
an&lt;br/&gt;exact solution is required. This paradigm is inadequate in
many&lt;br/&gt;applications. First, there is often uncertainty in the model and
data;&lt;br/&gt;this is being dealt with by a recent upsurge of work in
stochastic and&lt;br/&gt;robust optimization. Second, users often require a
simple approximate&lt;br/&gt;solution rather than a more complicated exact
solution. When the&lt;br/&gt;problem is formulated in the appropriate space,
simplicity is often&lt;br/&gt;manifested as sparsity - the vector of variables
has relatively few&lt;br/&gt;nonzeros. Inclusion of nonsmooth regularization
terms in the&lt;br/&gt;formulation can steer the model toward sparse solutions.
This proposal&lt;br/&gt;focuses chiefly on algorithms and theory for sparse and
regularized&lt;br/&gt;optimization, and on application of the methods to such
important&lt;br/&gt;areas as compressed sensing, machine learning,
computational&lt;br/&gt;statistics, and image processing. The project also takes
a&lt;br/&gt;higher-level view, cross-fertilizing algorithmic ideas
across&lt;br/&gt;different application areas, and devising and analyzing
algorithms in&lt;br/&gt;general settings that encompass many specific
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization methods can be used
to solve a great variety of practical&lt;br/&gt;problems, such as design of
cancer treatment plans, removing noise and&lt;br/&gt;blur from images and
videos, identifying genomic and environmental&lt;br/&gt;risk factors for
diseases, and reconstructing pictures, signals, and&lt;br/&gt;other data sets
from limited random samples. Precise mathematical&lt;br/&gt;formulations of
these optimization problems are available, and exact&lt;br/&gt;solutions can
often be obtained, but what is needed in many cases is a&lt;br/&gt;simple,
approximate solution that is easy to compute, understand, and&lt;br/&gt;apply.
To take one example: Many images can be stored by taking a&lt;br/&gt;small
number of random combinations of the pixels that make up the&lt;br/&gt;image.
The optimization algorithm that reconstructs the original&lt;br/&gt;picture from
the samples should look for the simplest picture that is&lt;br/&gt;roughly
consistent with the random observations; this image is likely&lt;br/&gt;to
appear more natural than complicated images that give an exact&lt;br/&gt;match
to the data. This project investigates how the mathematical&lt;br/&gt;statements
of problems like this one, and the mathematical methods&lt;br/&gt;that solve
them, can be modified to produce simple solutions.