* 0914459
* Collaborative Research--Microscopic Islands: Modeling the Theory of Island Biogeography for Aquatic Pathogens Colonizing Marine Aggregates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* J. Evan Ward, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 624,146.00

The theory of island biogeography, seminal to modern ecological thinking, has
been invoked hundreds of times to explain colonization sequences and species
richness on "islands" of many sizes and in many locations. These applications
have overwhelmingly focused on macro-organisms (among them lizards, birds, and
beetles) and practically ignored microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project investigators at four U.S. research universities -- Old Dominion
University, University of Georgia, University of Minnesota at Duluth, and
University of Connecticut -- will apply the theory more provocatively: to
infectious disease ecology. They argue that organic-rich marine and freshwater
aggregates (synonyms include: marine snow, freshwater snow, organic detritus,
and bioflocs) serve as "microscopic islands" for bacteria in aquatic
environments. The theory?s relevance in this context will be tested through
development of analytical models parameterized by empirical studies in both
field and laboratory. Using a three-step approach, the research team (microbial
ecologists, infectious-disease modeler, shellfish biologist/ physiologist)
together will: (1) Design and experimentally test an analytical model of island
biogeography applied to individual aggregates ("islands") to predict bacterial
species richness as a function of aggregate size and distance from a point
source of pathogens (Species richness of marine aggregates); (2) Use the outputs
from the species-richness model to construct and experimentally analyze a second
mathematical model that considers the persistence of pathogenic species within
the microbial communities of aggregates. The effects, if any, of species
richness on persistence will also be determined (Pathogen persistence in marine
aggregates); and (3) Apply information from the species-richness model and the
pathogen-persistence model to evaluate links between marine aggregates and
public health with an agent-based simulation model. The long-term goal of the
principal investigators is to bring a community-level approach to studies of
infectious diseases in aquatic environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this proposed research are many. Graduate students at all four
participating universities will be trained, and two post-doctoral researchers
will be supported and mentored. In addition, ambitious outreach efforts will
develop innovative, inquiry-based teaching materials for students from grades
K-12. These materials advocate basic ecological principles of infectious
diseases, helping to fill a void in resources available for this topic. Between
them, these institutions host more than 30,000 school children and educators
annually, providing the NSF Ecology of Infectious Diseases program an immense
and diverse audience for disseminating this project's interactive demonstrations
and activities and in so doing, enhance the public understanding of science.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;