* 0914390
* Collaborative Research:   Testing Alternative Hypotheses for Gradients in Lyme Disease in the Eastern U.S.:   Climate, Host Community and Vector Genetic Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Lorenza Beati, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2015
* USD 574,648.00

Lyme disease (LD) is the most common vector-borne disease in the U.S., with most
cases acquired from blacklegged ticks. These ticks are found throughout the
eastern U.S., yet 93% of LD cases occur in ten states found in the Northeast and
Upper Midwest. Various explanations have been proposed for the puzzling absence
of LD in some areas where blacklegged ticks occur, but no agreement has been
reached. The absence of an explanation contributes to uncertainty and confusion
felt by citizens and healthcare providers faced with expanding tick populations
in many parts of the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team represents
five universities as well as national and international governmental agencies.
They have a strong commitment to disseminating research findings to scientists,
public health agencies, land managers, and the public. They will test three key
hypotheses concerning LD distribution using field, laboratory, and computer
modeling studies. Data on tick-host relationships, tick seasonal biology, and
tick genetics will be collected from field sites in four widely-separated
regions of the eastern U.S. Application of modeling and molecular tools will
reveal the ecological and evolutionary processes responsible for the variation
in LD risk in different regions of the U.S., as well as help predict how climate
change could alter this risk. Furthermore, this improved understanding of
factors determining the distribution and abundance of infected ticks will assist
in human disease diagnosis and treatment, tick control measures, and public
education on regional differences in the risk of LD and other tick-borne
disease.