* 0914976
* HCC:  SMALL:  Modeling and Exploiting Interaction Context in 3D User Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Scott Frees, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 98,780.00

With each advance in computing technology, researchers develop innovative user
interfaces so users can leverage the technology to enhance productivity. 3D
immersive virtual environments have long been considered a new frontier in
computing; however, lack of effective user interfaces within these virtual
worlds has prevented them from being widely used in industry. The PI's prior
work has focused on a user interface framework for immersive virtual
environments that facilitates context-driven interaction techniques, which have
been proven to enhance productivity. One aspect of "context" is the use's
workspace: the area and position in the virtual world that the user is most
interested in. In this project the PI will build on his previously developed
framework to create methods for automatically inferring workspace size and
location, and for enabling applications to select the most appropriate
navigation technique. The underlying hypotheses are that contextual information
can be automatically inferred by observing the user's actions, and that
automatically activating specialized interaction techniques suited for the
current context will enhance productivity. The hybrid navigation aid to be
developed will be based on the well-known WIM and Orbital Viewing approaches.
Finding ways to effectively transition between navigation aids based on a
changing workspace is a principle objective of this research, which will
represent a significant contribution toward making navigation within a virtual
world less cumbersome and more efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This work will lead to more effective user interfaces for immersive virtual
environments, which will help unlock their true potential for applications such
as architectural design, scientific exploration, and collaborative training
applications. The implicit recognition of workspace coupled with the activation
and transitioning between navigation techniques will be a valuable addition to
the current body of knowledge in 3D user interface design. Although the current
project focuses on a single particular area of 3D user interface design, the
PI's context-driven framework outlines dozens of instances benefit from this
technique. Each of these additional highly focused projects can be undertaken
with the equipment funded through this award; together, they constitute
excellent opportunities for undergraduate research, which will continue long
after the current effort is completed. Virtual environment development
inherently requires input from a wide range of specialties (e.g., domain experts
to help develop simulation applications and graphics artists to help create
content); the PI will take full advantage of his institution's liberal arts
focus to bring together students and faculty from a variety of disciplines when
carrying out this research.