* 0914954
* Domain Decomposition Methods: Algorithms and Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 209,874.00

The development of numerical methods for large algebraic systems is central in
the development of efficient codes for computational fluid dynamics, elasticity,
and electromagnetics. Many other tasks in such codes parallelize relatively
easily. Algebraic system solvers therefore remain very important now that an
increasing number of parallel and distributed computing systems, with a
substantial number of fast processors, each with a relatively large memory, are
becoming widely available. A very desirable feature of domain decomposition
algorithms is that they respect the memory hierarchy of modern parallel and
distributed computing systems, which is essential for approaching peak floating
point performance. This is important since the cost of communication often can
dominate for large computer systems. The domain decomposition methods are also
relatively easy to implement and they have an increasingly solid theoretical
basis, which shows that the rates of convergence of these preconditioned Krylov
space methods are independent of the number of subdomains and grows only very
slowly with the dimension of the subproblems allocated to individual processors.
In each iteration step, local problems representing the restriction of the
original problem to a potentially large number of subregions are solved exactly
or approximately. The subregions, which can be allocated to individual
processors of a parallel computer, form a decomposition of the entire domain of
the problem. In addition, the inclusion of a coarse component often
substantially increases the efficiency of the preconditioner and can
dramatically reduce the CPU time. This project will combine mathematical
analysis with the design and numerical testing of algorithms. Each class of
applications, e.g., elasticity, incompressible fluid flow, and electromagnetics,
requires special considerations and, in particular, the design of an appropriate
coarse solver, for the problem at hand, is crucially important. Among the
applications to be considered are incompressible Navier Stokes equations,
Reissner-Mindlin plates, Maxwell's equations, nonlinear elastic contact
problems, and those arising in forced vibrations and acoustics. Work will also
continue on developing analytic tools, which also are applicable to very
irregular subdomains such as those obtained from mesh partitioning software.

The overall goal of this work is to provide improved computational methods for
the engineering and scientific community. A special emphasis is on methods that
can be used effectively on modern parallel and distributed computer systems;
these systems have many processors and fast networks for the communication
between the processors. In many design problems, such large scale computing
resources are required in order to take complicated geometry and rapidly varying
displacements or velocities into account and standard computing systems have
often proved to be inadequate. Led by the US national laboratories and the
computer manufacturers, large scale parallel computing systems are being
developed rapidly and these systems are by now also available to practicing
engineers, who, e.g., test building design under the impact of earthquakes,
prior to certification and construction, or machine parts under realistic
operating conditions, prior to making prototypes. This work requires access to
software systems and ultimately to reliable methods to approximate complicated
scientific or engineering models. In many applications, accurate predictions
often require massive amounts of data to describe the geometry and material
properties accurately enough. The design of methods to extract the solution of
such problems requires different algorithms for different applications such as
the design of buildings, the propagation of electromagnetic waves, or fluid flow
in oil fields. This project is focused on mathematical analysis of these issues
and the design of improved methods. Experience of such efforts in the past
clearly indicates that insight gained from such work can greatly improve the
efficiency and reliability of computational practice. This work is a
collaborative effort with leading developers of methods and software systems at
the SANDIA National Laboratories at Albuquerque, NM, and at the University of
Essen, Germany.