* 0914586
* Sharing the Land: Fostering Further Success in Building Tribal Earth Science Expertise: TRACK 2
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Jonathan Harbor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2013
* USD 785,985.00

The Sharing the Land program is a collaborative effort designed to increase the
number of Native Americans who have access to a well-rounded, place-based
education in the Earth sciences and who understand the utility of the
geosciences for tribal resource management and the connections between the
geosciences and indigenous culture and knowledge. Renewal OEDG funding is being
used to replicate successful programs initiated in California among Midwestern
tribal communities, strengthen the evaluation of project outcomes, and develop
appropriate strategies for sustaining key project resources through
institutionalization and integration with other tribally-managed programs. The
Sharing the Land program has the dual goals of increasing on-reservation
expertise in the Earth and environmental sciences and developing a better
understanding of how to most productively and appropriately integrate
culturally-held, indigenous, scientific Earth science knowledge into the
teaching of the Earth sciences in American Indian communities. Partners in this
collaboration include Purdue University, San Diego State University, regional
Native American reservation communities and the high schools and educational
programs that serve these communities. This project has formally united
cooperating programs in adult education, a well established middle- and high-
school to college bridge program operated by and for local tribal communities,
high-school science departments, and an early outreach program in outdoor
science for younger children. Together these programs have combined into a
complete and culturally responsive recruitment and retention pipeline. Younger
Native American children participate in the Science Explorers Clubs outdoor
science programs, learning to understand and enjoy the connections between their
environment, culture and science. Older children participate in the Young Native
Scholars program, which is a year-round academic enrichment and field-based
geoscience education experience that promotes bridging between high school and
college. With cooperatively designed high school curricula based in local issues
and the local geological setting, students become well prepared for college
science and aware of career options in the Earth sciences. All efforts are
augmented by project-supported work experience for participating students
through internships in tribal environmental management offices on their home
reservations. This project has produced and continues to produce insights into
best practices in Native American geoscience education, adding unique
information to the growing body of research into the best approaches to the
inclusion of all under-represented groups in the earth science enterprise.