* 0914893
* Gravity, cosmology and collider physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Dejan Stojkovic, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 05/31/2012
* USD 120,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The study of the fundamental physics that governs evolution of our universe is
one of the most exciting research fields in modern physics. In the last two
decades, technological advances have made possible a host of cosmological
observations strongly constraining the properties of the universe and making
possible the formulation of the Standard Model of cosmology in analogy with the
Standard Model of particle physics. At the same time, direct cosmological
observations are almost always complemented by data from particle accelerators,
earth-based detectors and cosmic ray observatories. Along these lines, the
proposed project will have two aspects. The first aspect is related to
fundamental theoretical cosmology and envisions a concerted research effort
towards understanding and explaining the puzzle of dark energy. The approach to
this problem that will be explored is based on the idea of the late time phase
transitions in the universe, where the field responsible for the phase
transition carries gauge charges. Such models have a very good chance to be
tested in near future collider experiments. The second aspect of the project
will be tightly connected to models with large extra dimensions that can
accommodate a TeV-scale gravity. Probably the most interesting and intriguing
feature of these models is the possibility of production of mini black holes in
future collider experiments. The project envisions building a black hole event
generator for the LHC which will play an important role in confirming or
excluding this class of models. This event generator (tentatively called
BlackMax) will be integrated into the ATLAS Monte Carlo programs Herwig and
Pythia.. The broader impact of the proposed activities is that they will lead to
an improved understanding of the possible connection between dark energy and the
Standard Model. This would further link cosmological observations with
fundamental physics. This project will provide an excellent training ground for
students at both the undergraduate and graduate level. Developed numerical tools
as well as the black hole event generator itself will be made public for the
benefit of a wider physics community. Scientific results will presented at
national and international conferences and workshops. The PI is also a guest
Lecturer at "Petnica Science Center" which is a center for gifted high school
students.