* 0914793
* (MOD) Metrics for Capturing Crucial Social Dynamics of Innovative Regions: Implications for S&amp;T Policy
* SBE,SBE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mary Walshok, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 07/31/2012
* USD 399,866.00

This research quantifies and documents the role of social dynamics in the
economic growth and development of regions with great scientific institutions.
The presence of major scientific research institutions in a region does not, by
itself, lead to social and economic benefit in that region. The importance of
hard assets such as R&amp;D expenditures, patents and venture capital, as well
as the critical mass and propinquity of scientific talent is well known.
However, this research probes in detail a set of social mechanisms which are
postulated to enable some regions to transfer and commercialize knowledge more
effectively than others. It examines the importance of the robust activity of
S&amp;T boundary-spanning organizations in a region in contributing to
successful technology commercialization as measured by number of new business
startups. These S&amp;T boundary-spanning organizations, social gatherings of
cross-disciplinary and cross-functional groups including both technologists and
their business supporters, are of three types: formal groups that support local
technologies (trade associations and entrepreneur-aiding groups); volunteer-run
chapters affiliated with national organizations (e.g. IEEE, AeA, Sigma Xi,
AWIS); and informal volunteer-run affinity groups focused often on a particular
interdisciplinary subject such as systems biology or
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Previous
research on social dynamics, largely descriptive and anecdotal, has yet to
inform policy. This project studies and quantifies the following aspects of the
region's boundary-spanning groups: their types, numbers, meeting frequency and
attendance, their membership diversity (Shannon-Wiener index), and the region's
overall membership overlap among these boundary-spanning groups. These
independent variables are then correlated with new business startups including
controls for R&amp;D expenditures, patent activity, venture capital, critical
mass and propinquity of the region?s scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An initial set of three pilot case studies represent the
first step in the development of a predictive model based on machine learning
techniques. A recommended data structure is being developed so that other
research institutions or their regions may also gather data to perform self
assessments and thus add to the training and test data used to test and enhance
the resulting model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work develops
metrics which capture "cultural and social dynamics" and correlates them with
successful knowledge flows between research institutions and a dynamic regional
commercialization ecology. It searches for the social factors that distinguish
vibrant regions with the capacity to innovate from those that do less, in order
to better understand the processes by which investments in S&amp;T research are
transformed into positive social and economic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This information may influence how regions and research organizations
set policy to stimulate social networks and inclusive interdisciplinary
discourse groups. The increased understanding of previously-uncharacterized
aspects of knowledge flows should lead directly to new mechanisms available for
optimization by policy makers. The application of artificial intelligence
machine learning techniques in this work should also lead to new capabilities in
the science of science policy.