* 0914895
* SHF: Small:Design Tools and Optimization Methods for Digital Microfluidic Biochips
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/28/2014
* USD 283,000.00

Advances in digital microfluidics have led to the promise of biochips for
applications such as point-of-care medical diagnostics. These devices enable the
precise control of nanoliter droplets of biochemical samples and reagents.
Therefore, integrated circuit (IC) technology can be used to transport and
process "biochemical payload" in the form of nanoliter/picoliter droplets. As a
result, non-traditional biomedical applications and markets are opening up
fundamentally new uses for ICs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop a design-automation infrastructure for reconfigurable microfluidic
biochips. It envisions an automated design flow that will transform biochip
research and their use, in the same way as design automation revolutionized IC
design in the 80s and 90s. Design tools and optimization methods are being
developed to ensure that biochips are as versatile as the macro-labs that they
are intended to replace. The results from this research will enable a "panel" of
concurrent immunoassay-based diagnostic tests on an integrated microfluidic
processor biochip that can be "user-programmed", and which can provide results
in real-time with picoliter sample/reagent volumes. Specific research tasks
include control-path synthesis and microcontroller/microfluidics integration,
chip optimization for multiplexed immunoassays, microfluidic logic gates for
smart decision-making, and design for
testability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Miniaturized and low-cost biochips will
revolutionize data analysis for air quality studies and clinical diagnostics,
enabling a transformation in environmental monitoring, healthcare, exposure
assessment, and emergency response. This project is especially aligned with the
vision of functional diversification and "More than Moore", as articulated in
the ITRS 2007, which highlights "Medical" as a "System Driver" for the future.
The project bridges several research communities, e.g., microfluidics,
electronic design automation, and biochemistry, and it provides
interdisciplinary education to graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;