* 0914565
* Track 1: Southern Illinois Undergraduate Recruitment and Retention in Geoscience Education (SURRGE)
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Matthew Therrell, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2013
* USD 186,439.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Southern Illinois Undergraduate Recruitment and Retention in Geoscience
Education (SURRGE) is a three-year project working toward enhancing diversity in
the geosciences at Southern Illinois University Carbondale (SIUC) by: 1)
identifying the factors responsible for the low recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minorities in the geosciences and contributing to this
literature, 2) establishing a program of classroom and field experiences to
increase the number of underrepresented minorities who choose and complete an
academic degree in the geosciences, and 3) exposing students to the cultural
relevance of the geosciences at critical junctures (e.g., high school to
college) toward this career path and balancing the academic challenge of these
endeavors with instructional strategies derived from Universal Design for
Learning (UDL).

Partners involved in this project include SIUC's Departments of Curriculum &
Instruction and Geography, Research-Enriched Academic Challenge (REACH), and
McNair Scholars program; and the Illinois Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (ILSAMP). The project aligns several programs and courses at SIUC
by expanding and strengthening existing resources to establish a secondary-
through-graduate school "pipeline" of underrepresented minorities in the
geosciences. This interdisciplinary approach will expose students to the
cultural, political, and economic impact of past and present episodes of human
and environment interaction. Through opportunities to engage in hands-on, field-
based research related to the cultural relevance of the geosciences, students
from ethnically and linguistically diverse backgrounds will be able to develop
academic skills related to reading comprehension, historical reasoning, media
literacy, and quantitative reasoning. The expected outcomes for this project are
a positive impact on participants' academic achievement and an epistemological
shift in their beliefs about the geosciences, thus influencing their career
aspirations. Over the course of three years, an estimated 1200 undergraduate
students and 50 high school students will experience the curriculum developed
for this project.