* 0914645
* Track 1: Departments and Underrepresented Students ALIGNED: Addressing Locally-tailored Information Infrastructure &amp; Geoscience Needs for Enhancing Diversity
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Patricia Solis, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2012
* USD 199,276.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Association of American
Geographers (AAG) is working to align the needs of university departments and
underrepresented students by Addressing Locally-tailored Information
Infrastructure &amp; Geoscience Needs for Enhancing Diversity. The ALIGNED
Project will support the development of knowledge-driven, place-based, and
locationally-tailored plans for recruitment and retention at the department
level where students enter and engage with universities through their majors.
This project seeks to support underrepresented youth to learn just where and how
they might transform their personal interests into career goals, and mobilize
and retool departments with better ways to learn where to find and how to
connect with underrepresented groups, including how to convey the relevance of
geoscience careers. This model program will integrate knowledge of, from, and
about places and the realities of communities living in them and will identify
and incorporate research about migration patterns, commuting patterns, and
choices and preferences that lead to geographic behavior, and in doing so
demonstrate the importance of geographic concepts and technologies as applied to
the science of broadening participation. The project will design and test an
innovative toolkit that combines a spatial decision support system prototype and
an online clearinghouse of materials for increasing diversity in higher
education. ALIGNED will reach out to 52 hybrid geography/geoscience departments
in 27 states, and will help a pilot group of 7 programs to integrate knowledge
and best practices about where and how to engage underrepresented groups in
their local catchments. Other deliverables are a geoscience symposium reflecting
on emerging research themes, a Diversity Ambassadors peer mentor exchange
framework, a scholarly publication, and strengthened collaborations among the
AAG, geography/geosciences departments, the National Association of Colleges and
Employers, American Association of Persons with Disabilities, American
Association of Community Colleges, White House Commission on Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, Hispanic Association of Colleges &amp; Universities,
and American Indian Higher Education Consortium, among others.