* 0914554
* Numerical solutions of time-dependent stochastic partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yanzhao Cao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 138,874.00

This project is to study numerical solutions for time-dependent stochastic
partial differential equations (SPDEs). In particular the investigator will
construct fast, practical numerical algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;At the same time, A
solid theoretical basis for these algorithms based on proper error analysis will
be provided. The project intends to concentrate on stochastic parabolic partial
differential equations as our model problem. However, it is expected that the
algorithms and analysis will be extended to many other types of
time&lt;br/&gt;dependent SPDEs. A concerted and comprehensive effort will be
made&lt;br/&gt;to develop efficient, accurate, and robust computational
methodologies, which from the very beginning incorporate uncertainty effects.
The research has three major components: 1. Study of finite element
approximations for high dimensional parabolic SPDEs with a forcing term
involving either multiplicative colored noise or a random field; 2.
Investigation of fast collocation methods to numerically evaluate statistical
moments of parabolic SPDEs with random boundary input data; 3. Construction of
enhanced Monte Carlo methods, using sensitivity derivatives, for SPDEs with
random parameters such as diffusion
coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have discovered that there is a
significant amount of uncertainty in all physical systems; not just when
something is measured, but even when an attempt is made to describe how the
system changes. No computer calculation can possibly consider every slight
variation in the measurements and dynamics of a system under study. And yet it
is known that, at least in some cases, small amounts of uncertainty can lead to
significant, and even disastrous, errors in the computed results. The proposed
research intends to make an effort to understand, quantify and control the
effect of uncertainties through numerical computations. The underling
mathematical equations describe basic physical phenomena such as heat transfer,
diffusion processes and fluid flow dynamics. An important bonus of this research
is the involvement of a group of undergraduate and graduate students, some of
them from under represented groups. It is expected that their participation in
this project will expose them to scientific research, induce them to pursue
further training, and to consider a scientific career as a future.