* 0914892
* A New Initiative in Computational Mathematics at Princeton
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ingrid Daubechies, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 980,043.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Computational Mathematics has been central to the Program in Applied and
Computational Mathematics(PACM) since its inception in the mid 1970s. This
tradition is rooted in the traditional, in uential and powerful fields of
computational fluid dynamics, control theory and operations research, fields in
which PACM is committed to continue to invest energy and resources, and in which
it is well represented by dynamic and top-level researchers branching out into
quantum chemistry, materials science and nanotechnology. Parallel to these
traditional computational mathematics elds, recent years have seen exciting new
developments in mathematics and computer science, which have opened up new
domains of application for computational mathematics. These come with their own
challenges, for which new approaches and tools must be and are being developed.
Machine learning and compressive sensing are two typical examples; they draw not
only from traditional linear-algebra-based numerical analysis or approximation
theory, but also from information theory, graph theory, the geometry of Banach
spaces, probability theory, and more. This proposal seeks to fund the research
of three PACM faculty drawn to these new computational challenges, who are also
finding increasingly that their different fields of expertise all contribute to
the development of dramatically more effective tools. This contiuence of
interests, and the conviction that joining their efforts will produce a whole
that exceeds the sum of its parts, constitute the engine that drives the
approaches proposed here. The PIs will bring to bear harmonic analysis,
combinatorial group theory and statistical data analysis approaches on the
construction of algorithms that address large-scale computational problems not
yet solved by traditional approaches.

Whereas acquiring a sufficient amount of data used to be the main preoccupation
of scientists and engineers, they now often find themselves deluged with massive
amounts of often unstructured data, of which much more can be saved than was
possible before. Faced with an enormous mass of unstructured, noisy data, the
challenge is then to identify and study the hidden structures within the data
(often much lower dimensional than the data set itself). This is like searching
for needles in haystacks, when one doesn't even know how many (if any!) needles
are hidden among the hay. In a very real sense, this is similar to the learning
task accomplished by babies, who, in a few years' time, learn to make sense of
the overwhelming amount of information provided to them by their senses, and
succeed in learning many skills, including language, from identifying the
structure in these data. The PIs will study how to discover such hidden
structure in several applications. These include the determination of the
geometric structure of biological molecules for which standard X-ray
Crystallography doesn't work because the substance cannot be crystallized; the
study of masters' paintings to learn how to better distinguish original from
fakes or copies; the identification of the structure in very large data arrays
for which only a small percentage of the entries are known, so that the others
can be inferred; the detection of anomalies in internet or other network
traffic.