* 0914532
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Simulation of Diesel Particulate Filters in Exhaust Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* David Herrin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2011
* USD 45,000.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. David W. Herrin,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky and Dr. Tamer M. Elnady, Ain Shams University in Egypt, on the topic of
simulating diesel particulate filters in exhaust systems. A diesel particulate
filter is an after-treatment device used to trap and capture soot from diesel
engines. Due to increasingly stringent regulations, diesel particulate filters
will be required in Europe and possibly the United States as early as 2013.
Though their primary purpose is to reduce exhaust pollutants, diesel particulate
filters (DPF) are also effective sound attenuation devices in exhaust systems.
For one-dimensional acoustic analysis of exhaust systems, it is usually assumed
that only plane waves can propagate, which limits the frequency range of the
simulation. This assumption is appropriate for applications like small
automotive mufflers. However, the duct dimensions are large compared to the
acoustic wavelength for large diesel engine silencers like those used in trucks,
heavy equipment, ships and generator sets, and more sophisticated approaches
like the Finite (FEM) or Boundary Element Methods (BEM) are essential tools for
such analyses. The objective of this project is to refine and validate a BEM
approach to predict the attenuation from exhaust systems including diesel
particulate filters. Though the DPF itself is modeled one-dimensionally, the BEM
technique allows for three-dimensional wave behavior up or down stream to the
filter. The new model will be validated against measurements to be made by the
Egyptian team at Ain Shams University (ASU). A parametric study will be
conducted to provide guidance on the placement and selection of DPF units.

To date, engineers have addressed problems of noise and exhaust emissions
experimentally in a costly trial-and-error fashion. As a result, current
technology wastes raw materials, and the solution to the noise problem is sub-
optimal and costly. Consequently, a validated analysis tool which accurately
predicts noise attenuation will meet a pressing industry need. Furthermore, the
developed methodology should be appropriate for other after-treatment devices
like catalytic converters. In addition to the potential environmental and
industrial benefits of the research, the effort provides an outstanding
collaborative opportunity, particularly since Egypt has a state of the art
muffler testing facility. Most of the participants in this project are junior
scientists and graduate students, including both the Egyptian and US
coordinators. The collaboration will include short courses in both the US and
Egypt. Additionally, the Egyptian PI will aid the US PI in developing a muffler
test rig while the US partner will assist the Egyptian partner in developing
their computational capabilities, indicating a true intellectual collaboration.
In order to fully inform the industrial community, project results will be
disseminated to industry through the Vibro-Acoustics Consortium (VAC) which is
coordinated by the US PI.

The project is funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to undertake cooperative
research.