* 0914795
* LTREB: Long-term Changes in Experimental Salt Marsh Plots: Effects of Chronic Eutrophication and Sea Level Rise.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Ivan Valiela, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 143,061.00

Nitrogen enrichment and sea-level rise are major and intensifying agents of
ecological change in coastal ecosystems, including salt marshes. We propose to
define long-term effects and interactions of chronic eutrophication and sea-
level rise within experimental plots in the Great Sippewissett marsh in Eastern
Massachusetts. Since 1970, we have been mapping vegetation and elevation within
10 m radius plots experimentally fertilized with 4 dosages of nitrogen.
Preliminary data show continuing long-term shifts in form, cover, biomass and
spatial distribution due to both eutrophication and sea-level rise. In un-
enriched plots low marsh vegetation expanded at the expense of high marsh
vegetation in response to the 12-14 cm sea-level rise during the 33 years of our
studies. In fertilized plots, in contrast, increased nitrogen supply stimulated
growth of high marsh plants whose thick thatch increased organic matter
accumulation and favored capture of sediment particles from flooding water, thus
countering submergence. We hypothesize that increased nitrogen supply and rising
sea-level alter direction of competitive success among different species of
marsh plants, and force long-term interactions that thoroughly reshuffle spatial
disposition and composition of swards of salt marsh plants, and dependent animal
communities. Continuing study of these plots offers an unmatched opportunity to
understand how the interaction of chronic nitrogen enrichment and increased sea-
level rise that is occurring in estuaries world-wide will restructure salt marsh
ecosystems. We will also upload and analyze the extensive past data record for
these plots for publication of long-term impacts, and sharing with the other
researchers.