* 0914856
* Algorithms for Threat Detection (ATD): adaptive sensing and sensor fusion for real time chemical and biological threats
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,023.00

The investigator plans a three year research program to develop algorithms for
sensor systems for the detection of chemical and biological materials. This work
builds on prior research of the investigator and her colleagues involving
autonomous mobile sensors for environmental sampling and algorithms for
understanding hyperspectral imagery data. The research program involves the
design of multiscale, multimodal sensing and detection algorithms, using data
from both standoff detection and point detection from sensors mounted on mobile
autonomous platforms. This data-intensive research depends on the modes of data
available and their spatio-temporal resolution, viewpoints, and spectral
resolution. The work includes the design and construction of a numerical
simulator for the project, that incorporates various sensing modalities and on
which algorithms are tested against against field data supplied by the
government. In addition, mobile sensing algorithms are validated and tested at a
laboratory multi-vehicle wireless testbed involving simpler sensors as a proxy
for field sensor data. The research exploits recent algorithmic advances in
image analysis and reconstruction from high dimensional data. These include, but
are not limited to, compressive sensing methods, total variation minimization
methods, hybrid wavelet-PDE algorithms for data fusion at different scales,
hybrid geometric-stochastic algorithms for real time path planning and analysis,
and nonlinear filtering.

The ability to detect and analyze biological and chemical threats in real time
is essential to the future security of our country. Recent advances in sensor
design now allow for rapid collection of information from multiple vantage
points, involving multispectral sensing modalities. Where we are lacking is the
ability to rapidly process and understand evolving information from diverse
platforms to accurately identify and track the threat. This challenging problem
requires new ideas for mathematical algorithm design to fuse the diverse data
and provide accurate detection with both a low false alarm rate and detection
delay. This research program develops new methods for high performance data
processing and new fast algorithms for identification, in order to optimally
utilize state-of-the-art and future sensor technology.