* 0914790
* A Renewal Proposal for the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center (NSEC) for Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymeric Biomedical Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Albert Conlisk, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keith Roper
* 09/30/2015
* USD 13,078,743.00

ABSTRACT The Center for Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymeric Biomedical
Devices is researching low-cost, polymer-based nanotechnologies that can be used
to manufacture multifunctional nanostructures and nanofluidic devices for next
generation medical diagnostic and therapeutic applications. The Center?s
research concentrates on the interface between polymer nanoengineering and
nanofluidics, leading to two practical nanofactory assembly lines, one based on
nanofluidic network and the other on electrospun nanofibers. A nanofactory
assembly line links nanomaterials and nanotechnologies to allow cells,
biomolecules and nanoparticles to be formed and transported along a pre-
specified ?assembly line? with controlled motion and structure. It allows
continuous production of multi-functional biomimetic nanostructures, non-
stochastic transfection and molecular analysis of individual cells, and 3D cell-
based devices. These nanofactories will greatly enhance the performance of new
drugs and genes discovered through genomics and proteomics research for the
treatment of cancer, infectious and parasitological disease, chronic illness,
and genetic disorders. There are three major scientific challenges in Phase II:
1) nanoscale characterization and modeling of polymer properties, 2) interfacial
polymer-biomolecule interactions at the nanoscale, and 3) nanoscale and
multiscale fluidics and modeling These scientific studies will enable: (1)
affordable and biologically benign fabrication of 3D polymer nanoconstructs, (2)
guided assembly of polymer and biomolecule nanostructures, (3) active
nanofluidic designs, and (4) arrays of devices for the manipulation of
biomolecules, cells and nanoparticles, based on magnetic tweezers, optical
tweezer wave guides, and electrochemical dip-pen nanolithography cantilever
arrays.

The societal impacts of the proposed activities are to: (1) commercialize new
nanoengineered biomedical devices through affordable manufacturing methods and
novel design, (2) extend research results from medical/biology applications to
functional nanocomposites, water treatment, homeland security, environmental
protection, and food industry toxicology, (3) establish new products and new
industries to create high-paying jobs in the U.S., and (4) train the 21st
century workforce in economically important and critical high-tech fields.