* 0914630
* CIF: Small: An Analytical Framework for Comprehensive Study of Intermittently-Connected Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Faramarz Fekri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 268,191.00

Intermittently-Connected Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (ICMANET) are one of the new
areas in the field of wireless communication. Networks under this class are
potentially deployed in challenged environments using isolated mobile devices
with limited resources. They are emerging as a promising technology in
applications such as in wildlife management, military surveillance, underwater
networks, and vehicular networks. Recent focus on these networks has naturally
generated efforts to analytically understand them. In contrast to conventional
Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs), links on an end-to-end path in ICMANETs do not
exist contemporaneously. This compounds the analysis of such networks. The
research provides one of the first steps for performance modeling of ICMANETs.
This is very crucial in the design of practical schemes targeted to offer good
performance across different mobility scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
current analytical research employs simple mobility models such as the Poisson-
contact model, which are unrealistic. Departing heavily from this trend, the
investigator has developed performance analysis under the very general class of
stationary mobility models. This paves the way to analytically understand the
effect of mobility parameters on performance. In particular, the research
answers questions of the following nature: What parameters of the mobility model
affect ICMANETs performance? How does one extract the necessary information? The
research objective is to develop novel approaches in performance modeling of
ICMANETs, drawing out key ideas from Markov-chain- and queuing- theory. The
research attempts to arrive at a novel framework which is capable of capturing
key network characteristics under practical constraints such as finite
bandwidth, random contact durations, and finite node buffers. Key performance
measures such as throughput will be explored for various communication
scenarios, routing protocols, network coding and buffer management
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;