* 0914913
* CSR: Small:  Collaborative Research:  Tool Support for Producing High Assurance and Reliable Software for Wireless Sensor Actor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sandeep Kulkarni, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 247,597.00

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have been mainly used for data collection
purposes, and have not been employed in the context of any consistency- or
safety-critical applications. As such software development for WSNs has been
done mostly on a best-effort basis. However, as WSNs get more integrated with
actuation capabilities, the resulting wireless sensor actor networks (WSANs)
require more assurance and survivability guarantees. The goal of this project is
to design and implement the tool-support necessary for achieving assurance and
reliability of WSANs software.

The project will produce a transformation tool that allows programs for WSANs
to be written in high-level models traditionally used to describe abstract
distributed programs and automatically transforms these abstract programs, while
preserving their correctness and reliability properties, into programs deployed
in WSANs. The project will also develop a synthesis tool that manipulates the
given abstract distributed programs for the automated addition of desired level
of fault-tolerance. Finally, the project will design a framework that guards
against the corruption of the auxiliary state introduced at the concrete system
to ensure that the deployed program is verifiably reliable.

This project will simplify the development of high assurance WSANs software,
and has the potential to pave the way to high assurance cyber-physical systems
development. The project will integrate research and education through
coursework development, building and dissemination of systems software, and
outreach to the wider community.