* 0914787
* CSR:Small:Preventing the Exploitation of Software Vulnerabilities and Execution of Malicious Software on Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,807.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software security attack prevention,
which addresses threats posed by software vulnerabilities and malicious
software, is important for modern computing, especially for embedded systems.
Despite widespread research efforts, the increasing complexity of software and
sophistication and ingenuity of software attacks have led to a constant need for
innovation. Some of the shortcomings of conventional techniques are insufficient
detection accuracy (false positives/negatives) and high performance
penalties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new methodology will be
investigated for detecting and preventing malicious code execution and software
vulnerability exploits, with the potential to significantly improve the accuracy
and efficiency beyond current techniques. It will leverage recent advances in
related areas, such as virtualization and dynamic binary instrumentation, which
enable efficient creation of isolated execution environments and dynamic
monitoring and analysis of program execution. The key aspects of the project are
safe post-execution analysis to detect violation of specific security policies,
derivation of a hybrid model that represents a dynamic control of the
program/data flow in terms of regular expressions and data invariants, run-time
prevention of malicious behavior, and several software/hardware enhancements for
efficiently deploying the defense framework on embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies will be disseminated through
research articles, and software tools developed will be placed on the world-wide
web. Undergraduates will be encouraged to carry out independent research
projects on this topic. Princeton encourages applications from female and
minority students through special fellowships, which will be leveraged. Several
other outreach activities are also planned for promoting education among
underrepresented high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;