* 0914465
* Collaborative Research: ATD (Algorithms for Threat Detection): Inverse Problems Methods in Chemical Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Yen-Hsi Tsai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 273,206.00

This proposal introduces a class of novel inverse problems with applications to,
and motivated by anti-terrorism efforts, such as surveillance and discovery of
harmful comtamination sources in unknown battle fields as well as urban regions.
Unlike the typical settings of a large class of inverse problems, the research
involves inverting Radon transforms from very sparse samples and constraints
involving parttial differential equations. These considerations present
interesting challenges in both mathematical analysis and modeling as well as in
the design and implementation of appropriate computational methods. In addition,
this proposal introduces novel strategies which greatly reduce the complexity
for the inversion. &lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art numerical techniques that have
been in development by the PI and his collaborators, such as the use of Bregman
iteration in imaging and compressed sensing and inverse problem applications
will be central in meeting these challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has immediate and direct
implications for anti- &lt;br/&gt;terrorism efforts, such as surveillance and
discovery of harmful &lt;br/&gt;contamination sources in unknown battlefields as
well as urban regions. &lt;br/&gt;A desired capability is to reconstruct and
predict the whereabouts and the &lt;br/&gt;extent of an offending chemical
and/or biological cloud from passive, &lt;br/&gt;remote measurements from an
array of sensors. A very limited number &lt;br/&gt;of stationary or moving
sensors receive and record infrared radiation &lt;br/&gt;from the scene
containing the cloud (plume) in addition to the radiation &lt;br/&gt;from other
elements in the scene, such as the background and intervening
&lt;br/&gt;atmosphere. The sensors are assumed to be able to resolve the
spectrum of &lt;br/&gt;the receivedtotal radiation and the spectral signatures
of chemicals of &lt;br/&gt;interest may be known. This research will help to
move the sensors to &lt;br/&gt;optimal locations, to detect the locations and
contents of thesources, to &lt;br/&gt;predict the plumes' behavior and
ultimately to minimize the damage caused &lt;br/&gt;by such events.