* 0914780
* TC: Small: Privacy-safe sharing of network data via secure queries (PSEQ)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2013
* USD 444,674.00

This project will explore a novel direction to address the privacy/ utility
tradeoff of trace sharing: secure queries on original traces under their owner?s
control. The data owner publishes a query language and an online portal,
allowing researchers to submit sets of queries to be run on data. Only certain
operations are allowed on certain data &amp;#64257;elds, and in
speci&amp;#64257;c contexts. This policy is speci&amp;#64257;ed by the provider
and enforced by the language interpreter. The interpreter analyzes the queries,
runs those that are permitted and returns the results to the researcher. The
results consist of aggregate information such as counts, histograms,
distributions and not of individual packets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secure queries
address privacy/utility tradeoff much better than sanitization. Privacy is
protected by &amp;#64257;ner-grain control given to data owner, which permits
detection of many passive attacks and minimization of information leakage from
active attacks. Future attack vectors can be handled by adding new constraints
on the query language. Secure queries also show a potential to reveal more data
to researchers than it was possible with sanitization. Fine-grain control via
query language enables processing of many &amp;#64257;elds in the application
header, and even in sensitive application content, while satisfying the owner?s
privacy concerns. This is likely to increase utility of public traces for
application and security research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
investigate research utility of network trace data, and the relationship of
known and novel attacks to combinations of packet &amp;#64257;elds, operations
on those &amp;#64257;elds, and contexts that pose privacy risk. Based on these
&amp;#64257;ndings, the team will develop a secure query language Trol, and an
interpreter for this language Patrol. Trol will support common operations on
traces, needed for networking research, and Patrol will prohibit queries and
contexts that pose a privacy risk as speci&amp;#64257;ed by the provider ?s
privacy policy. Both the language and policies will be extensible by data owners
to accommodate future discoveries. Trol and Patrol will be deployed at USC/ISI
and will run on publicly available, sanitized trace archives and on
synthetically generated, full packet traces. This deployment will help to test
expressiveness and privacy protection of Trol operations. The work will also
publicize the work among data owners, to motivate the shift from sanitization to
protection of traces via secure queries.&lt;br/&gt;