* 0914550
* Track 1. Geo.CORPS: Pipeline for Success in the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Suman Singha, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2011
* USD 178,547.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoCORPS is a partnership between the
Yale Peabody Museum's after school program "Evolutions", Yale geoscience
faculty, and the LSAMP program at the University of Connecticut. The aim of the
GeoCORPS program is to provide a diverse group of Grades 9 - 12 students with a
comprehensive pipeline that comprises multiple opportunities to explore the
geosciences and geoscience careers together with access to the skills and
support needed for college matriculation. Specific goals are: (1) Promote
geoscience and general science literacy by expanding each student's geoscience
and science knowledge base and empower them to consider critically relevant
questions in these areas; (2) Create experiences that facilitate students'
understanding of the importance of college preparation and their eventual
transition to the college environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
combines meaningful geoscience research and learning experiences with the
college and career-focused curriculum of an established after school program and
the opportunity for employment training and experience. Project activities will
include: (a) a curriculum unit centered around the exploration of STEM majors
and careers with a specific focus on the geosciences that includes career
research, interviews with college admissions staff, and field trips to colleges;
(b) development of videos on an earth science standard for elementary school
students and a museum exhibit; (c) paid geosciences internships for high school
students and LSAMP students; (d) laboratory visits and behind-the-scenes
collection tours at Yale and UConn; (e) participation in a "career ladder"
program in which students will learn to interpret the Museum's new geology
gallery and host floor experiments for the public gradually working their way up
to paid work; (f) mentoring by Yale and UConn LSAMP students. The program serves
40 high school students from the New Haven Public School system, their families
and communities; Museum visitors; and 4 Yale students and 4 LSAMP students from
UConn.