* 0914951
* ATD:Bayesian data mining approaches for Biological threat detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Leslie Adams, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 834,978.00

Recent developments of DNA-based methods are reliable tools for detecting and
characterizing biological agents. Pathogen detection in this way is challenging,
because there are few genetic differences that distinguish a pathogen from a
closely related nonpathogenic organism. The principal investigators propose
Bayesian detection methods combining prior biological information as well as
data from different biological platforms. Gene expression microarray data as
well as massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS) will be combined by a
novel data fusion method to perform proper inference about the unknowns. Gene
networks models will be developed to identify the dependence and interactions
among the genes. The principal investigators will develop hierarchical Bayesian
models where the data from different sources will be related to each other by
conditional models at different stages of the hierarchy. They will consider
nonparametric models which wil create an automatic clustering of the genes.
Novel Bayesian graph clustering model will be developed by combining local
Gaussian models and the Dirichlet process prior. Due to complexity of the
problems, the joint posterior distribution of the unknown parameters will not be
explicitly available hence Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based computation
methods will be used to draw samples from the posterior
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Terrorists are likely to use a weapon of
mass destruction somewhere in the world in the next five years and they are more
likely to use a biological weapon than a nuclear one -- and the results could be
devastating," the chairman of the a blue-ribbon panel assembled by Congress told
to media on 2nd December, 2008. Biological attack is more likely than a nuclear
one because it would be easier to carry out. Historically disease-causing
microbes have taken their toll on human populations, sometimes in devastating
numbers. These disease causing pathogens can be utilized as biological weapons.
One of the scientific movements to reduce the biological thereat will be the
development of methods for proper detection and characterization of those
biological agents that can be used as weapons. The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity is that it will provide general and consistent frameworks for
deadly pathogen detection using genomic data. The efficient tools and models
which will be developed through this project will be utilized to reduce the
biological threat generated from these deadly pathogens. The methods proposed
here is not only applicable to the scenarios described in this proposal, but
also to a wide variety of basic science and biomedical problems with genomic
data. Understanding regulatory networks and gene interactions will have
significant impact on the development of molecular therapeutic approaches
targeted against cellular abnormalities.&lt;br/&gt;