* 0914912
* CIF: NeTs Small: Collaborative Research: Distributed Spectrum Leasing via Cross-Layer Cooperation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2013
* USD 227,465.00

CIF: NeTS: Small: Collaborative research: Distributed Spectrum Leasing via
Cross-Layer Cooperation

?Cognitive radio? networks, in which primary (licensed) and secondary
(unlicensed) terminals coexist over the same bandwidth, are regarded as a
promising solution to address spectral shortage and overcrowding. The main
conventional approaches to enable such coexistence are: (i) Underlay/ overlay/
interweave strategies, which enforce strict constraints on the secondary
behavior in order to avoid interference to the primary; and (ii) System-wide
dynamic spectrum allocation. Both frameworks have significant drawbacks for
implementation of large-scale distributed cognitive radio networks due to
technological and theoretical limits on secondary spectrum sensing for (i) and
on the stringent constraints on protocols and architectures for (ii). To address
the problems highlighted above, this research introduces and studies the novel
framework of Distributed Spectrum Leasing via Cross-Layer Cooperation (DiSC) as
a basic mechanism to guide the design of Medium Access Control/ Data Link
(MAC/DL) - Physical (PHY) layer protocols in decentralized cognitive radio
networks. According to this framework, dynamic ?leasing? of a transmission
opportunity (e.g., a time-slot) from a primary node to a secondary terminal is
performed locally as driven by primary needs in terms of given Quality-of-
Service (QoS) measures at the MAC/DL-PHY layers. Specifically, DiSC enables each
primary terminal to ?lease? a transmission opportunity to a local secondary
terminal at MAC Protocol Data Unit (MPDU) granularity in exchange for
cooperation (relaying). The project aims, on the one hand, at a theoretical
understanding of the potentiality of the approach from the standpoints of
network information theory and networking theory, and, on the other, at the
(clean-slate and back-compatible) design of MAC/DL-PHY protocols that
effectively implements DiSC in a complex wireless environment. Keywords:
Spectrum leasing, dynamic resource allocation, cognitive radio, cooperative
transmission, cross-layer design, multi-hop wireless networks.



