* 0914488
* HCC:Small: A New Method for Evaluating Perceptual Fidelity in Computer Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* William Thompson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 546,893.00

For many applications of computer graphics, it is important that viewers
perceive an accurate sense of the scale and spatial layout depicted in the
displayed imagery. Medical and scientific visualizations need to accurately
convey information about the size, shape, and location of entities of potential
interest. Architectural and educational systems should give the user an overall
sense of the scale of a real or hypothesized environment, along with the
arrangement of objects in that space. Simulation and training systems need to
allow users to perform tasks with the same or similar facility as in the real
world. Despite the importance of achieving a high level of perceptual fidelity
in computer graphics, there are as yet no established methodologies for
evaluating how well computer graphics imagery conveys spatial information to a
viewer. The lack of such methodologies is a significant impediment to creating
more effective computer graphics systems, particularly for non-entertainment
applications. In this multidisciplinary project involving genuine collaboration
between computer scientists and cognitive psychologists, the PI and his team
will develop a method for quantifying perceptual fidelity that is both
generalizable and task-relevant. This work will be the first systematic use of
the concept of perceived affordances, defined as the perception of one's own
action capabilities, for characterizing the accuracy of space perception in
computer graphics. The methodology involves a verbal indication that a
particular action can or cannot be performed in a viewed environment. By varying
the spatial structure of the environment, these affordance judgments can be used
to probe how accurately viewers are able to perceive action-relevant spatial
information. The result is a measure relevant to action, less subject to bias
than verbal reports of more primitive properties such as size or distance, and
applicable to non-virtual-environment display systems in which the actual action
cannot be performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will
lead to a methodology that significantly impacts displays and rendering methods
not yet developed, and will result in qualitative improvements in domain-
specific systems that go beyond current practice. Project outcomes will be
applicable across a broad range of display technologies and rendering
techniques, and will reduce the confounds associated with training and prior
experience found in more specialized task performance measures. The nature of
this collaboration will lead to an exceptional educational environment, from
which students will come away with a depth and breadth of experience which makes
them especially well qualified to tackle demanding problems in science and
engineering. The investigators have a well established record of involving
undergraduates and women in research, and will continue that tradition with this
work.