* 0914418
* Fear, Food, and Infections:   Linking Host Behavior to Disease Transmission in the Ranavirus-Salamander System
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Jesse Brunner, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2011
* USD 303,722.00

Jesse L. Brunner, Proposal EF- 0914418, Fear, Food, and Infections: Linking Host
Behavior to Disease Transmission in the Ranavirus-Salamander
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed knowledge of how infectious agents are
transmitted is key to predicting whether an infectious disease will invade,
persist, and spread, and to designing control strategies.. Yet we know very
little about how transmission works in real world systems. Much of our present
understanding stems from models that assume hosts contact each other randomly,
like molecules colliding in a chemical reaction. Animals are not molecules; they
mate, forage, fight, and flock, and these behaviors can drive the spread of
disease. This project will use a salamander-virus model system coupled with
simple mathematical models to evaluate how common host behaviors, such as
foraging for food and avoiding predators, shape transmission dynamics.
Experiments are proposed to evaluate how certain host behaviors (e.g., by
introducing a predator) influence the spread of a virus through the population.
For instance, one would predict that when animals aggregate together in the face
of a predator, disease transmission will increase. Alternatively, when hosts
reduce their movements (e.g., when hiding) transmission may
slow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the foundation for a
predictive, behavior-based theory of disease transmission. This study may also
lead to novel ways of intervening in disease outbreaks (e.g., by carefully
arranging food resources or refuges from predators). The investigator will offer
short workshops on wildlife disease epidemiology and modeling to students and
wildlife professionals, and train undergraduate and graduate researchers in
behavioral ecology, disease ecology, epidemiology and statistics, as well as in
laboratory and field methods. &lt;br/&gt;