* 0914935
* CAREER: Construction of Magnetic Cyanide-, Acetylide-, and Butadiynylide-Based Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2008,01/31/2012
* Stephen Holmes, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 01/31/2012
* USD 527,636.00

This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program supports work by Professor Stephen M. Holmes at the University of
Kentucky to study molecule-based materials that exhibit tunable magnetic and
photomagnetic behaviors. A series of stable and magnetically anisotropic
poly(pyrazolyl)borate cyanometalate and alkynyl precursors are prepared and
controllably aggregated into a series of magnetic and photomagnetic polynuclear
cluster derivatives. The fundamental structure-property relationships assist in
the understanding and engineering of tunable magnetic and optical properties,
especially for applications in molecule-based memory devices. The Summer
Nanoscale Institute and physical property measurement courses for undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students introduce and describe nanoscale science and
spectroscopy concepts from a first-principle standpoint. Spectroscopic and
magnetic characterizations of user-supplied materials are discussed and tutorial
experiments are performed by students using remote access. The newly acquired
skills and access to instrumentation enable the timely and cost-effective
collection and interpretation of spectroscopic data for research groups at a
variety of regional undergraduate institutions. Collaborative participation of
regional mentors and the exchange and support of their students at Centre
College and Kentucky State University (local minority-serving and Historically
Black Colleges and University (HBCU) institutions) expand nanoscale curriculum
development and research activities across the region.