* 0914739
* Computationally efficient estimation of the error rates of hidden Markov model results
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Lee Newberg, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

NSF proposal: 0914739&lt;br/&gt;PI: Newberg, Lee
A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computationally efficient estimation of the error rates
of hidden Markov model results&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hidden Markov models are
employed in a wide variety of fields, including speech recognition,
econometrics, computer vision, signal processing, cryptanalysis, and
computational biology. In speech recognition, hidden Markov models can be used
to distinguish one word from another based upon the time series of certain
qualities of a sound. In finance, the models can be used to simulate the unknown
transitions between low, medium, and high debt default regimes in time. In
computer vision they can be used to decode American Sign Language (ASL). Hidden
Markov models are used in computational biology to find similarity between
sequences of nucleotides (DNA or RNA) or polypeptides (proteins) and to predict
protein structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hidden Markov models are employed
because they permit the facile description and implementation of powerful
statistical models and algorithms that are used to score a match possibility in
sequence data. Perhaps the most common use of hidden Markov models is for the
purpose of hypothesis testing or classification. For instance, a speech-
recognition model may be used to quantify the belief that a recorded message
contains the word ?elephant.? However, once a score for a belief has been
computed, the question is how to interpret that value.&lt;br/&gt;1. Is the score
strong enough to indicate a signal, or is it reasonably probable that noise will
yield a score this strong?&lt;br/&gt;2. Is the score weak enough to indicate
noise, or is it reasonably probable that a signal will yield a score this
weak?&lt;br/&gt;The false positive rate (closely related to the type I error or
p-value) for a score threshold is the probability that noise data will yield a
score at least as strong as the threshold. The false negative rate for a score
threshold is the probability that signal data will fail to score at least as
strong as the threshold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2008, Newberg designed a method
for estimating error rates that is more efficient than other approaches that are
applicable to general hidden Markov models. However the approach is still too
slow for computationally intensive applications such as repeated searches of
large DNA databases. This proposed research aims to speed the estimation
primarily via two approaches: (1) the creative re-use of simulations, and (2)
statistically robust elimination of outlier simulation
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is significant because the
facile availability of error rates permits researchers in a wide variety of
scientific fields to evaluate the statistical significance of their conclusions
and the power of their hypothesis tests. Once the technique and software are
available, researchers in speech recognition or ASL recognition will be able to
use rigorously derived statistical significance values to set their hypothesis
test thresholds for word recognition. Financial modelers will have a rigorous
standard by which to evaluate their market timing models. Computational
biologists will have rigorous statistical significance values for their sequence
alignments and for their pattern scans of large sequence databases. More
generally, the availability of error rates for hidden Markov model results will
significantly enhance the attractiveness of hidden Markov models for use in
fields where hidden Markov models are not currently employed.&lt;br/&gt;