* 0914214
* MRI:  Development of a Sonic IR Research Instrument for Nondestructive Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2008,07/31/2012
* John Chen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2012
* USD 47,060.00

Sonic IR is a relative new nondestructive inspection technique developed to
detect cracks in materials such as metals, polymers, ceramics and composites.
This technique, while not yet accepted by industry as a standard, is gaining
wide interest because it is fast and reliable, has low environmental and health
impact, and is less prone to operator error compared to current practices. Our
major finding over the past two years is that this technique causes fatigue
cracks to propagate under typical operating condition. The reason for the
observed crack propagation is due to the mismatch between the high power output
from the source (an off-the-shelf equipment used for welding plastics) and the
low power requirements for most inspection situations. We are therefore
proposing to develop a new sonic IR instrument that can self-adjust to still
allow for reliable inspection but will not further damage the component. Our
proposed instrument would utilize commercial, off-the-shelf piezoelectric
actuators on multiple locations (as opposed to a single, high-power actuator) as
the vibration sources and drive them using a controllable power amplifier. The
control system would be custom software that inspects the infrared camera's
image to identify defects and interfaces with the amplifier for instrument
control.