* 0914946
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards a Dynamic and Composable Model of Trust
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ting Yu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 242,334.00

People rely on two types of trust when making everyday decisions: vertical and
horizontal trust. Vertical trust captures trust relationships between
individuals and institutions, while horizontal trust represents the trust
inferred from the observations and opinions of other peers. Although significant
benefit could be realized by combining horizontal and vertical trust mechanisms,
they have evolved independently in computing systems.

This project focuses on developing a composable trust model capable of tightly
coupling vertical and horizontal trust in a manner that is both amenable to
formal analysis and efficiently deployable. This research advances the state of
the art in trust management through a series of innovative results, including
the design of a unified framework for specifying composite trust policies and
the design and analysis of efficient algorithms for policy evaluation. The
composite trust management approach championed by this project also enables
policy authors to move beyond simple proof of compliance to identify the "top-k"
preferred users satisfying security policies including subjective assessments.
The beneficiaries of this research range from administrators of traditional
computing systems who can better incorporate previous history into their
decision-making processes, to users in social networks who can more carefully
manage the exposure of their personal data.