* 0914371
* NetSE:  Small: Activity-Aware Sensor Network for Smart Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* WenZhan Song, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A smart environment contains many highly interactive and
embedded devices as well as the ability to control these devices automatically
in order to meet the demands of the environment. While smart environments offer
many societal benefits, they also introduce new and complex challenges for
wireless network design. A typical home may be equipped with hundreds or
thousands of wireless sensors that aid in ensuring the health, safety, and
productivity of its residents. If these sensors are continuously operating in
full-alert mode, they will expend a great deal of energy and bandwidth. The
result is an expensive infrastructure that requires constant maintenance to
replace batteries and ensure quality-of-service. The goal of this project is to
imbue such wireless sensor networks with cognitive capabilities and context
awareness that will allow them to act in a more intelligent manner. The
principal investigators (PIs) will use machine learning techniques to recognize
activities that are being performed in the smart environment. This context
information will then be conveyed to the network to allow sensor nodes to
intelligently decide when to sleep, when to wake up, and how to route
information. By transforming sensor networks into activity-aware sensor
networks, the researchers hypothesize that they will greatly reduce energy and
bandwidth consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of this project
include: 1) enhance existing algorithms to recognize activities that are
incomplete, interleaved, or performed in parallel by multiple residents, 2)
design and implement an algorithm that will allow each sensor to intelligently
decide sampling rates and sleep/wake times, and 3) test the algorithms in
simulation and in two physical smart environment testbeds. All of the synthetic
and real-world datasets will be disseminated, together with the source code,
over the Internet to facilitate community-wide comparison and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The research enhances
pervasive systems with cognitive capabilities and context awareness. By
partnering sensor networks with intelligent reasoning and learning capabilities,
The PIs are proposing a paradigm that can be used to create innovative
intelligent sensor networks, sustain smart environments, and improve the quality
of life for residents of smart
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;