* 0914942
* Finite Volume Methods and Software for Hyperbolic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Randall LeVeque, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 490,242.00

Nonlinear hyperbolic systems of partial differential equations arise in many
scientific and engineering applications where wave propagation or transport
phenomena are important, giving rise to discontinuous solutions such as shock
waves. Often the problems are posed in heterogeneous media in which the material
parameters vary and may be discontinuous across interfaces. Solving these
equations requires special techniques based on the mathematical theory of weak
solutions. The investigator has previously developed a multidimensional "wave-
propagation algorithm" that yields a very general framework for solving such
problems. These high-resolution finite volume methods are implemented in the
open source Clawpack software package, which allows students and researchers
studying a wide range of phenomena to use the technology of high-resolution
methods and adaptive mesh refinement. These algorithms and the software are
being further developed and brought to bear on a variety of problems,
particularly in geophysical flow and wave propagation, in collaboration with
researchers in these fields. A version of the Clawpack software (GeoClaw)
specifically tuned to model tsunami propagation and innundation has recently
been developed and is being extended to handle various related problems
involving flow over topography. The study of specific applications is motivating
the development of new mathematical models and finite volume algorithms to more
accurately and robustly model these extreme flows.

This work focuses on the development of computational models for simulating
geophysical flow and wave propagation problems that are related to the
prediction and mitigation of natural disasters. The investigator and coworkers
been working on tsunami modeling for several years and have developed a software
package that has been used both for scientific research on tsunami phenomena and
for the preparation of innundation maps for specific communities in the Pacific
Northwest. In addition to continuing this work, the software is being extended
to model other related phenomena, which often requires the development of new
mathematical models and computational algorithms. Applications being studied
include: flooding due to catastrophic dam breaks, storm surges generated by
hurricanes such as Katrina, tsunamis generated by submarine landslides, and the
flooding and debris flows that would result from the eruption of volcanoes such
as Mt. Rainier that are covered with glaciers. The investigator and his students
are working with researchers in earth sciences, at the USGS Cascades Volcano
Observatory, and at several other research centers on scientific and hazard
mitigation projects related to this software development. New algorithms for
modeling earthquakes are also being developed and applied to the study of
tremors at Mount St. Helens in order to help determine the risk of future
eruptions. The investigator is actively involved in training students and
postdoctoral fellows at the University of Washington as well as at other
institutions by hosting visiting graduate students and scientists. The
investigator has also taught several short courses elsewhere and has developed
lecture notes, textbooks, software, and other educational material based on this
research. The software enhancements under way will further improve its usability
as a freely-available educational tool for students and researchers in many
fields where similar problems arise.