* 0914424
* US Egypt Cooperative Research:  Development of High Performance Nano-Sized Tungsten Heavy Alloy Composites by Powder Metallurgy
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Randall German, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

This collaborative research project is being undertaken by Dr. Randall M.
German, San Diego State University, and Dr. Sayed Farag Moustafa, Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Institute of Egypt, on the topic of
utilizing new nanoscale coating techniques to form copper coated nanoscale
tungsten powders for low temperature net-shape sintering densification. Tungsten
heavy alloys (WHAs) were developed in the 1930s for applications requiring high
density and tailored thermal and electrical properties useful in electrical
switching equipment, inertial guidance systems, and vibration dampening. Today,
new applications are emerging in computer and microelectronic systems for heat
dissipation, as well as in electro-discharge machining and aircraft stabilizers.
Many WHA compositions rely on high tungsten contents and a matrix consisting of
various iron, nickel, cobalt, and copper additions. Tungsten solubility in the
matrix is historically required to induce liquid phase sintering densification.
Concomitant with densification (at temperatures near 1500°C) is extensive grain
growth. However, an alternative is to use an insoluble system, W-Cu, with a
nano-sized particle to induce rapid, lower temperature sintering without grain
coarsening. In this collaboration, a wide range of scientific and engineering
applications will be explored, including microwave packaging, electrical
contacts, integrated circuit heat sinks, welding electrodes, and plasma spray
electrodes. The US partner will be responsible for sintering and coarsening
studies on the novel powders fabricated by the Egyptian partner, who will also
work on rationalization of the properties and applications. The project is
funded under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to undertake cooperative research.