* 0914778
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical and experimental approaches  to search problems in group theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Vladimir Shpilrain, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 73,495.00

The objective of this proposal is to address various search problems in group
theory. &lt;br/&gt;Decision problems in group theory have been studied for over
100 years now, since Dehn put forward, &lt;br/&gt;in the beginning of the 20th
century, the three famous decision problems now often referred to as
&lt;br/&gt;Dehn's problems: the word problem, the conjugacy problem, and the
isomorphism problem. In general, &lt;br/&gt;decision problems are problems of
the following nature: given a property P and an input O, find out
&lt;br/&gt;whether or not the input O has the property P. On the other hand,
search problems are of the following &lt;br/&gt;nature: given a property P and
an input O with the property P, find a proof (sometimes called a "witness")
&lt;br/&gt;of the fact that O has the property P. This is a substantial shift of
paradigm, and in fact, studying &lt;br/&gt;search problems often gives rise to
new research avenues in mathematics or computer science, very different
&lt;br/&gt;from those prompted by addressing the corresponding decision
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential broader impacts of the proposed
research are extensive; the impact on the general area &lt;br/&gt;of information
security can be singled out. The difficulty of several well-studied problems,
e.g. &lt;br/&gt;integer factorization and the discrete logarithm problem
underlie most current public-key cryptographic &lt;br/&gt;protocols used in
real-life applications. Developing public-key protocols based upon other search
problems, &lt;br/&gt;e.g. the conjugacy search problem whose difficulty has been
well studied by group theorists, is prudent from &lt;br/&gt;the standpoint of
robustness, particularly if factorization or related developments threaten the
security of &lt;br/&gt;current protocols. The complexity of non-abelian infinite
groups is a promising fertile ground for new &lt;br/&gt;protocols and there is a
great deal of preliminary work required such as that proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;