* 0914353
* CIF:SMALL: Nonlocal Sparse Representations on Graphical Models: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Xin Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 172,479.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image processing is an interdisciplinary field at
the intersection of science and engineering. Mathematical modeling of image
signals not only supports various engineering applications in our daily lives
(e.g., digital cameras, high-definition TV, ultrasound diagnosis and so on) but
also offers a computational approach to understand sensory coding as a strategy
for information processing in visual cortex. An improved understanding of image
models is likely to lead to artifact-free signal processing systems that well
match the perception by human vision systems. Models developed for images could
also facilitate the study of self-organization principles underlying other
complex sensory signals such as speech and video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research targets at a more fundamental understanding towards image modeling via
nonlocal sparse representations (NSR). Unlike wavelet bases that are dilation
and translation of a signal-independent wavelet function, the PI advocates the
representation of a signal by ?basis functions? that are dilation and
translation of the signal itself. Self-similarity based signal representation is
closely related to the fractal theory and can be connected with sparse
representations via regression shrinkage and selection. Such fruitful connection
leads to a nonlocal regularization framework on graphical models and a class of
novel deterministic annealing optimization techniques. This research has
applications to a wide range of image processing systems from noise suppression
in medical imaging to artifact removal in JPEG/JPEG2000 compression. The longer-
term objective of the research is to demonstrate the intimate relationship
between image processing and higher-level vision tasks such as segmentation and
recognition. &lt;br/&gt;