* 0914917
* Second Workshop on Predictive Methods of Analysis for Complex Jointed Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Lawrence Bergman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 09/30/2010
* USD 15,000.00

There has been progress toward understanding dynamic behavior of complex,
jointed structures. Due to slip and impact between joint elements, structures
are strongly nonlinear and time-varying; yet, they can be found across the full
range of manufactured components and systems. Significant understanding has been
achieved principally through research programs in the US and Europe by combining
analysis, computation and physical experiments over a range of scales. Still,
the notion of fully predictive methods of analysis for complex, jointed
structures remains elusive. A successful workshop addressing the issue of joints
modeling, sponsored by the National Science Foundation and Sandia National
Laboratories, was held in October, 2006, in Arlington, VA. A second workshop is
proposed, in the UK, during the period April 27-29, 2009, having two major
thrusts: (1) guide the development of advanced modeling allowing reliable
prediction of the dynamics of joints and interfaces used in engineering
structures; and (2) explore and develop new concepts for joint design using new
analysis methods to achieve reduced uncertainty and variability.

The benefit will be reliable structures with improved resistance to dynamic
loads. Economic aspects will be addressed reflecting the belief that improved
design methods will result in both economic and technical improvements. The
workshop will be unique by virtue of the diversity of its participants. A subset
of younger researchers, particularly those from underrepresented groups, will be
encouraged to attend and participate in the development of the research road
map. Broad dissemination of results will attract researchers to this challenging
problem.