* 0914925
* US Egypt Cooperative Research: Freeform Fabrication of Porous Metallic Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* David Bourell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2011
* USD 58,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project is
being undertaken by Dr. David L. Bourell, University of Texas at Austin, and Dr.
Khalid M. Elghany, Central Metallurgical R&amp;D Institute, Egypt, to evaluate
and optimize freeform fabrication processes for porous metallic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porous metallic structures have several
important applications such as rapidly fabricated human-body-tailored implants
and specially shaped filters direct from electronic design (CAD) data. For this
research, the freeform fabrication technology of choice is Selective Laser
Sintering/Melting (SLS). Optimization of fabrication processes (direct and
indirect) will be based on the resulting relative density of the final parts and
the dimensional accuracy compared to the CAD solid model that is used to create
the parts. Indirect processing involves the use of a transient binder and post-
processing, whereas direct processing involves building of the final part in the
freeform fabricator. Test specimens will be characterized for mechanical
behavior in anticipation of service applications. A detailed cost analysis will
be performed to compare the utility of indirect and direct SLS for part
production. Finally, sustainability issues will be addressed for each process by
assessing the total life cycle environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There exists in the rapid
manufacturing field an ongoing debate on the overall utility of direct versus
indirect freeform fabrication. This project is the first "head-to-head"
competition of these approaches for a ferrous alloy by Selective Laser Sintering
(SLS). The international collaboration is desirable given that the concentration
of direct SLS processing is in Europe and the Middle East, whereas indirect SLS
processing is centered in the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Technically, commercialization of SLS has been limited to indirect processing
for metals since commercial machines do not have the capability to directly melt
the powder. There are several foreign entities developing commercial machines
with capabilities for melting metal powder directly. The efforts are centered in
Germany, Belgium and the United Kingdom, but this focus is evident in Egypt as
well. In the United States, commercial polymer machines are adapted to metal
processing by indirect SLS. The work described here will have direct commercial
impact as it provides an explicit cost and environmental-impact comparison of
the direct and indirect approach for commercially important metals under
consideration for rapid manufacturing. A graduate student will be involved in
the USA research with recruitment from underrepresented groups. The
International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium organized annually by the PI
will be an international venue for presentation and publication.