* 0914712
* Collaborative Research: The role of viscosity heterogeneity in plate-mantle coupling
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2008,11/30/2012
* Clinton Conrad, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Raffaella Montelli
* 11/30/2012
* USD 145,561.00

The earth's surface is broken into more than a dozen mobile "plates" that move
relative to one another at rates of a few cm per year. Over millions of years,
these plates deform at their boundaries as well as internally, producing plate-
bounding shear zones such as the San Andreas Fault, basins, and mountain ranges.
Much of this deformation occurs seismically, which generates an earthquake
hazard in regions that are experiencing deformation. Ultimately, the forces that
drive these dynamic surface processes originate within the Earth's deep
interior, which flows as it convects. While Earth's surface plates are the
surface expression of this convection, the details of how their motion and
deformation is related to the motion of the convecting mantle is not well
constrained. Yet, it is essential to understand this plate-mantle interaction,
which ultimately controls plate tectonics and the surface deformation that we
observe. This project is designed to constrain the interaction between mantle
flow, tectonic stresses, and plate motions. PIs Conrad and Lithgow-Bertelloni
are using spherical finite element models of viscous mantle flow to predict the
forces that the mantle exerts on the base of Earth's tectonic plates. These
forces are then used to predict two fields that can be observed from the Earth's
surface. First, plate velocities are predicted by balancing the forces on each
of Earth's tectonic plates. The comparison of predicted motions to observations
lead to further improvements in the numerical model. Second, the PIs compute the
stresses experienced by an elastic lithosphere that is subjected to basal shear
tractions associated with mantle flow and plate motions. These stresses are
statistically analyzed against observations of lithospheric stress made in
boreholes, from moment tensor solutions for earthquakes, and from geological
observations of lithospheric deformation. To quantitatively assess the degree
and variability of plate-mantle coupling, the PIs focus on the influence of
viscosity heterogeneity beneath the elastic lithosphere. The material strength
of the rocks beneath the lithosphere is thought to vary between geological
provinces. For example, oceanic and thin continental lithosphere may be
underlain by low-viscosity asthenosphere that is weaker than the upper mantle
while old continental shields may reside over thick, strong cratons that
protrude deeply into the upper mantle. These extreme lateral variations in
viscosity greatly influence the coupling between the mantle and the lithospheric
plates. In doing so they affect plate motions, patterns of lithospheric stresses
at the surface, and the long-term geological deformation of continents. The PIs
are developing rigorous models of lithosphere-mantle interaction, calibrated
against a variety of observations. Specifically, the PIs hope to further
illuminate the range of material properties that characterize the sub-
lithospheric mantle, and to gain a better understanding of how the mantle
controls surface deformation and the background stresses associated with seismic
hazards. This funded project involves the close collaboration between the two
PIs with varying scientific and technical expertise ranging from numerical
modeling to geology. Hence, the results of these experiments are likely to have
a broad impact and to be of interest to diverse segments of the Earth Sciences
community. Beyond the scientific collaboration, the project will involve the
education of two PhD students (one female), the establishment of a new
geodynamic research laboratory at Johns Hopkins University, and the continuing
support of a Hispanic female PI.