* 0914615
* RI: Small: An Affect-Adaptive Spoken Dialogue System that Responds Based on User Model and Multiple Affective States
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 460,745.00

There has been increasing interest in affective dialogue systems, motivated by
the belief that in human-human dialogues, participants seem to be (at least to
some degree) detecting and responding to the emotions, attitudes and
metacognitive states of other participants. The goal of the proposed research is
to improve the state of the art in affective spoken dialogue systems along three
dimensions, by drawing on the results of prior research in the wider spoken
dialogue and affective system communities. First, prior research
has&lt;br/&gt;shown that not all users interact with a system in the same way;
the proposed research hypothesizes that employing different affect adaptations
for users with different domain aptitude levels will yield further performance
improvement in affective spoken dialogue systems. Second, prior research has
shown that users display a range of affective states and attitudes while
interacting with a system; the proposed research hypothesizes that adapting to
multiple user states will yield further performance improvement in affective
spoken dialogue systems. Third, while prior research has shown preliminary
performance gains for affect adaptation in semi-automated dialogue systems,
similar gains have not yet been realized in fully automated systems. The
proposed research will use state of the art empirical methods to build fully
automated affect detectors. It is hypothesized that both fully and semi-
automated versions of a dialogue systemthat either adapts to affect differently
depending on user class, or that adapts to multiple user affective states, can
improve performance compared to non-adaptive counterparts, with semi-automation
generating the most improvement. The three hypotheses will be investigated in
the context of an existing spoken dialogue tutoring system that adapts to the
user state of uncertainty. The task domain is conceptual physics typically
covered in a first-year physics course (e.g., Newtons Laws, gravity, etc.). To
investigate the first hypothesis, a first enhanced system version will be
developed; it will use the existing uncertainty adaptation for lower aptitude
users with respect to domain knowledge, and a new uncertainty adaptation will be
developed and implemented to be employed for higher aptitude users. To
investigate the second hypothesis, a second enhanced systemversion will be
developed; it will use the existing uncertainty adaptation for all turns
displaying uncertainty, and a new disengagement adaptation will be developed and
implemented to be employed for all student turns displaying a second state of
disengagement. A controlled experiment with the two enhanced systems will then
be conducted in a Wizard-of-Oz (WOZ) setup, with a human Wizard detecting affect
and performing speech recognition and language understanding. To investigate the
third hypothesis, a second controlled experiment will be conducted, which
replaces the WOZ system versions with fully-automated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major intellectual contribution of this
research will be to demonstrate whether significant performance gains can be
achieved in both partially and fully-automated affective spoken dialogue
tutoring systems 1) by adapting to user uncertainty based on user aptitude
levels, and 2) by adapting to multiple user states hypothesized to be of primary
importance within the tutoring domain, namely uncertainty and disengagement. The
research project will thus advance the state of the art in both spoken dialogue
and computer tutoring technologies, while at the same time demonstrating any
differing effects of affect-adaptive systems under ideal versus realistic
conditions. More broadly, the research and resulting technology will lead to
more natural and effective spoken dialogue-based systems, both for tutoring as
well as for more traditional information-seeking domains. In addition, improving
the performance of computer tutors will expand their usefulness and thus have
substantial benefits for education and society.