* 0914384
* Quantifying the influence of environmental temperature on transmission of vector-borne diseases
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Robert Crane, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,884,991.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change has the potential to
affect the dynamics and distribution of vector-borne diseases that impact the
lives of millions of people. However, our ability to quantify risk is limited
due to the poorly-specified relationship between transmission and environmental
parameters; at present neither the resolution of the climate models nor the
parameterization of the disease models is sufficient to inform us what the
actual situation will be on the ground. The central aim of this project,
therefore, is to quantify how environmental temperature influences the
transmission of vector-borne diseases, and how this in turn determines disease
risk both now and under future climate change scenarios. To address this overall
aim, the project will: (i) evaluate the effect of realistic temperature
variation on the key entomological/epidemiological processes that determine
disease transmission; (ii) down-scale state-of-the-art global climate model
projections to the regional level; and (iii) take these biologically meaningful
down-scaled climate model predictions and combine them with the novel
empirically-derived biological data to develop mechanistic epidemiological
models to quantify the effects of environmental temperature on disease dynamics
over time and space. Developing policies to prevent or reduce the impact of
changing disease dynamics requires a much better understanding of both regional
climate change and the nature of the climate controls on the disease, as well as
how these intersect with other environmental and socio-economic factors. This
project will set the foundations of a wider program in climate and environmental
change integrating the social, physical and natural sciences. These outputs can
then be used to better inform society of the links between climate and disease
and to develop appropriate practices for prevention, control, and adaptation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This project includes outreach to both
the general public and to stakeholders, and includes continued participation in
the activities of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The training
and mentoring proposed are at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
levels, and participation of women and minorities will be maximized through
participation in Women in Science and Engineering Research (WISE) and Minority
Undergraduate Research Experience (MURE) programs.The fundamental issues
addressed by this project are broad and scientists trained in this program will
be well placed to transfer skills into many areas of social and economic
interest (e.g. domestic animal and wildlife diseases, agriculture, fisheries and
conservation).&lt;br/&gt;