* 0914372
* US-Tanzania Workshop:  Advancing the Structural Use of Earth-based Bricks; Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; 20-21 May 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Esther Obonyo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 04/30/2011
* USD 51,690.00

This award is to provide funds to hold a two-day US-Tanzania workshop to discuss
experiences and potential strategies for advancing the structural use of earth-
based bricks, particularly in Africa. The workshop will benefit from the
expertise of professionals championing the use of earth-based technologies in
the US and in Africa. The workshop will formalize loosely coupled relationships
the PIs have with different individuals/ groups in the US and Africa. The
proposed workshop will result in the identification of fundamental research and
development challenges, knowledge gaps, and research needs in the existing
efforts directed at resolving significant variations in the performance of
earth-based bricks depending on the soil conditions, brick manufacturing methods
and climatic conditions.

The workshop will provide both a national and international forum for
researchers in earth-based technologies and experts from closely aligned
disciplines to discuss the fundamental structural and durability performance of
earth-based bricks. The workshop will take place in Tanzania, Africa and will
help to establish research collaborations between US researchers and African
university and building construction researchers. The US PI and co-PI are
leaders in the field of earth structures and earth based brick technologies.
This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering.