* 0914474
* CSR: Small: Elastic Computing - An Enabling Technology for Transparent, Portable, and Adaptive Multi-Core Heterogeneous Computing
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Greg Stitt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 405,362.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Computing architectures are increasingly parallel, most relying on multi-core
microprocessors. Trends are also towards increased heterogeneity, with systems
combining diverse components ranging from multiple microprocessors, field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), graphics processing units (GPUs), among
others, often resulting in speedups of 10x to 100x.

A number of research thrusts have focused on the challenges associated with
utilizing parallelism and heterogenity in computing architectures, including
languages aimed at simplifying parallel programming. Despite numerous compiler
and synthesis studies, usage of such systems has largely been limited to device
experts due to significantly increased application design complexity.

To reduce design complexity, this project will investigate elastic computing,
which is a framework to automatically parallelize an application across numerous
heterogeneous resources while dynamically optimizing for different runtime
parameters such as input size, battery life, etc. Elastic computing overcomes
limitations of compilers and synthesis tools by providing the optimization
framework with extra knowledge of functions, thus enabling automatic exploration
of thousands of possible implementations, even ones using different algorithms.
This project establishes an underlying theory for elastic computing, validated
for numerous architectures and application domains, thus laying the foundation
for much future research. In addition, the project will enable scientists
without programming expertise to more easily develop applications for powerful
multi-core heterogeneous systems, thus enabling new simulations that may advance
the state of science. The project will also integrate elastic computing into
graduate curriculum and will involve collaboration with the South East Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (SEAGEP) to recruit
underrepresented students for undergraduate research.