* 0914680
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Diversity in Geoscience Education through Coastal Research in a Port City (EDGE) - Track 2
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Mary Curran, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,030,442.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the Enhancing Diversity in
Geoscience Education through Coastal Research Program (EDGE) Savannah State
University (SSU) and the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography will address two
issues which currently limit engagement of students in the geosciences in a
diverse coastal Georgia community. The issues to be addressed are a lack of
exposure of public school and HBCU (SSU) students to the geosciences and a
perceived lack of relevance of geosciences to their lives. Formal academic
exposure to the geosciences is limited in Savannah due to lack of required earth
science coursework beyond 6th grade in Georgia and a paucity of geoscience
course options for SSU students in majors beyond the marine and environmental
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems will be addressed through 1)
delivery of hands-on lessons relevant to Georgia Performance Standards through
undergraduate service learning course requirements, 2) inclusion of high school
students in SSU coastal monitoring teams and training sessions, 3) initiation of
an Environmental and Ocean Habitat Orientation for SSU students of all majors,
and 4) development of a Coastal Issues course for non-science majors at SSU.
Student understanding of the relevance of geoscience to their lives and
potential careers will be broadened through 1) development of and student
participation in Coastal Research Teams which will monitor coastal environmental
parameters with the potential to be influenced by regional climate and economic
factors, and 2) expansion of undergraduate understanding of and preparedness for
geoscience career options through internships offered in cooperation with
diverse local partners (including research, regulatory, commercial, formal and
informal educational institutions). Included among the participants in these
activities will be Peach State LSAMP (PSLSAMP) students. Coastal Georgia's
ecosystem health is relatively high but faces increased burdens associated with
industrial use and population growth. The monitoring completed by Coastal
Research Teams will therefore provide a critical regional research resource, in
addition to meeting the primary goals of community engagement and increasing the
diversity of geoscientists. The EDGE program, by leveraging and broadly engaging
the expertise and resources of a coastal community, will create a model
transcending the traditional boundaries of the education, research, management,
and commercial community. This will therefore serve as a transformative approach
not only for increasing diversity in the geosciences, but also for developing
new synergistic collaborations to help coastal communities adapt to climatic and
economic changes and sustain themselves.