* 0914564
* GV: Small: Collaborative Research: Analysis and Visualization of Stochastic Simulation Solutions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Kirby, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2013
* USD 309,244.00

This is a collaborative research project conducted by Robert Kirby, University
of Utah (IIS-0914564) and Dongbin Xiu, Purdue University (IIS-0914447).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this age of scientific computing, the simulation
science pipeline of mathematical modeling, simulation and evaluation is a
commonly employed rendition of the scientific method. In addition to the
traditional components of the pipeline, there has been a recent surge of
interest in uncertainty quantification (UQ). Visualization is the window through
which scientists examine their data for deriving new science, and hence
visualization methods which depict underlying uncertainty information are
crucial. This research addresses the questions of how does one accurately and
efficiently post-process stochastic simulation fields and how does one
effectively and succinctly convey the results. This is accomplished by
developing strategies and techniques for augmenting current visualization
techniques used for visualizing spatio-temporal fields with UQ information in a
seamless way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this work are that
(1) proper techniques for UQ will have large impact on many scientific
disciplines from medical/bioengineering to aeronautics, and (2) developed
visualization techniques might be put to use when higher dimensional data is
available for each point in space. The educational objectives are focused on
training a new generation of scientists who are proficient not in both
visualization techniques and in UQ. The project will produce a series of methods
and algorithms for stochastic visualization. These pioneering results will be
disseminated in archival publications as well as via the project website
(http://www.cs.utah.edu/~kirby/StochasticVis.html). Workshops on stochastic
methods and tutorial sessions in SIAM and IEEE conferences are also planned to
raise the visibility and impact of the project.