* 0914596
* Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Partial Differential Equations and Theoretical Questions in Finite Elements
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Johnny Guzman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 189,826.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main part
of this project will focus on developing and analyzing discontinuous Galerkin
(DG) methods for problems arising in structural mechanics and fluid flow. In
particular, the P.I. will analyze hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (HDG)
methods for plate bending problems, elasticity equations and convection-
diffusion equations. One advantage of HDG methods is that they can approximate
all the variables of interest in an optimal way while using equal-order
approximations for all the variables. More importantly, many of the global
degrees of freedom can be eliminated by the use of Lagrange multipliers, making
the final linear system smaller than linear systems arising in standard DG
methods. Another component of the project is the investigation of DG methods for
multiscale problems. The P.I. hopes to develop higher-order DG methods using
non-polynomial basis functions. A final project will be answering theoretical
questions in finite elements. The P.I. will prove pointwise error estimates for
finite element methods applied to the Stokes problem on general convex
polyhedral domains. Then, the P.I. will prove error estimates for higher-order
streamline diffusion methods on layer-adapted meshes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations play a central role in modern
engineering. For example, they are crucial in the design of airplanes,
automobiles, and oil platforms, to name a few. They allow industries to test
structures using computers without ever building an actual physical model. One
of the reasons this is possible is that very efficient and reliable numerical
methods have been developed over the years. However, to meet new computational
challenges, researchers are working on improving existing algorithms and on the
development of new competitive ones. In this project, the P.I. will work on
developing a new, promising family of numerical methods called hybridizable
discontinuous Galerkin methods. In order to gain a deeper understanding of these
numerical methods and related ones, the P.I. will also investigate mathematical
aspects of such methods. &lt;br/&gt;