* 0915270
* RI: Small: Performance Prediction and Validation for Object Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Subir Ghosh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This project brings together an interdisciplinary collaboration between
Engineering and Statistics for developing the science for automated object
recognition. Object recognition technology is pervasive in a broad range of
applications, such as safety and law enforcement, defense and security,
autonomous navigation, industrial manufacturing, business process and
e-commerce. The proposed transformative research provides a foundational
framework for predicting the performance of object recognition algorithms based
on probabilities and structural characteristics of the models and data. In
contrast to previous work, the proposed research considers not only the data
distortion factors but also the model similarity. The performance is explicitly
modeled as a function of data distortion factors (feature uncertainty, occlusion
and clutter) and model factors (similarity) so that one can ultimately
characterize the probability distribution of performance rather than the
empirical results on a specific dataset. The research will focus in three areas:
1) Developing the Bayesian formulation of performance prediction and bounds on
performance. 2) Analyzing the effects of all of the assumptions made in the
performance prediction approach; evaluating the effects of mathematical
tractability, complexity and the gain in performance and validating different
assumptions based on real data. 3) Generating results of the approach for
practical applications. The development of scientific theory, prediction and
computational models for recognition will result in the development of
systematic approaches to the design of recognition systems that can reliably
achieve predictable results in complex real-world, and contribute towards the
science of computer-based object recognition.