* 0915495
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Ultra Low Latency Optical Packet Switched Interconnects with Novel Switching Paradigm
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Zhenghao Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 166,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;With the advances of modern computer architectures,
interconnects are playing an ever increasingly important role for providing an
effective communication medium. Advanced optical switching technologies, such as
optical packet switching and wavelength-division-multiplexing, provide a
platform to exploit the huge capacity of optical fiber to meet the increasing
needs. This research proposes a new switching paradigm - optical cut-through
with electronic packet buffering, and systematically investigates the
fundamental and challenging issues in the optical interconnect under this
switching scheme, with the objective of designing cost-effective, ultra-low
latency and pragmatic interconnects for future high-performance computing and
communications systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of the proposed
interconnect is that those packets that do not cause contention can pass the
interconnect directly in optical form and experience minimum delay, while only
those that cause contention are buffered. This research proposes to combine
optical packet switching with electronic buffering, such that the interconnect
will enjoy both fast switching and large buffering capacity. This research will
(1) design the switching fabric and packet scheduling algorithms, (2) design
practical Forward Error Control (FEC) for the interconnect, and (3) conduct
extensive performance evaluations by means of simulation and emulation tools and
analytical models. The outcome of this project will have a significant impact on
fundamental design principles and infrastructures for the development of future
high-performance computing and communications systems. The PIs will integrate
graduate and undergraduate students into the project and promote the
participation of female and minority students. The findings will be disseminated
to the research community by way of conferences, journals, and web site access.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;