* 0915299
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Signal Design for Low-Complexity Active Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Arthur Calderbank, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2012
* USD 160,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is motivated by the
recognition that the volume of sensor data is expected to overwhelm even the
enormous performance improvements in silicon technology expressed by Moore's
Law. The focus is the development of a low-complexity alternative to non-
adaptive image formation through innovations in signal design. The objectives
support closer monitoring of weather patterns and may lead to a more detailed
understanding of climate change. They also impact a wider range of surveillance
applications from microwave landing systems to through-wall imaging. The
research program is highly interdisciplinary with signal processing as the
bridge between application domains and the mathematics of sequence
design.&lt;br/&gt;Current hardware allows transmission of wavefields that vary
across space, polarization, time and frequency and which can be changed in rapid
succession. However, sensing resolution is limited, not by hardware, but by the
complexity of remote image formation. This research program develops new signal
design principles that enable fast and reliable active sensing with minimal
receiver signal processing complexity. The basic unit of transmission is a
unitary matrix of phase coded waveforms indexed by array element and by pulse
repetition interval, where the polarization of constituent waveforms may vary.
Golay Complementary waveforms appear as entries of these matrices. Appropriate
sequencing of unitary waveform matrices in time eliminates Doppler induced range
sidelobes and provides resilience to multipath without compromising the
simplicity of signal processing. OFDM signaling of complementary waveforms
improves performance beyond conventional matched filtering by introducing
nonlinear signal processing that exchanges static sidelobes for more dynamic
cross-terms. The development of a new mathematical framework based on group
theory enables the systematic construction of new complementary
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;