* 0915851
* NeTS: Small: Pulse Switching: An Ultra-light Multi-hop Network Paradigm without Packet Abstraction
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Edward Rothwell, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

This research develops a transformative pulse switching framework for light-
weight networking applications. It abstracts a single pulse, as opposed to data
packets, as the information switching granularity. Pulse switching is shown to
be sufficient for on-off style event monitoring applications such as building or
bridge structural health monitoring with ultra-thin energy budgets, especially
when the energy is harvested from structural vibrations, ambient temperature
variations or the mechanical perturbations caused by an event itself. An
observable event can be coded as a pulse, which is transported multi-hop while
preserving sufficient amount of spatio-temporal information about the event in
question. Zero collisions, zero buffering, no addressing, no packet processing,
and an ultra-low energy budget makes the framework applicable for networking
between embedded devices with ultra-tight energy budgets. This research
involves: 1) developing a joint MAC-Routing abstraction for pulse switching, 2)
mapping the pulse switching architecture on Ultra Wideband (UWB) impulse radio,
3) designing multi-sink and peer-to-peer pulse routing protocols, and 4)
constructing a prototype pulse-switched network using UWB hardware. Impacts of
this research includes a potential transformation of the area of low-information
networking by replacing the traditional concept of packet switching by pulse
switching in the realm of energy-constrained event monitoring. Expected results
will include a joint MAC-routing architecture and its performance in an Ultra
Wideband pulse networking system. This research is considered to be a key
enabler for emerging cross-disciplinary research and applications including
structural health monitoring, bio-medical body-area sensing, earthquake
engineering, environmental monitoring, and disaster management through ultra-
light packet-less communication.