* 0915667
* TC: Small: A High-Performance Abstract Machine for Network Intrusion Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Nicholas Weaver, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) need to balance between a set of
challenges difficult to simultaneously address to their full extent: the
complexity of network communication; the need to operate extremely efficiently
to achieve line-rate performance; and dealing securely with untrusted input. Our
project aims to build an efficient and secure bridge between dealing effectively
with these challenges, and offering the high-level abstractions required for
describing a security policy. Observing that NIDS implementations share a large
degree of functionality, we introduce a new middle-layer into NIDS processing,
consisting of two main pieces: first, an abstract machine model that is
specifically tailored to the network intrusion detection domain and directly
supports the field's common abstractions and idioms in its instruction set; and
second, a compilation strategy for turning programs written for the abstract
machine into highly optimized, natively executable code for a given target
platform, with performance comparable to manually written C code. As a broader
goal, our undertaking provides the security community with a novel architecture
that facilitates development and reuse of building blocks commonly required for
network traffic analysis. While the focus of our effort is the design and
implementation of the abstract machine environment itself, we envision enabling
the community to unleash its full potential by building analysis functionality
on top of the platform we develop.