* 0915081
* HCC-Small: Deception Hotspots as a Resource for Supporting Interpersonal Awareness Narratives
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Hancock, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2014
* USD 500,484.00

This study of the function of deception in electronic communications is designed
to develop new theories and tools that will significantly improve collaboration
in virtual organizations of all types. Virtual organizations - aggregations of
individuals, facilities and resources that span geographic and institutional
boundaries - are having transformative effects on the ways in which people
socialize and collaborate. They enable interaction between individuals with
diverse perspectives who might not otherwise work together, the sharing of
expensive and scarce resources, and novel ways of accomplishing tasks and
solving problems. Despite the unique capabilities that virtual organizations
provide to distributed groups, many have faced difficulties in working together
at a distance. While virtual organizations provide basic communication tools
(e.g., instant messaging or video conferencing), these tools lack support for
the subtlety and nuance of initiating and exiting conversations. In particular,
systems fail to support the narrative accounts that people use to explain their
behavior and availability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of this disconnect
between social practice and technical implementation is a flood of unwanted
interruptions and painstaking decisions about what personal information one is
willing to share and with whom. This research addresses this fundamental problem
by developing a narrative approach to interpersonal awareness, and by focusing
on the role of deception in managing these narratives. Preliminary evidence
suggests that one fifth of all lies told in instant messaging are used to
initiate or conclude a conversation. These lies represent potentially valuable
"hotspots" that signal trouble in one's interpersonal awareness narrative.
Focusing on these hotspots, this work addresses 3 issues: 1) How do people use
deception to manage their interactions and avoid unwanted interruption? 3) Are
there linguistic and sensor-based attributes that indicate deception may be
likely? 3) Can this knowledge be used to design and evaluate tools for managing
interpersonal awareness narratives and enabling interaction in virtual
organizations? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on substantial research in
the area of interpersonal awareness and fostering informal interaction in
geographically distributed groups. It makes several unique contributions through
a focus on interpersonal awareness narratives: 1) systematically examining the
conditions under which deception is used as a resource with existing awareness
technologies, 2) conceptualizing deceptions as an indicator of a "hot spot" that
can be drawn on in supporting interpersonal awareness, 3) identifying behavioral
predictors of deception to design systems that reduce unwanted interruptions
without blocking those that are useful or important. By managing attentional and
awareness needs more fluidly, members of virtual organizations will be able to
coordinate their activity and achieve their tasks more effectively, and the
organizations as a whole will be better able to meet their business,
educational, social or other goals.&lt;br/&gt;