* 0915364
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable Malware Analysis Using Lightweight Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fabian Monrose, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,264.00

As the web continues to play an increasing role in
information&lt;br/&gt;exchange, so too is it becoming the prevailing platform
for infecting&lt;br/&gt;vulnerable hosts. One commonly deployed strategy for
delivering&lt;br/&gt;web-malware involves the underhanded tactic of targeting
browser&lt;br/&gt;vulnerabilities to automatically download and run malicious
software&lt;br/&gt;upon visiting a website. When popular websites are exploited,
the&lt;br/&gt;victim base from these so-called drive-by downloads can be far
greater&lt;br/&gt;than other forms of exploitation because traditional defenses
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;firewalls) pose no barrier to infection. Unfortunately, with
the&lt;br/&gt;plethora of (insecure) web applications being deployed today, it
is&lt;br/&gt;likely that web servers will continue to be popular targets
for&lt;br/&gt;exploitation for the foreseeable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
of our primary goals is to take an in-depth look at the
malware&lt;br/&gt;serving network on the Web by building a scalable malware
execution&lt;br/&gt;and analysis infrastructure. Specifically, we plan to build
a&lt;br/&gt;resource-efficient host architecture that permits lightweight
process&lt;br/&gt;monitoring via tracking of interactions with the OS. An
important&lt;br/&gt;facet of our research direction is to explore a
transactional&lt;br/&gt;framework that unifies virtualization and logging to
allow efficient&lt;br/&gt;analysis. In this framework, the granularity of
recorded transactions&lt;br/&gt;is dynamically adjusted based on execution
contexts, aggregating&lt;br/&gt;multiple transactions to a single, summarized,
transaction whenever&lt;br/&gt;possible. Broader impats of this project will
result from the&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive analysis of the different aspects of the
problem posed&lt;br/&gt;by web-based malware, and the tools, methods, and
analytical&lt;br/&gt;techniques that will ultimately allow for large-scale
malware analysis&lt;br/&gt;by the security community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;