* 0915612
* SHF: Small: Exploiting Redundancy for Process-Variation Resilience in Nano-scale Fabrics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,998.00

This project addresses critical questions relevant to the successful realization
of nanoelectronics based computing platforms. The promised higher density, lower
power, and faster operation of nanoelectronics devices is attracting increasing
interest. Two of the remaining major roadblocks to the creation of nanoscale
computational structures, however, are very high levels of defects and process
variations. While the small size of nanostructures and their self-assembly based
manufacturing provide great advantages, they also cause them to be very
vulnerable to defects and parameter variations---much more so than conventional
CMOS. The high defect rates require a layered approach for fault tolerance and
typically involve incorporating carefully targeted redundancy at multiple system
levels. In addition to defects, even tiny variations in the manufacturing
process can lead to very substantial variations in the actual values of key
parameters, such as circuit delay. The purpose of this award is to develop a
comprehensive methodology to efficiently use redundancy in nanofabrics to
ameliorate the effects of both high defect levels and circuit delay variations.
The methodology that will be developed will assist designers with a set of well-
tested approaches to provide resilience in the face of manufacturing defects and
process variations. In educational terms, this project will contribute to the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in the art of physical
nanofabrics, nanoscale computer architecture, and circuit design for the future
nano-technologies.

