* 0915730
* TLS: Assessing and Predicting Scientific Progress through Computational Language Understanding
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Evans, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 475,700.00

This project provides new approaches to the evaluation of scientific and
technological promise. The basic insight is that scientific concepts, like
organisms within ecologies, only exist in networks of supporting ideas, and this
is key to understanding the way in which scientific concepts are adopted and
diffused. The particular discipline that is studied is chemistry and related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has three stages. First, it assesses
and predicts innovation in science from the novelty and popularity of terms and
statements within a scientific network. Second, it assesses and predicts the
integration of scientific knowledge from term and statement linkage, repetition,
and elaboration patterns. Finally, it assesses and predicts success along the
path from science to technology by linking term and statement connections to
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses cybertools to develop a very
large database of scientific terms and statements across a broad corpus of
published research and invention, including news, blogs, and other informal text
as well as unpublished opinions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Scientific evaluation, from awarding grants to reviewing tenure,
has historically relied on quantity to proxy for quality. Progress is inferred
from the amount of research produced or the sum of attention garnered. Numbers
of books, articles, pages, citations and media mentions are tallied. These
quantities are inexpensive to measure, but fail to directly capture whether a
contribution is important. This project advances the measurement of scientific
achievement by placing scientific claims in the context of past science. It does
this by building on recent advances in computational language understanding, and
the electronic availability of science. In particular, the project extracts
scientific term and statements from a broad collection of published articles,
patents and blogs in disciplines related to chemistry. These statements are
supplemented with information about their social context -- their location in
the network of authors and the geographical sprawl of global research
institutions. Models are then developed that exploit patterns in the structure
of scientific language to assess the importance of scientific programs and
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The degree of innovation in science is assessed
from the novelty and popularity of terms and statements within the broader
network. The integration of scientific knowledge is assessed by examining the
term and statement linkage, as well as repetition and elaboration patterns.
These are, in turn, used to predict the path from science to Technology. The
project also develops new methods for managing and processing large quantities
of text and network data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project
develops general methods relevant for policy makers and scientists. This
research generates, for example, high resolution, dynamic maps of knowledge
claims in chemistry and neighboring disciplines such as pharmaceuticals and
toxicology. The interactive nature of the maps means that they can serve as a
teaching tool to help students understand scientific trends in their corner of
science. They can also facilitate precise analysis of the production of science
and stimulate the production of new hypotheses, as researchers note statements
not made within the network of claims. When these maps are combined with the
scientific models, they hold the potential to revolutionize the way scientists
collaborate, identify research problems and validate hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, because the research both clarifies what is
published and where, as well as traces the careers of scientists and
inventors,the research generates insights into what factors channel scientific
attention, and how these factors can be harnessed to guide the most powerful
public investments in innovation.