* 0915376
* CSR:Small: Novel Techniques for Lossless Data Compression and Efficient Decompression in Heterogeneous Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Prabhat Mishra, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0915376 - Novel Techniques for Lossless Data Compression and
Efficient Decompression in Heterogeneous Embedded Systems&lt;br/&gt;PI: Prabhat
Mishra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demands for heterogeneous and complex embedded
applications have soared drastically in recent years. Memory is one of the key
driving factors in designing such systems since a larger memory indicates an
increased chip area, more power dissipation, and higher cost. Compression
techniques are promising to reduce memory requirements by reducing the program
and data size. The existing approaches either perform efficient compression
using complex and variable-length encodings at the cost of slow decompression,
or fast decompression using simple and fixed-length encodings at the cost of
compression efficiency. This research will develop novel tools and techniques to
achieve both efficient compression and fast decompression for a wide variety of
application domains and system architectures. This project will make three
fundamental contributions: novel decode-aware compression, optimal bitstream
placement for parallel decompression, and synergistic integration of compression
and encryption. A successful implementation of the proposed research will result
in significant improvement in system performance and security, and drastic
reduction in overall area, cost and energy requirements. Synergistic integration
of compression and encryption will lead to efficient and secure embedded
systems. The outcome of this research has a direct impact on everyday life.
Improved compression/decompression techniques will have double impact ? low-cost
and low-power everyday appliances for the public and improved performance and
security for safety-critical systems. This project will have broad educational
impact by developing compression related projects in both graduate and
undergraduate courses, and by involving undergraduates as well as minority
students through UF Honors, University Minority Mentoring and SEAGEP
programs.&lt;br/&gt;