* 0915585
* MOD: Tom Edison and the Electric Innovation Machine
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gary Bradshaw, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 358,533.00

Although technological innovation is seen as essential to the success of the US
economy, our discussions about the nature of innovation are all too often fuzzy,
relying on vague notions of genius, luck, perseverance, or Yankee ingenuity.
However, if government or private business are to make strategic investments in
technology, then it is important to develop a better understanding about how
individuals create new technology. This research examines discovery and
invention as cognitive processes to advance understanding of technological
creativity. The particular focus is on one of the most prolific U.S. inventors,
Thomas Alva Edison. His inventions include the kinetoscope/kinetograph, which
led to the motion picture industry); the phonograph, which led to the recording
industry; and the electric light, which led to the electric generator and power
grid. In his day, few questioned the processes that made Edison so successful:
He was regarded as a genius beyond the reckoning of ordinary people. Even today,
our knowledge of Edison is a complex mixture of myth and fact. Thus the nature
of his success remains a considerable mystery: How did Edison produce such a
remarkable string of successes? By studying his inventive processes in detail,
this research advances the understanding of the psychology of invention and
innovation, in particular the thought processes that help inventors produce
practical inventions that are commercially successful.



Intellectual Merit This project analyzes Edison's notebooks, correspondence, and
artifacts to reveal the methods Edison used as an inventor and innovator. The
focus of the research is understand invention as the movement of ideas across
three spaces: experimental, design, and conceptual. This research reveals the
mental models Edison used to think about his inventions, the heuristics he used
to create and improve his inventions, and the strategies Edison pursued in
coordinating a complex set of activities.

Broader Impact This research identifies creative methods that can be taught to
engineers and innovators in order to help them to produce innovative products.
Managers, as a result of understanding the creative processes that underlie
innovation, should be able to evaluate whether the prerequisites for innovation
are met and to track innovative progress (or lack thereof). Finally, this
research makes fundamental contributions to the psychology of creativity and
invention.