* 0915176
* RI: Small: Statistical Machine Translation Through a Tree Adjoining Grammar with Flexible Parsing Operations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Michael Collins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2011
* USD 450,000.00

Our research involves the development of a syntactic approach for statistical
machine translation that extends a tree adjoining grammar (TAG) formalism to the
translation problem, and frames translation directly as a parsing problem. The
model imposes no constraints on entries in the phrasal lexicon, thereby
retaining the flexible lexical entries of phrase-based translation systems; it
allows straightforward incorporation of a syntactic language model. The
operations used to combine tree fragments into a complete parse tree are
generalizations of standard parsing operations found in TAG; specifically, they
are modified to be highly flexible, potentially allowing any possible
permutation (reordering) of the initial fragments. This allows the model a great
deal of freedom in capturing differences in word order between source and target
languages.

The use of flexible parsing operations raises a couple of challenges that are a
major focus of our research. First, efficient decoding algorithms are required
for the models. Second, flexible parsing operations allow the model to capture
complex reordering phenomena, but in addition introduce many spurious
possibilities. We are investigating the use of learned, probabilistic
constraints based on information in the source-language sentence, or in a parse
tree for the source-language sentence, thereby incorporating syntactic
information from the source language.

The end goal of the project is to develop new models for translation that
improve the fluency or grammaticality of translations, improve the degree to
which semantic information (e.g., predicate-argument structure) is preserved in
translation, and improve the treatment of differing word orders between source
and target languages.