* 0915361
* TC:  Small: Lossy Trapdoor Functions - Applications, Realizations and Beyond
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brent Waters, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,252.00

A central goal in foundational cryptography is to find a primitive that realizes
all interesting cryptographic applications, and yet has its security based on a
simple assumption --- ideally a weak general assumption. Recently, a significant
step in this direction was made with the introduction of Lossy Trapdoor
Functions. A family of Lossy Trapdoor Functions (TDF) lets a user generate a
publicly computable function, f, and corresponding trapdoor, t, such the user
can recover x given f(x). Alternatively, the user can generate a function g such
that g looses information about the input x; moreover, no computationally
bounded adversary can distinguish whether it is given the description of an
injective or lossy function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lossy Trapdoor Functions give
rise to a host of cryptographic applications including: injective trapdoor
functions, chosen-ciphertext secure encryption, collision-resistant hash
functions, and oblivious transfer (OT). Furthermore, one can realize Lossy TDFs
from several standard number theoretic assumptions: Decisional Diffie-Hellman,
the Shortest Vector (SVP) problem in lattices, and the Composite Residuosity
problem. Taken all together this solved two longstanding open problems:
realizing non-factoring based trapdoor functions; and building chosen ciphertext
secure encryption systems from lattice-based
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will endeavor to make significant
progress towards realizing the ultimate goal of building all of cryptography
from simple general assumptions. The following directions will be pursued.
First, the work will aim to create new constructions from both weaker number
theoretic assumptions and from general assumptions. Second, the project will
build trapdoors into Identity-Based Cryptosystems. Constructing identity-based
trapdoors will enable applications such as ``deterministic encryption'' in the
Identity-Based context. Third, it will build new Non-Interactive Proof Systems.
The project will study the relationship to Universal Hash Proof Systems and
create new Non-Interactive Zero Knowledge Proof
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our foundational
understanding of cryptography. Results will be disseminated through conferences,
journals, and invited talks. In addition, funding will be used to support
graduate students and build a cryptography program at UT Austin.&lt;br/&gt;