* 0915560
* HCC: Small: Modular Tactile Feedback for Whole-Body Motion Guidance
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Katherine Kuchenbecker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 532,000.00

Computers have progressed from their origins as isolated rooms of electronic
components to being distributed, highly connected, mobile personal devices that
are increasingly intertwined with everyday human experience. But computers
haven't yet permeated the domain that is most intuitive and essential for their
users, namely that of three-dimensional space and naturalistic human movement.
In this research the PI will test the hypothesis that graded whole-body tactile
feedback can help humans learn or relearn important body postures and motions.
To this end, she will augment commercial human motion tracking with a suit of
modular tactile actuators (tactors) that provide spatially-registered
naturalistic real-time feedback on the way in which each limb segment should be
moved, emulating the light touch of a physical therapist, teacher, or coach.
Through collaboration with a clinical researcher the PI will focus in this
project on rehabilitation for apraxic stroke patients. Our current understanding
of stroke indicates that these patients cannot accurately estimate the pose of
their limbs when performing purposeful movements, so the PI will augment their
motion practice with continuous tactile guidance about the 3D location and
magnitude of any configuration errors. Determining the efficacy of this approach
will advance our knowledge of healthy vs. impaired human motor control, and will
also improve our understanding of the way in which humans process certain types
of tactile signals. Development of the novel modular tactor system will provide
insights on the effectiveness of voice-coil tactors and the range of sensations
they can create. In the course of testing the project's primary hypothesis, the
PI will employ human-subject experiments to determine which system design
methods best succeed at helping stroke patients recover. The project will be
organized into low- and high-level thrusts, each of which will be spearheaded by
a doctoral student. The PI's prior work on haptic contact feedback will help her
successfully lead this project, as will the support and resources of relevant
experts at the University of Pennsylvania, at nearby Moss Rehabilitation
Research Institute, and at Engineering Acoustics, Inc., a leading tactor
company.

Broader Impacts: This project will have immediate relevance to stroke
rehabilitation, with excellent potential for positive impact on society in the
longer term through application to a variety of exciting topics in human-
centered computing, especially computer-mediated scenarios in human motion
guidance, such as athletic motion training and haptic virtual environments. The
PI will strive to conduct this research so as to enhance its appeal to students
from groups that are typically underrepresented in computer science and
engineering, especially women.