* 0915996
* MCS: Reconstructing and  Inferring Topology and Geometry from Point Cloud Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 462,000.00

Point cloud data (PCD) is pervasive across numerous areas in science and
engineering. This project addresses two issues, namely reconstruction in three
dimension and inference from PCD in high dimensions. In reconstruction, the
problem of approximating a three dimensional shape from its PCD is considered.
This problem becomes hopeless from computational view point for shapes sitting
in high dimensional spaces. Here, the project focuses on inferring topological
and geometric properties of the hidden object from its sampled representation
rather than reconstructing it completely.

A successful implementation of this project will enable many areas of science
and engineering to enhance their scope in modeling, analyzing, prototyping, and
visualizing input data with assurance of accuracy. Designing machine parts in
automotive industry, creating virtual environments with buildings, simulating
cracks and shocks in scientific studies are few examples where new algorithms
are needed for reconstructing shapes in presence of non-smoothness. This will be
addressed in the reconstruction section of the project. Various scientific and
social studies such as the ones in medicine, economics, climate, disease control
produce data that presumably sample a hidden parameter space (a manifold). They
will benefit from the research on the topology and geometry inference section of
the project.