* 0915388
* AF:Small:Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Problems in Protein Structure Studies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Christopher Bailey-Kellogg, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2012
* USD 224,999.00

The research involves the design and analysis of efficient algorithms for
fundamental problems that arise in studies of the three-dimensional structures
of proteins. Graph-theoretic problems underlie these studies, since protein
structures are naturally (and sufficiently) represented by graphs that have
vertices for the individual amino acid residues and edges between close pairs.
However, graph-theoretic formalisms lead to computationally hard optimization
problems, further complicated by extensive amounts of noise in experimental
data. Motivated by specific challenges in nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and other protein structure studies, the project addresses two
significant algorithmic problems: identifying correspondences between a pair of
graphs where one is a significantly corrupted version of the other, and
determining three-dimensional coordinates for the vertices of a graph, given
approximate, noisy distance measurements for its edges.

The first algorithmic problem is a form of graph matching, and the project
focuses on developing efficient search algorithms to uncover correspondences,
with random graph models to rigorously analyze the algorithms and study
threshold phenomena characterizing robustness to noise. In an application to
analysis of NMR data, one of the graphs represents the protein and the other the
data, a noisy, ambiguous set of atomic interactions; the goal is to match the
NMR-identified interactions with specific atomic interactions in the protein.
The second algorithmic problem is Euclidean embedding for sparse geometric
graphs, and the research involves development of algorithms to render such
graphs amenable to low rank distance matrix reconstruction methods, generalizing
the reconstruction methods to exploit the underlying geometric structure and
account for the confounding noise structure. In the NMR setting, the graph
represents NMR-probed through-space atomic interactions, and the goal is to
compute structures consistent with the experimental data and biophysical
constraints. Both problems are fundamental to numerous other significant
applications in protein structure studies.