* 0915966
* CIF: Small: Optical Diffusion Tomography, with Application to in Vivo Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2013
* USD 376,582.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical
Diffusion Tomography, with Application to In Vivo Fluorescence Resonance Energy
Transfer Imaging &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kevin Webb, Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical sensing and imaging will continue to
become more important for in vivo medicine. In most cases, light can be modeled
with a diffusion equation, and the reconstruction of images based on this model
is the basis of optical diffusion tomography (ODT). Enhanced contrast can be
achieved with targeting of a fluorophore to cancer cells, for example, and
targeted anti-cancer drugs can be delivered. Another molecular imaging
opportunity involves fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) parameters.
FRET has proved to be of immense value in the study of chemical transport into
cells and the underlying cause of disease, and by coupling to ODT (FRET-ODT),
there is the opportunity to transfer this knowledge to in vivo studies. While
substantial progress has been made in various ODT modalities, the achievable
resolution and the computational burden impede effective applications. More
efficient imaging strategies are thus essential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research involves the development of a method for deep tissue imaging of FRET
parameters (FRET-ODT) and fast, accurate and robust methods for optical
diffusion tomography. The recent demonstration by the Webb group that it is
possible to image FRET parameters using heavily scattered light is being
expanded into a method for imaging FRET in vivo. This involves a solution for
the intramolecular FRET parameters with both rigid and flexible linkers that are
incorporated as unknown sources in a diffusion equation representation for the
donor fluorescence. Multigrid algorithms are being developed and applied to
fluorescence imaging and FRET-ODT. A model-based non-iterative image
reconstruction method, that has proved to substantially reduce computation time
in preliminary studies, is being applied to image FRET kinetic parameters.