* 0915725
* RUI: The Influence of Network Structure on Sex Disparities in Scientific Collaboration: Commercial Innovation in the Life Sciences
* SBE,SBE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Kjersten Bunker Whittington, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 12/31/2013
* USD 115,675.00

This research examines the influence of network structure on sex disparities in
scientific collaboration. It incorporates data on the collaboration networks of
the national population of biotechnology inventors and those from a variety of
organizational settings (including public research organizations, pharmaceutical
companies, and government laboratories) across a thirty-year period (1976-2002).
The results should provide direct causal linkages between network mechanisms and
gendered outcomes in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Previous research on sex differences in social connectivity
suggests that women and men assume qualitatively different patterns of
interaction in their work settings. These network theories of influence on
women's performance suggest that a key mechanism in the production of sex
disparities manifests itself through the ties and connections that women make,
or are able to make, in workplace settings. Little is known about the ways in
which network mechanisms might be operating to produce differences in outcomes
across scientific settings, however. It is not clear what types of networks
support women's collaboration and whether those factors differ from those that
support men's collaboration. And while it has been shown that sex disparities in
scientific productivity appear to differ across organizational settings --
specifically, in more horizontally-organized work settings as compared with more
hierarchical ones. The mechanism for these differences has not been clearly
identified. Greater insight into the stratification processes of women and men
in science can be gained by studying how organizational forms affect the way
collaborative work is structured across sectors. The premise of the proposed
study is that the differing structures of collaboration in particular
organizations or industries not only influences men and women scientists?
opportunities for finding collaborators, but the subsequent influence of these
connections on productive work more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transformative nature of this research lies in the integration of network
theories of social structure and current insight in work on gender and
occupational dynamics within a national innovation context. In addition, this
research employs novel research methods that extend our current approaches to
network analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This project has
significant implications for current discussions on the causal factors bringing
about sex disparities in science and innovation, and also for the larger
theoretical literature on networks and social structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research establishes whether network mechanisms
across organizational forms result in decreased innovation by women. As such, it
provides insights into how policy can be targeted to fully engage women in
science and contribute fully to national scientific innovation.