* 0915157
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Securing Multilingual Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gang Tan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 281,048.00

Most real software systems consist of modules developed in multiple programming
languages. Different languages differ in their security assumptions and
guarantees. Consequently, even if single modules are secure in some language
model and with respect to some security policy, there is usually no uniform
security guarantee on a whole multilingual system. This project focuses on low-
overhead techniques for providing security guarantees to software systems in
which type-safe languages such as Java interoperate with native code. Native
code is developed in low-level languages including C, C++, and assembly
languages. Although often used in software projects, native code is notoriously
insecure and is a rich source of security vulnerabilities. The PIs are
developing a two-layered approach to alleviating security threats posed by
native code to type-safe languages: (1) Binary rewriting tools and their
verifiers are being incorporated into the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) for
rewriting and verifying native modules at the machine-instruction level to
enforce security policies; (2) A safe dialect of C for interoperation with Java
is being designed; with the help of programmer annotations, the safety of
programs in this dialect can be statically verified. The outcome of this project
will enable popular platforms such as the JVM and .NET and other major
programming languages (e.g., Python, OCaml, etc.) to incorporate native modules
safely. The developed principles will also be applicable to web browsers and
operating systems in which there is a need of extending them with untrusted low-
level modules without comprising host security.