* 0915528
* DAT: A Visual Analytics Approach to Science and Innovation Policy
* SBE,SBE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Martin Ribarsky, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 06/30/2014
* USD 848,984.00

A fair amount of work, such as map of science visualization methods, has been
done in the area of visualization of scientific discovery and of the
relationships among scientific disciplines. Typically, both the maps and the
portfolio analyses are derived from keyword and/or citation analyses of research
papers coupled with categorizations by discipline of journals and conferences.
Although useful, this analysis is far from complete because it does not consider
the full text of the papers, just the keywords and citations, and does not
consider other sources, such as research project abstracts compiled by funding
agencies and reports published by agencies or research organizations. A complete
analysis upon which to base policy decisions, evaluations of the effectiveness
of funding, or assessments of the direction of a field would include an
integrated analysis of all these sources.

Intellectual Merit: This project develops a visual analytics approach to perform
these assessments of multiple sources, including full text of papers, abstracts,
and reports that have not been available before. The approach is exploratory,
supporting investigations where one does not initially know precisely what one
is looking for but rather uses tools that permit the discovery of new relations
and the uncovering of insights. Once found these insights can be looked at in
more detail, tested with the gathering of new evidence, and then be the basis of
further insight discovery. To support this exploratory investigation, analyses
must be, at least in initial stages, unstructured and automated. The most
significant words and relations must bubble up from the texts themselves. They
must be automated because there will be too many text documents to assess in any
other way. Yet, the analyses cannot be completely automated; there must be a
place to insert understanding, to organize and make sense of what is found and
to direct the investigation in a new direction based on what is found. This is
exactly where interactive visual analytics makes its contribution, revealing to
investigators detailed results in understandable visual displays, providing
clues to prompt further exploration, and supporting organization and annotation
of collected evidence and pursuit of new hypotheses. This project also looks at
changes and trends over time in the paper and other collections. Detailed
examination of changes and trends over time brings out behaviors that may be
caused by new or newly revealed directions chosen by researchers in a field, by
changes in funding, or by new and important applications. The approach that is
applied is based on analyses of streaming text organized into stories, reports,
or similar narrative structures. The streaming stories are organized on the fly
into ?event clusters? of similar stories that begin and end at particular points
in time and have detailed time structures. The goal is to identify motivating
events such as new funding directions, new directions established by leaders in
a field, as well as new interdisciplinary thrusts across fields.

Broader Impacts. As indicated by the recent Visualization of Scientific
Discovery Workshop (September, 2008) with sponsorship by NSF, the DOE Office of
Science, collaboration by several NSF divisions, and broad attendance by program
managers, researchers, and business innovators, there is a significant interest
and need for visualization. In addition, the just-released Science of Science
Policy Roadmap (November, 2008) from the Office of Science and Technology Policy
and the National Science and Technology Council prominently mentions the need
for visualization, and in particular visual analytics, tools for science
analysis. This report also mentions the need for assessment of these tools for
real science analysis applications. This project is positioned to meet both
these needs by pursuing the development and assessment of a broad, flexible
visual analytics approach for real science and innovation policy applications
with real data.