* 0915104
* Collaborative Research: An ADT Proposal: Fast Point Cloud Surface Reconstruction Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Sharpley, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,001.00

Sensor data is vital to the security, economy, and health of our nation.
&lt;br/&gt;It comes in various formats and resolutions: visual, radar,
lidar,&lt;br/&gt;laser scans, and multiple forms of medical imagery. There have
emerged several approaches to the representation and visualization of point
cloud data. These developments have typically been ad hoc, applying to one form
of sensor data. This project will develop new generic processing platforms based
on the following key ingredients. The quality of fit will typically not be made
in the least squares sense but instead will be determined by metrics closely
tied to the application domain such as variants of the Hausdorff metric. The
representation platform will be a fusion of implicit (level set) methods
together with multiscale (wavelet like) decompositions. The selection of optimal
representations will be made with the aid of techniques from nonlinear
approximation and learning theory. The proposed research will be applicable to
generic point cloud data, but an emphasis will be placed on processing point
cloud data that arise in applications such as autonomous navigation of robots
and micro air vehicles, identification of sources of biological and chemical
contaminants and climate modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information
about the world in which we live is obtained through sensors. These include
medical imagery (MRIs, CAT scans), navigational tools (Radar, LIDAR, Sonar),
surveillance (satellite imagery, video). The data gathered by such sensors
consist of an array of point values (called a point cloud). This data must be
processed and visualized in order to extract the important information they
hold. Such processing is done literally millions of times a day and how it is
done determines the quality of the information. Most&lt;br/&gt;current methods
for processing and visualizing sensor data are built on old ideas from image
processing and fail to capture many of their important features such as their
geometry and topology. This project proposes new sophisticated techniques from
mathematics and computer science to create more effective data processing. The
development will be made with an eye towards the critical issues of accuracy and
the speed at which the processing and rendering take place. A particular
emphasis in the proposal is on terrain data&lt;br/&gt;which are used daily in
navigation, especially for robotics and unmanned air surveillance.