* 0915876
* RI: Small: Robot Grasping of Deformable Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Yan-Bin Jia, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 06/30/2013
* USD 369,795.00

Deformable objects are ubiquitous in our daily life. The ability to manipulate
them is an important measure of the robot's intelligence and dexterity. This
project investigates several fundamental issues related to robot grasping of
deformable objects (which has remained an underdeveloped research area): (i)
efficient and interactive modeling of grasp formation; (ii) analysis and
synthesis of two-finger squeeze grasps with understanding of the role of
elasticity; (iii) resistance to and absorption of external forces; and (iv)
sensing and force control for grasp achievement. A graphical interface called
GraspDeform is under development not only for simulation purpose, but also to
assist the design, evaluation, and implementation of grasping strategies over a
robot platform. The PI hopes to acquire in-depth understanding about the
geometry and mechanics of grasping in the presence of deformation, by examining
issues like contact, strain energy, elasticity constants, and friction. The
project intends to demonstrate that a robot hand can reliably grasp various
deformable objects. Results are expected to considerably widen up research on
manipulation of deformable objects, influence deformable modeling in computer
graphics, and have potential applications in medical and home robotics. They
will be disseminated to the research community via the development of an
interactive website on deformable grasping.

