* 0915611
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Specification Language Foundations for Modular Reasoning Methodologies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* David Naumann, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 257,949.00

This project extends the semantical foundations of object-oriented (OO)
&lt;br/&gt;languages to cover methodologies for modular reasoning. Modular
reasoning &lt;br/&gt;means verifying software components assuming the
specification of each &lt;br/&gt;used component. Modularity is important for
productivity and scalability, &lt;br/&gt;but is difficult to achieve for OO
software. To support modular reasoning, &lt;br/&gt;researchers have proposed
several methodologies that restrict programs and &lt;br/&gt;their
specifications. The goal of this project is to provide a theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;basis that supports practical techniques for justifying and using
&lt;br/&gt;methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides guidance
for the designers of programming and &lt;br/&gt;specification languages,
verification logics, and associated tools. The &lt;br/&gt;results will improve
the utility and extensibility of verification tools &lt;br/&gt;--- a key goal of
the Verified Software grand challenge. Software &lt;br/&gt;developers may
benefit from the integration and harmonious interoperation &lt;br/&gt;of best-
practice methodologies. This project is potentially &lt;br/&gt;transformative:
it aims to enable combinations and customizations of &lt;br/&gt;methodologies by
tool users, scalable to real applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved OO
programming methodologies may greatly improve programming &lt;br/&gt;practice,
especially in applications needing high assurance, reliability, &lt;br/&gt;and
security. This will benefit society, which increasingly depends on
&lt;br/&gt;computing systems built using OO components. Unification of
methodologies &lt;br/&gt;and streamlining of tools also facilitates the
education of software &lt;br/&gt;developers.