* 0915574
* NeTS: Small: Algorithms and System Support for Monitoring of Amorphous Phenomena with Dynamic Signatures in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Qi Han, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 348,000.00

Emerging applications using wireless sensor networks for critical areas such as
environmental monitoring and emergency response highlight the urgent need for
more powerful algorithms for tracking amorphous events or phenomena with dynamic
identities. Several such events may combine into a large whole or one event may
disintegrate into several smaller ones. Current efforts in event detection and
tracking have mostly assumed that either events remain distinct, never crossing
or passing too close together to become indistinguishable, or if they do cross
that they were identified prior and nothing new has formed. This project
addresses the research challenges in designing and implementing a system that is
capable of tracking events with or without well-defined shapes and identities in
the presence of stringent energy constraints and unpredictable network failures
posed by wireless sensor networks. Specific research objectives include: design
and evaluation of algorithms that detect and track any types of events including
amorphous phenomena with dynamic signatures and events that possess a static
shape with a crisp boundary; design and evaluation of algorithms that form and
reform communication structures around events of interest; and development of an
integrated system that provides interfaces to high level application tasks to
execute on each identified event. Successful completion of this project will
result in a rich set of tools that can be used by applications monitoring all
different types of events. The tools will be made publicly available via the
Internet. This project provides opportunities for recruitment of female students
and undergraduate students.