* 0915914
* III: Small: SPAL3D -- Design and Implementation of a Type System for Three-Dimensional Spatial Data in Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Markus Schneider, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 354,292.00

The research objective is the design and implementation of a new formal data
model and type system called Spatial Algebra 3D (SPAL3D) for three-dimensional
(3D) spatial data in database systems and geographical information systems.
While these systems so far focus on two-dimensional spatial entities only,
despite many potential geoscience applications, three-dimensional (3D) data
modeling and data management have so far been rather neglected. This research
and education project explores the fundamental properties and the structure of
complex 3D spatial data from a data management and database perspective,
identifies their most important operations and predicates, and supports their
treatment in data modeling, representation, storing, manipulation, and querying.
SPAL3D is extensible, makes it possible to add new types and operations, and can
be plugged into different DBMS. The solution approach is based on three three
fundamental pillars: (i) an abstract data model (SPAL3D-A) for the rigorous,
mathematical definition of a comprehensive type system (algebra) for 3D spatial
data including volumes, surfaces, and 3D lines, (ii) a discrete data model
(SPAL3D-D) for the design of effective geometric data structures for the 3D
spatial data types of SPAL3D-A and on efficient geometric algorithms on these
data structures for the 3D operations and predicates of SPAL3D-A, and (iii) the
implementation and database integration (SPAL3D-I) of the data structures and
algorithms of SPAL3D-D as abstract data types into several extensible DBMS data
models and query languages.

The results of this research are expected to have broad impact on applications
in areas where the third dimension of spatial data plays an important role.
Examples are geographical information systems, meteorology, hurricane research,
environmental monitoring, pollution control, soil science, water supply and
distribution, fishery monitoring and simulating, geology, soil engineering and
mining, earthquake modeling and simulation, to name only a few. The educational
component of this project includes specialized classes that focus on important
aspects of this project, the creation and use of new GIS educational materials,
and the involvement of students in interdisciplinary research. The project
Website (http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~mschneid/Research/FundedResearchProjects/NSF-
IIS-0915914/spal3d) is used for the dissemination of research results,
educational material, publications, generated data sets, produced software, and
other information of interest.