* 0915718
* AF:Small:Coarse-Grained Algorithms for Soft Matter
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* N Aluru, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Number: 0915718&lt;br/&gt;Title: AF:Small:Coarse-Grained Algorithms for
Soft Matter&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: N. R. Aluru
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft matter (e.g.
liquids, polymers, biopolymers, etc.) plays an important role in many emerging
technologies in engineering and science. The physics of soft matter at
macroscopic scales has been investigated for many decades. There is now a good
understanding of how to manipulate soft matter at macroscopic scales. The
physics of soft matter in confined environments (referring to the behavior of
soft matter in constrained spaces) can be quite different from its macroscopic
counterpart and many fundamental issues still remain. Soft matter in confined
environments can find applications in important technological areas such as
energy, health, sensing, sequencing, separation, etc. As a result, soft matter
in confined environments has now gained significant interest from the scientific
community. Various computational techniques can be used to understand physical,
chemical and biological properties of soft matter. However, many of the existing
techniques are either too expensive or not accurate enough to perform detailed
studies. The objective of this research is to develop advanced computational
algorithms to enable a detailed understanding of soft matter in confined
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though quantum-mechanical and atomistic
molecular dynamics simulations can be used to understand soft matter in confined
spaces, they are limited to small length and short time scales. Mesoscopic
methods, such as Brownian dynamics, Monte Carlo, lattice Boltzmann, dissipative
particle dynamics, etc., can be used to overcome the limitations of quantum and
atomistic molecular dynamics simulations, but, structural accuracy is a key
issue in these methods. The objective of this research is to develop novel
coarse-grained algorithms where inter-atomic potentials, widely used in
atomistic simulation of soft matter, are directly incorporated into advanced
physical theories. The inter-atomic potentials will be coarse-grained to ensure
structural consistency. The inter-atomic potential based coarse-grained
algorithms will be applied for several challenging examples of soft matter. The
accuracy of the structural prediction from coarse-grained algorithms will be
compared with that from atomistic simulations. It is anticipated that inter-
atomic potential based coarse-grained algorithms will be many orders of
magnitude faster than purely atomistic simulations and the development of such
algorithms will not only elucidate the fundamental aspects of soft matter in
confined spaces, but will also lead to rapid computational prototyping of
various applications of soft matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is at the cross-roads of several engineering and science disciplines. As a
result, the development of inter-atomic potential based coarse-grained
algorithms for soft matter will impact several disciplines and application
areas. Some of the application areas that could benefit from this fundamental
research are energy, sensing, health, sequencing, separation, etc. The main
efforts of this project will result in the education of students and
postdoctoral associates in the highly interdisciplinary area of soft matter. The
research results from this project will be broadly disseminated via journal and
conference publications, presentations at meetings and workshops, software,
courses taught by the PI in the Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering
and summer schools offered at University of Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;