* 0915993
* ADVANCE Partnerships for Adaptation, Implementation and Dissemination (PAID):   Broadening Participation - The 2009 ADVANCE PI Meeting
* EHR,HRD
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2010
* Janet Bandows Koster, Association for Women in Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kelly M. Mack
* 02/28/2010
* USD 385,079.00

The Association for Women in Science seeks funding to organize and host the 2009
meeting of the ADVANCE Principal Investigators (PI). Our goal is to organize a
2.5day meeting from September 30 to October 2, 2009 for PIs of ADVANCE IT,
ADVANCE PAID, and ADVANCE IT-Catalyst grants and include a broader audience of
the leadership of professional discipline related societies as well other
diversity stakeholders in the STEM disciplines.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: A Program Committee will be appointed as soon as funding is
secured. We have structured the Program Committee to include PIs of current
ADVANCE awards, an NSF ADVANCE program officer, representatives of professional
societies, members of the AWIS Board, and one at large member and have received
confirmations from most of the individuals identified for membership. The
Program Committee will be charged with developing a meeting within the broad
outlines defined below&#894; identify symposium topics and organizers as well as
keynote speakers&#894; develop an invitation list and dissemination plan to
ensure broad participation from professional societies&#894; and work with the
grant PI on issues which affect the quality of the program (e.g. budget). In
addition to a subcontract for the conference management, we seek funds to
support AWIS staff involvement in the project&#894; travel for members of the
management team to DC for one preconference meeting&#894; and office expenses.
We anticipate that our outreach to new constituencies may require targeted
travel support. Many of the largest and most influential professional societies
are based in the Washington DC area&#894; however, the society officers are STEM
academics located throughout the nation. We have therefore budgeted for travel
grants to support involvement of up to 40 individuals who will be either
representatives of minority serving institutions or society officers.

BROADER IMPACTS This project is novel in that it is designed to carry the
innovations funded by the ADVANCE program and the insight gleaned from research
into an expanded realm, to new audiences that influence the national
conversation on how to meet the coming challenge of providing a technical
workforce for US industry, higher education, government, and other work sectors.
AWIS will leverage its already established liaison network with the discipline-
related professional societies to extend the dissemination and adoption of
strategies to improve recruitment and retention of women and underrepresented
minorities. Professional societies are the logical first audience for this
initiative, both because they play a central role in the advancement of women in
STEM and because AWIS has recently assumed a lead role in convening disciplinary
societies around diversity issues.