* 0915861
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Hybrid Opportunistic Computing for Green Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Xiaosong Ma, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2013
* USD 320,000.00

CSR:Small:Collaborative Research: Hybrid Opportunistic Computing for Green
Clouds

Xiaosong Ma (PI) and Xiaohui Helen Gu (co-PI), NCSU (lead institute) Wuchun Feng
(PI), Virginia Tech

Abstract

On-demand, service-oriented cloud computing infrastructures continue to increase
in popularity with organizations. Three observations motivate us to investigate
running high-throughput, data-intensive tasks as background workloads on these
cloud infrastructures. First, the rapid growth in hardware parallelism leaves
more residue resources to be exploited. Second, the ``incremental power usage''
of piggybacking a secondary background workload onto the foreground workload to
utilize those residue resources is relatively low. Third, the advances in GPGPU
(General-Purpose GPU) processing enable a novel coupling of concurrent
workloads.

This project will explore a new computing model of offering cloud services on
active nodes that are serving on-demand utility computing users. We plan to (1)
assess the efficacy of resource sharing between foreground and background
workloads and investigate the relationship between their resource usage patterns
and the benefit and cost of their mixed execution; (2) develop scheduling and
load management middleware that performs dynamic background workload
distribution considering the energy-performance tradeoff; and (3) exploit the
use of GPGPUs for cloud services on active nodes that are running foreground
workloads mainly on the CPUs.

Our research will explore a revolutionary change in the use of cloud computing
and may influence their hosting organizations' future resource configuration and
planning to create greener clouds. The research will be closely integrated with
education-oriented cloud platforms at NCSU. The PIs will also leverage their
established services and connections to increase the participation of women and
minority students and to promote students' interactions with industry partners.