* 0915473
* III:  Small: High Throughput Real-Time Astronomy: Discrimiation, Dissemination and Decision
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roy Williams, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irene Qualters
* 08/31/2013
* USD 479,100.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;We propose to build
an event-driven network, a continuation of the NSF VOEventNet, applying the
event-driven technology to Astronomy. There are many large surveys coming online
(CRTS, PTF, LOFAR, LIGO, LSST, SKA etc) that are scanning the sky repeatedly, to
find what is changing and why. Observation can be caused by supernova, gamma-ray
burst, blazar eruption, planetary microlensing, or other exciting astrophysics.
In many cases, rapid dissemination and follow-up observation is the key to
discovery, to get magnitudes and multi-wavelength
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new VOEventNet will ingest events from
multiple event surveys, professional and amateur and disseminate them for free
at all levels, from child to major observatory. Trigger (selection) criteria can
be built precisely and individually. When an event arrives, these triggers
(boolean functions) are run to decide if an action is to happen or not. These
triggers will work with heterogeneous, multi-sourced data. Actions can include
the moving and operating of a sensor, either human or robot guided, sending
messages, fetching data to build a data portfolio, and running classification
rules. Further, actions can cause the generation of new events, thus inducing a
workflow. Events come in real time from an automated pipeline of a major sky
survey or from a small college observatory or amateur astronomer doing follow-up
observations. These authors have previously registered the semantic meaning of
the parameters that will be used in the actual events, so that automated systems
can be effective, real-time, semantically aware decision-makers. The new
VOEventNet will use an international standard (VOEvent) to be part of the global
event infrastructure, exchanging events with other event brokers, such as NASA's
GCN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;We propose here a cyber-
infrastructure for events that are created from real-time sensors. The sensor
could be many things, for example a radiation detector at a port. Excess click
rate of the Geiger counter creates an event that is automatically assembled with
other data, such as country of origin, and decisions made, perhaps using an
additional sensor, the results triggering another action. Only important events
merit human attention. This "Sensor-Event-Action" pattern occurs in many other
fields of science and engineering, for example early earthquake warning, network
provisioning when an internet story becomes viral, leak or pollution detection,
and many others.