* 0915121
* Numerical optimization for large-scale experimental design of ill-posed inverse problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* James Nagy, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 117,025.00

Inverse problems play a key role in a variety of fields such as computer vision,
geophysics and medical imaging. The proposed work focuses on experimental design
of ill-posed inverse problems; a field that has not received sufficient
attention in the inverse problems community where the focus is usually on the
analysis of the inverse problem given the data. Obviously, this already imposes
restrictions on the quality of the possible solutions. On the other hand, the
objective of the funded work is the study of an important pre-data acquisition
question: How should the experiment be conducted to obtain optimal data given
the physical constraints and available resources? Solutions to this question
require techniques from numerical optimization, statistics and inverse problem
theory. In particular, the problem of experimental design can be cast as a
bilevel optimization problem that consists of two nested optimization problems.
The proposed work is a study of design criteria and new numerical algorithms for
the solution of the bilevel optimization problems that arise from
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will address the fundamental
question of experimental design of ill-posed inverse problems. Such problems
arise in the design of any practical experiment or instrumentation from
geophysical and medical imaging to the production of better vision systems. This
work will develop new criteria for the design and development of new algorithms
that will enable its numerical implementation. The results of the research will
be applied to electromagnetic imaging, a field that is routinely used in
geophysics and medical physics. &lt;br/&gt;It will lead to better experiments
that yield better images and as such, will assist in the decision making of
geoscientists and and physicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;