* 0915223
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Coupled Wave, Current, Sediment Transport and Morphological Evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Clinton Dawson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 279,188.00

The goal of this project is to significantly advance the capability to
accurately predict sediment transport and seabed morphology in three-dimensional
coastal and estuarine environments. To achieve this goal, state-of-the-art
algorithms for fully coupled wave, current, sediment transport and bed
morphology will be developed, analyzed, and implemented. The development of this
system will require a better mathematical and physical understanding of the
tightly coupled nature of the various processes involved. In addition, it will
require computational strategies which address the accurate and efficient
coupling of interdependent processes that exhibit a wide range of spatial and
temporal scales?both within the fluid motion itself and between the fluid and
bed motion. Robust and highly parallelizable algorithms for the various
processes will be developed based on discontinuous Galerkin finite element
methods, and the coupling of these algorithms will be carefully investigated in
order to maintain numerical accuracy, efficiency, and local mass conservation of
sediment and fluid phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying and predicting the
morphodynamics of the coastal zone requires a detailed knowledge of winds,
waves, currents, sediment transport and, ultimately, the resulting morphological
changes of the seabed that occur as a result of these processes. The erosion and
deposition of bed sediment can have a major detrimental impact on the coastal
population, infrastructure and environment. For example, during Hurricane
Katrina, four major levee breeches that occurred during the storm were a result
of foundation-induced failures caused by scour. The transport of sediment is
closely tied to a number of other issues in the coastal zone, including water
quality and related ecological concerns, beach and shoreline erosion, and the
maintenance of navigation channels and harbors through dredging
activities.&lt;br/&gt;Accurate estimates of expected sediment transport and bed
morphological changes can aid greatly in the long-range planning and management
of coastal and estuarine environments. In this project, the investigators will
develop a fully coupled wave, current, sediment transport and bed morphology
model system. Such a system will significantly advance the capability to
accurately predict sediment transport and seabed morphology in coastal and
estuarine environments.&lt;br/&gt;From this research, a better scientific
understanding of the complex interrelations among hydrodynamic, transport and
morphodynamic processes in the coastal zone will emerge, which can lead to more
informed decision-making that will help protect the coastal population and
infrastructure. The developed software of the project will also provide a
computational infrastructure that can be used in many other applications within
the area of computational modeling. Furthermore, the technology developed under
this project will be disseminated to government agencies such as NOAA and the US
Army Corps of Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;