* 0915394
* TC:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Protecting Commodity Operating Systems from Vulnerable Device Drivers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vinod Ganapathy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

Device drivers constitute a large fraction of the code in commodity operating
systems. Over 35,000 drivers with over 112,000 versions exist for Windows XP,
while over 3.1 million lines out of 5.4 million lines of the Linux kernel is
device driver code. As several recent exploits against device drivers show,
drivers are rife with bugs that compromise system
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploits against device drivers are dangerous
because commodity operating systems execute drivers in kernel address space. A
compromised driver can modify kernel data structures or execute arbitrary code
with kernel privilege. Prior techniques that protect commodity OS kernels from
device drivers either suffer from low performance or are limited to specific
classes of vulnerabilities, such as memory errors.&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by user-
mode driver frameworks, this project applies a three-pronged approach to the
problem of protecting kernel data from vulnerabilities in device drivers. First,
this project will develop techniques to monitor kernel data structure updates
initiated by device drivers and ensure that they do not compromise the integrity
of these data structures. Second, it will develop techniques to limit driver
access to kernel memory via DMA without requiring hardware support yet taking
advantage of it if available. Third, it will develop new techniques for
recovering from compromised drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These techniques are
applicable to legacy device drivers on standalone commodity operating systems
and require minimal changes to the operating system. In addition, they impose
negligible overheads on common-case performance of device drivers and are thus
practical for use even with high-throughput devices. &lt;br/&gt;