* 0915567
* CSR:Small: Online System Anomaly Prediction and Diagnosis for Large-Scale Hosting Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xiaohui Gu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 405,000.00

Large-scale hosting infrastructures have become important platforms for many
real-world systems such as cloud computing, enterprise data centers, massive
data analytics, and web hosting services. Unfortunately, today's large-scale
hosting infrastructures are still vulnerable to various system anomalies such as
performance bottlenecks, resource hotspots, service level objective (SLO)
violations, and various software/hardware failures.

The goal of this project is to assess the viability of an online predictive
anomaly management solution for large-scale hosting infrastructures. We will
develop novel techniques for 1) performing light-weight online system anomaly
prediction; 2) providing self-evolving anomaly prediction models to achieve
high-quality prediction for real-world dynamic systems; and 3) performing
speculative, ``hot" system anomaly diagnosis that search possible anomaly causes
and suggest corrective actions while the system approaches the anomaly state.
Our research will carry out evaluation by conducting experiments and case
studies with our industrial partners on realistic platforms.

Students supported by this project will gain experience with development and
testing of robust real-world hosting infrastructures through interactions with
our industrial partners, through internships and onsite experimentation. This
work will advance diversity by involving students from under-represented groups.
Particularly, the prototype developed in this project will be applied to the
Virtual Computing Lab (VCL) at NCSU, a platform for providing a better
educational experience for K-12, community colleges, and universities.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

