* 0915236
* Collaborative Research: MOD and TLS: A Predictive Simulation Model of Competitive Dynamics in Innovation
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Riitta Katila, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 187,046.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How does competition influence
innovation? This project takes a unique approach to understand this question: It
develops an evidence-based simulation platform to understand how competitive
dynamics influences innovation. This approach contributes new knowledge to
technology strategy and a transformative new tool for science and technology
policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There are three main
contributions. First, a computational multi-agent search theory is developed and
evaluated for environments with complex interactions of competing agents. The
results help understand search for innovation when multiple agents search
simultaneously, and develop computational representations of it. Second,
qualitative observations on innovation and competition are made through
structured interviews in a real technology-based industry. The goal is to
provide theoretically informed answers to an enduring question in technology
strategy: What are the most effective firm-level innovation search strategies in
competitive markets? Third, a software research tool called ASaP is developed by
integrating insights from the computational and strategy components of this
project. This simulation tool makes it possible to perform "live" simulations of
industry data, similar to physical simulations in engineering. Scholars and
public policy makers can use this tool to understand the ways in which their
recommendations are likely to play out and therefore help design effective
policies to manage competition and simultaneously promote
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of the project can
be used not only by academics to analyze competition and innovation rigorously
but also by business and policy analysts to improve innovativeness of firms and
industries, and thus ultimately advance economic productivity. To foster such
progress, the ASaP tool is made publicly available to scholars and practitioners
through a website, thus lowering the barrier of entry to computational analysis
in general, and predictive analysis of business data in particular. During the
current difficult economic times, it is more important than ever to remain
innovative, both to resist deeper downturn and to bring our technology-based
economy back to a growth trajectory. The ASaP tool serves as a live model of the
data, and thus can be used to identify the sequence of events that generated the
data, and modified to find out what would have happened if some factors (such as
supporting the livelihood of certain players in the industry over others) had
been different. In essence, ASaP makes it possible to study the archival data
interactively in laboratory-like experiments, and it can therefore lead to
insights on science and technology policy that are not possible to obtain
otherwise.