* 0915812
* HCC-Small: Collaborative Research: Assessing Technology Requirements for Preventing Teamwork Errors in Safety-Critical Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Meredith Tinti, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2012
* USD 74,836.00

The staff in trauma centers are faced with complex problems under time
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;Despite the introduction of standard protocols, the
diversity of injuries that can occur&lt;br/&gt;requires a coordinated approach
to the evaluation and treatment for each patient.&lt;br/&gt;Trauma care involves
complex teamwork under time pressure, and teamwork errors&lt;br/&gt;endanger
patient care and increase costs. Our proposed ethnographic study will
use&lt;br/&gt;observation and detailed analysis of video recordings of trauma
resuscitations to&lt;br/&gt;determine the nature and extent of teamwork errors
in a trauma center. This detailed&lt;br/&gt;study of complex teamwork will
uncover the causes of teamwork errors in collaborative&lt;br/&gt;high-risk
environments. Methods will be developed to understand how teams work
and&lt;br/&gt;where difficulties arise. This work will yield detailed
descriptions of errors and their&lt;br/&gt;causes, a taxonomy of teamwork
errors, information on how to improve team&lt;br/&gt;performance, and guides to
the use of technology for teamwork support. It extends the&lt;br/&gt;level of
detail of ethnographic research so that we can achieve precision in
the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of procedures which are difficult to monitor
automatically but where&lt;br/&gt;step-by-step records are essential to detect
the causes of errors.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and improving the effectiveness of
trauma teams has direct benefit to&lt;br/&gt;society. Further, complex
collaborations are ubiquitous in modern enterprises and these&lt;br/&gt;results
could improve collaborations both in terms of quality and productivity
across&lt;br/&gt;organizations. In addition, this work will serve to develop the
skills needed by a new&lt;br/&gt;cadre of researchers with knowledge of
computer-supported collaborative work,&lt;br/&gt;video-content analysis and
cooperative research.