* 0915670
* DAT: Scientists and Engineers as Agents of Technological Progress: Measuring the Returns to R&amp;D and the Economic Impact of Science &amp; Engineering Workers
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Richard Freeman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 399,998.00

The project develops datasets and methods to estimate the economic return to
R&amp;D spending and the impact of both R&amp;D and non-R&amp;D science and
engineering (S&amp;E) workers on economic outcomes, and to assess the effects of
the mobility of S&amp;E workers on economic productivity. Existing data from
multiple government (Census, NSF, BLS) and other archival sources are matched
and linked together to create an "Amalgamated Science and Engineering Impact"
(ASEI) database. The database includes measures of output and inputs of firms
and plants, R&amp;D expenditures of firms and universities, patents of firms and
other organizations, S&amp;E employment by industry and geography, and the
mobility of workers across firms and plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
connects diverse measures of S&amp;E activity to outcomes in the economy overall
and in different sectors. The project produces:&lt;br/&gt;1. Updated estimates
of private returns to R&amp;D, not only in the widely studied manufacturing
sector, but also in other sectors of the economy, and for small firms as well as
large firms; &lt;br/&gt;2. New estimates of the social returns to R&amp;D, using
measures of "spillover" R&amp;D stock based on geographic region, industry
sector, and technology proximity;&lt;br/&gt;3. Estimates of the effect of own
R&amp;D and spillover R&amp;D on patent output and market value of firms, and of
the effect of patents on productivity of firms;&lt;br/&gt;4. Estimates of the
impact of non-R&amp;D S&amp;E employment on firms? productivity, patents, and
other outcomes;&lt;br/&gt;5. Estimates of the mobility of S&amp;E workers across
firms and plants, and of the effect of S&amp;E worker mobility on economic
outcomes;&lt;br/&gt;6. Estimates of the impact of R&amp;D on the changing demand
for labor with different skill levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this research inform policymakers about the
contribution of science and engineering to the U.S. economy, consistent with the
goals of the NSF SciSIP program. The research provides evidence on the changing
returns to R&amp;D in the U.S., on the mobility and impact of S&amp;E workers in
the U.S. economy, and on the future demand for labor with different types of
skills. The new ASEI database and analytical methods enable rapid updating of
estimated results on a regular basis. This can provide policymakers with timely
data and analysis on policy issues of interest.&lt;br/&gt;