* 0915661
* AF: Small: Fundamental Geometry Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gabriel Taubin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

In this project new discrete geometry processing algorithms based on simple and
intuitive discretizations of low order differential forms will be developed,
along with the supporting theoretical foundations, and it will be shown that the
proposed approach unifies and extends a number of existing mesh relaxation
algorithms used for denoising, subdivision, and interactive shape deformation.
In the classical theory of surfaces, a surface patch is defined by a smooth
3D-valued parameterization function of two parameters, which in the language of
differential forms is referred to as a 3D-valued differential 0-form. The two
partial derivatives of one of these 0-forms are three dimensional vector fields
which define a 3D-valued differential 1-form. A simple approach to surface
deformations is to modify this 1-form by locally stretching and rotating its two
component vector fields, and then solve for a parameterization function whose
partial derivatives match the component vector fields of the modified 1-form.
The discrete analog of this approach for deformations of graph embeddings and
polygon meshes will be developed. The first fundamental form measures distances
and angles on a smooth surface, and the second fundamental form measures how the
surface normal varies, i.e., curvature. The two fundamental forms are invariant
to rigid body transformations of the surface, and satisfy the Gauss-Codazzi-
Mainardi (CDM) equations. Conversely, given two second order symmetric tensor
fields satisfying together the CDM equations, the Fundamental Theorem of Surface
Theory asserts that: 1) there exists a surface immersed in three-dimensional
Euclidean space with these fields as its first and second fundamental forms; and
2) the surface is unique modulo rigid body transformations. The analog theorem
for polygon meshes will be formulated and proven, including extensions to
manifold meshes of arbitrary topology, meshes with border, and even non-manifold
meshes. New contributions to the mesh compression literature will be made by
exploiting the relationship between reconstruction algorithms and connectivity-
preserving mesh compression schemes.