* 0915956
* III: Small: Avoiding Contention on Multicore Machines
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kenneth Ross, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,978.00

To take full advantage of the parallelism offered by a
multicore&lt;br/&gt;machine, one must write parallel code. Writing parallel code
is&lt;br/&gt;difficult. Even when one writes correct code, there are
numerous&lt;br/&gt;performance pitfalls. For example, an unrecognized data
hotspot could&lt;br/&gt;mean that all threads effectively serialize their access
to the&lt;br/&gt;hotspot, and throughput is dramatically
reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a generic framework
for performing&lt;br/&gt;certain kinds of concurrent operations in parallel.
Infrastructure is&lt;br/&gt;provided to perform those operations in a scalable
way over the&lt;br/&gt;available threads in a multicore machine, automatically
responding to&lt;br/&gt;hotspots and other performance hazards. The goal is not
to squeeze&lt;br/&gt;the last drop of performance out of a particular platform.
Rather,&lt;br/&gt;with the planned system a programmer can, without detailed
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;of concurrent and parallel programming, develop code that
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;utilizes a multicore machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves the development of algorithms and data
structures&lt;br/&gt;designed for the efficient parallel execution of generic
code&lt;br/&gt;fragments. The primary focus is on data intensive operations as
would&lt;br/&gt;typically be found in an in-memory database engine. Critical
research&lt;br/&gt;questions include how to design generic multi-threaded
operators that&lt;br/&gt;can be applied to a range of computations, how to avoid
cache&lt;br/&gt;thrashing, and how to implement the framework in a way that
works on a&lt;br/&gt;variety of hardware platforms. Performance improvements in
throughput&lt;br/&gt;of an order of magnitude are expected relative to naive
solutions that&lt;br/&gt;suffer from contention. The project aims to achieve
performance close&lt;br/&gt;to that of hand-tailored expert-written parallel
code, with far less&lt;br/&gt;coding effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has immediate applications in both commercial and&lt;br/&gt;public-domain
database systems where performance improvements would&lt;br/&gt;enhance the
experience of database system users, and reduce hardware&lt;br/&gt;and energy
requirements for a given level of
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmability improvements would allow
programmers without expertise&lt;br/&gt;in parallel programming to effectively
use multicore machines. The&lt;br/&gt;project also provides the focus for an
advanced-level course on&lt;br/&gt;database system implementation for multicore
machines. The software&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure will be made available for
research use by others.&lt;br/&gt;