* 0915107
* Regularization Methods for Positron Emission Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Johnathan Bardsley, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 87,404.00

It has been well-established in the positron emission tomography (PET)
literature that statistical imaging algorithms for tracer density reconstruction
are superior to fully analytic methods, such as filtered back projection.
However, statistical imaging methods require some form of regularization, which
is usually implemented in one of two ways: via the truncation of an iterative
method applied to the maximum likelihood estimation problem, or by solving a
penalized maximum likelihood (PML) problem. The investigator's focus in this
proposal is on the later approach. PML methods are attractive because they allow
for the incorporation of prior information via the choice of the regularization
function. One of the investigator's main objectives in this proposal is the
development of edge-preserving regularization functions for PET stemming from
discretized diffusion operators. Edge-preservation in PET is important due to
the fact that tracer densities change abruptly at tissue boundaries. However, a
main issue with the PML approach is the need for methods for choosing the
regularization parameter. A second main objective of this proposal is the
development of regularization parameter choice methods for PET. Finally, a
statistical analysis of the resulting reconstructions is a goal of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most Americans are familiar with the terms 'X-ray',
'CAT scan', and 'MRI'. Indeed, the use of machines to view the interior of the
human body is so commonplace in this day-and-age that the challenging
mathematics and computation behind their use is largely unknown and
unappreciated. In this proposal, the investigator seeks to improve upon existing
computational methods for the medical imaging modality known as positron
emission tomography (PET). In PET, which is often used in cancer diagnostics,
the patient ingests a substance called a tracer that concentrates in various
regions throughout the body. The tracer then radioactively decays, resulting in
the emission of photons (i.e. light) outside of the body. The PET machine counts
the emitted photons and then reconstructs the amount of tracer at each location
within the patient. In this proposal, the investigator focuses on the
development of computational methods for PET that yield higher resolution
reconstructions than current approaches.&lt;br/&gt;