* 0915410
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Chronological Assessment of Fortification Features at Co Loa
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* Nam Kim, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2010
* USD 14,970.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Lawrence H. Keeley, Nam Kim will analyze data
gathered during his archaeological excavations at the Dongson Era (ca. 600 BC -
AD 200) site of Co Loa in northern Vietnam's Red River Valley. The data will be
used in Kim's dissertation to address questions concerning the origins of
Vietnamese civilization and the emergence of ancient, state-level societies. The
proto-urban Co Loa site is located 15 km from modern-day Hanoi, and much of Co
Loa's fortification system of three massive earthen rampart walls still remains
standing today. Approximately 600 hectares in size, Co Loa site's outermost
enclosure measures 8 kilometers in circumference. These monumental
fortifications undoubtedly required significant labor and investment for
construction, clearly indicating centralized authority and the possibility of
regional internecine warfare leading to Co Loa's political consolidation. This
has ramifications for anthropological theories concerning the emergence of
ancient states and the conditions that foster this process. Though researchers
have developed theoretical models based on various case studies, models have
largely overlooked data from Vietnam.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Regarding the
region's history, questions remain as to when Co Loa and its walls were
constructed, and by whom. According to Vietnamese oral traditions, Co Loa was
the capital of the semi-legendary Au Lac Kingdom (ca. 257 - 207 BC), serving as
the first capital of Vietnamese civilization. In contrast, Chinese Han
historical texts offer a conflicting depiction. The imperial Han began
colonizing the region at 111 BC, and their records contend that "barbarians"
inhabited the area, generally denying in situ and indigenous cultural and
political sophistication prior to colonization. Accordingly, researchers
continue to debate when the capital city and its walls were built. Until these
conflicting assertions are tested against the material record, they will remain
hypothetical, thus leaving unresolved debates concerning the origins of
Vietnamese civilization and ethnogenesis. Hence, the chronology of Co Loa is of
crucial importance, and this project involves laboratory analysis of artifacts
and organic materials to address when its walls were constructed as well as the
sociopolitical conditions that precipitated construction. Do Co Loa's
fortifications, monumental scale, and political complexity predate Chinese
colonization? Did political and social sophistication originate indigenously,
through colonization by the Chinese, or through some combination of both? Only
archaeological data can furnish the empirical evidence and chronological
assessments critical to these questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this
project holds broader significance beyond the research questions outlined above.
It will serve as a foundation for future, continued collaboration between
American and Vietnamese researchers. In recent years, Vietnam has become
increasingly open to collaboration with foreign researchers, but relatively few
American archaeologists have worked in Vietnam. Prior to Mr. Kim's fieldwork at
Co Loa, no foreigner had ever been allowed to excavate at the ancient capital.
Additionally, this collaboration will continue to engage various Vietnamese
constituencies, from academics to local community members at Co Loa. The
proposed project is especially salient given current efforts to obtain UNESCO
World Heritage site status for Co Loa. The importance of this project to the
Vietnamese was evinced by visits to the excavation site by government officials
during the fieldwork, such as the former president of Vietnam and the current
deputy prime minister.