* 0915619
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards a Paradigm-shift in Distributed Information Processing: Harnessing Group-structure and Interaction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Sandeep Sadanandarao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2012
* USD 249,984.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a vision to fully realize the
potential of next generation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;communication network
infrastructure based on ubiquitous sensor nodes,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;this
research introduces new architectures and strategies,
for&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;distributed in-network information processing, which
directly harness:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the structure of the objective
performance metrics for information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;processing, the
structure of the underlying statistical dependencies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;in the
information gathered by sensing nodes, the topology of
the&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;network, and the capability for bidirectional
interactive information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;exchange. This research advocates a
two-fold paradigm shift in network&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;information processing:
1) a shift from the traditional goal of data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;transport to
the goal of function computation and 2) a shift
from&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;unidirectional models of information flow to
interactive information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;flow models. This research supports
the education of future scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and engineers by
integrating research advances with curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;development
and supports diversity by encouraging the participation
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;women and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops two
fundamentally new classes of code ensembles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;for interactive
information processing. The first is based on&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;techniques
from abstract algebra and random graph theory to
capture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;the structure of functions being computed at
destinations. The second&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;is based on techniques from
communication complexity and multiterminal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;information
theory to capture interactive structures of
information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;flow in the network. These new code classes
have superseded the&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;performance of random code ensembles
used in network information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;theory since its inception.
This research develops new analytical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;frameworks and tools
to uncover the fundamental performance limits
of&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;interactive information processing in sensor networks.
This research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;facilitates the cross-pollination of research
fields by providing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;components which build bridges between
four fundamental areas, namely,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;information and coding
theory, abstract algebra, random graph theory,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and
communication complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;