* 0915131
* International Collaborative Circumpolar Archaeological Project (ICCAP): Joint Russian-American research in Kamchatka
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Ezra B. Zubrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2013
* USD 845,796.00

International Collaborative Circumpolar Archaeological Project (ICCAP): Joint
Russian-American research in Kamchatka

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The ICCAP research project's main goals are 1) the extent to which the
circumpolar area has been subject to varying trends of environmental change in
the past and 2) the similarities and differences in human adaptations to these
changes in different areas of the Arctic. The research team will employ a ?well
tested? collection of direct and indirect proxies of climate and human
adaptation based upon methods from dendro-climatology, palynology, geo-
chemistry, climate modeling, ethnography, and archaeology. The very successful
predecessor of this project, SCENOP of the European Science Foundation BOREAS
program, created and compared two data sets from northern Finland and northern
Canada. ICCAP creates a new data set from northern Russia and combined with its
predecessor will provide three approximately equidistant placed research areas
encompassing the entire the circumpolar world. For each research area, the
employing the same research teams using the same methodologies at the same
levels of resolution makes possible meaningful comparisons from uniformly
collected data. ICCAP adds to the existing ?two way? (Finland, Canada)
comparison, two new ?two way? comparisons (Finland, Russia) (Canada, Russia), as
well as making truly three way comparisons among the data sets (Finland, Canada,
Russia). Because of the circum-global geographic locations, Yli-ii Finland,
Wemindji Quebec Canada and Ust-Kamchatsk, Kamchatka, Russia, ICCAP will make
circumpolar generalizations. By using a long-term perspective on human responses
to climate and environmental change in these three coastal circumpolar locations
between 60 and 78 degrees N latitude and 7000 to 3000 years ago, the researchers
proposed to answer some basic questions that are important for science and
policy. For example: in the long run, several thousand years, are yearly average
temperatures more important than seasonal temperatures? Are absolute temperature
and precipitation changes more important than the variability in temperature and
precipitation? Does diversity of environmental change result in increasing
stability or diversity of human adaptation? Are there thresholds that must be
met in environmental change or in human adaptation before changes occur? Does
human adaptation to environmental or climate change need to be reactive or may
it successfully be pro-active? The circumpolar north widely is seen as a
critical observatory for understanding environmental change and human
adaptation. This is particularly true today since the effects of global warming
are most clearly visible in the Arctic where ?reality has exceeded
expectations?. Ultimately, this project proposes to explain the past and the
potential range of human resilience when faced with global and local
environmental changes. Taken from the circumpolar perspective, the research team
believes that this information has the potential to aid policy makers as they
enter into debates on new post-cold-war partnerships, and set policy concerning
such issues as energy, post-colonial governance, and strategy.