* 0915834
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Suppressing Sensitive Aggregates Over Hidden Web Databases: a Novel and Urgent Challenge
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Nan Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 230,795.00

The objective of this project is to understand, evaluate, and contribute towards
the suppression of sensitive aggregates over hidden databases. Hidden databases
are widely prevalent on the Web, ranging from databases of government agencies,
databases that arise in scientific and health domains, to databases that occur
in the commercial world. They provide proprietary form-like search interfaces
that allow users to execute search queries by specifying desired attribute
values of the sought-after tuple(s), and the system responds by returning a few
(e.g., top-k) satisfying tuples sorted by a suitable ranking
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While owners of hidden databases would like to
allow individual search queries, many also want to maintain a certain level of
privacy for aggregates over their hidden databases. This has implications in the
commercial domain (e.g., to prevent competitors from gaining strategic
advantages) as well as in homeland-security related applications (e.g., to
prevent potential terrorists from learning flight occupancy distributions). The
PIs' prior work pioneered techniques to efficiently obtain approximate
aggregates over hidden databases using only a small number of search queries
issued via their proprietary front-end. Such powerful and versatile techniques
may also be used by adversaries to obtain sensitive aggregates; thus defending
against them becomes an urgent task requiring imminent attention. This project
investigates techniques to suppress the sensitive aggregates while maintaining
the usability of hidden databases for bona fide search users. In particular, it
explores a solution space which spans all three components of a hidden database
system: (1) the back-end hidden database, (2) the query processing module, and
(3) the front-end search interface. The intellectual merit of the project is
two-fold: (1) problem novelty: it initiates a new direction of research in
information privacy of suppressing sensitive aggregates over hidden databases,
and (2) solution novelty: it investigates a variety of promising techniques
across the three components. The outcomes of this research have broader impacts
on the nation's higher education system and high-tech industries. Parts of the
project will be carried out by students of the University of Texas Arlington and
George Washington University as advanced class projects or individual research
projects.