* 0915128
* Collaborative Research: Computational problems in heterogeneous nanomaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* John Lowengrub, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 365,716.00

In many applications ranging from energy to biomedicine, nanocrystalline
materials, such as quantum dots and nanowires, promise to yield revolutionary
new technologies. The realization of this promise is hindered by the challenges
inherent in reproducibly fabricating nanocrystalline materials with controlled
morphologies and compositions. These nanomaterials are typically heterogeneous
and consist of alloys with multiple constituents. While there has been much work
on formulating conditions under which spatially ordered nanocrystals with nearly
uniform shapes and sizes may be produced, a quantitative description of the
mechanisms that determine the spatial distribution of the alloy components,
which is crucial to device performance, is still poorly understood. The
investigators and their collaborators address this issue in this proposal. They
study the nonlinear dynamics of heterogeneous, strained strained nanocrystalline
materials by (1) developing and applying state-of-the-art adaptive numerical
methods to large-scale computation and (2) performing analytical, numerical and
modelling studies of important constituent processes. The investigators focus on
the dynamic, nonlinear coupling among shape, elastic stress and composition in
the context of (i) the dynamics of thin film alloys and quantum dots under far-
from-equilibrium processing conditions where there may be bulk and surface
transport of the different constituents, as well as phase decomposition; and
(ii) the coarsening dynamics and stability of capped nanocrystals. The cap
material is needed in applications to provide the confinement potential for
charge carriers as well as passivation against the external environment. These
problems are characterized by the presence of multiple constitutive components,
bulk-surface interactions, complex pattern formation and/or singularities (i.e.
spatial complexity). The mathematical models involve high-order spatial
derivatives (e.g. up to sixth-order), evolving free boundaries and highly
nonlinear interactions that make analysis and simulation difficult, particularly
in 3D. The highly nonlinear nature of these problems makes fast, accurate and
robust numerical methods essential to their
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline alloy materials have physical
properties that make them ideally suited for a wide range of potential
applications including advanced electronic and magnetic devices as well as
biological and chemical sensors. The properties of nanoscale devices are
determined both by the spatial composition of the heterogeneous nanocrystal
components and the nanocrystal geometry. Recent advances in experimental
techniques have enabled the characterization of nanoscale composition variation
in nanocrystals.&lt;br/&gt;However, a quantitative understanding of these
variations remains elusive and yet is critical to device performance. The
investigators and their collaborators address this issue by developing new
mathematical models, theory and computational methods that make it possible to
characterize and quantify the interactions among nanocrystal shape, elastic
stress and composition. The investigators also consider capped nanostructures
where the cap material provides protection from the environment that is needed
in many applications including the use of nanocrystals in silicon-based
electronic circuits. The interaction among the nanocrystalline and capping
materials introduces additional complexity. These problems are multidisciplinary
and progress requires the combined expertise of the investigators in materials
science and applied and computational mathematics. Through this study, the
investigators provide guidance in the quantitative interpretation of
experimental measurements of composition variation in nanocrystals and suggest
optimized processing conditions to achieve desired device shape, composition and
performance. The project establishes a new collaboration between two
institutions and provides interdisciplinary training of two Ph.D students and
one postdoctoral researcher. In addition, the investigators build on their
recent success and continue to develop and teach a course on crystal and
epitaxial growth for gifted high school students as part of the Calif. State
Summer School for Mathematics and Science (COSMOS) at UC Irvine. This course
also helps to recruit new math and science majors and enhance the participation
of high school students in research.&lt;br/&gt;