* 0915735
* TC: Small:  Layered Modeling for Design, Analysis, and Implementation of Trusted Platform Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Stephen Tate, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 498,090.00

As trusted computing technology, and trusted platform modules (TPMs) in
particular, become widespread, it is important to build a strong foundation for
applications built on this new technology. This project is a structured effort
to develop a model for trusted platform applications, using a layered approach
that supports rigorous analysis and security proofs, and provides a basis for
modular software design that directly maps to the analytic model. Project
activities are organized toward five specific objectives: development of
concrete mathematical models for rigorous security analysis; analysis of
specific widely-applicable functionality built on TPMs; development of a timing-
accurate, extensible TPM simulator; study of TPM use in applications; and
development of a layered security framework corresponding to the formal model.
The project's approach is guided by two philosophies: keep it structured and
simple (the principle of economy of mechanism) and justify constructions through
rigorous analysis and proof.

Despite the growing use of trusted computing technology in modern systems, there
has been very little formal research regarding this new technology. This project
will fill this gap and provide a basis for future work in both using trusted
computing technology and in designing extensions to the current technology. In
addition to publications describing the knowledge gained, software for the
extensible TPM simulator and the layered trusted computing framework will be
distributed freely. The project will also result in the creation of a website
that will be a portal for information on trusted computing and related research,
and will include the development of a course on trusted computing and trusted
platforms that will prepare both undergraduates and graduate students for work
in this emerging area.