* 0915482
* Modelling Schumpeter's Theory of Innovation as a Basis for Innovation Policy: An Experimental Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* John Gero, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 373,724.00

Any science requires the following elements: phenomena; empirical data that
describe those phenomena; hypotheses at various levels to connect, explain and
then predict those phenomena; and the ability to test those hypotheses, Once a
hypothesis is able to predict it becomes a theory.

The science of innovation policy must be based on a platform that permits the
formulation and testing of key hypotheses. Constructing such a platform is
typically a challenge in the social sciences as there is often no ability to
carry out experiments in the same way that the physical sciences can, i.e, in a
laboratory. This project develops an approach to test hypotheses and theories by
creating a computational laboratory within with hypothesis evolution and
hypothesis testing can take place.

Intellectual Merit Much of the current research in the science of innovation
policy is focused on collecting empirical data. There is a surprising paucity of
testable models and theories. There are two directions from which models can
come: empirical observation or inference based on a qualitative understanding of
a field. Schumpeter, in his analysis of the success of capitalism, has produced
one of the most explanatory qualitative theories of innovation known as
?creative destruction?. This theory of innovation takes a Lamarckian view of the
evolution of products and processes, but it has yet to be formally modeled and
tested. The contribution of this research is to advance the modeling and testing
of Schumpeterian creative destruction.

In doing so the project creates a laboratory, which can then be used more
generally. The laboratory is designed to synthesize concepts from the disparate
fields of: innovation theory; creative production; computational sociology;
social multi-agent systems; situated cognition; emergence; and data mining. Both
the laboratory and the results it produces provide the foundations for a science
of innovation policy: science that produces testable results, and one that can
test hypotheses.

The laboratory uses computational sociology, a technology based on social multi-
agent systems that allow for emergent behavior, as the modeling tool. Agents are
generators and receivers of ?products? and take up novel, useful and unexpected
products. The overall system behavior is structured to be emergent and is
captured using data mining techniques. Because the system connects inputs to
outputs at the overall system level, the effects of different types of
innovation policies can then be tested in the laboratory.

Broader Impact The broader impacts of this research lie in multiple dimensions.
The project will involve PhD students and give other students experience with
this kind of integrative research. It will make connections to computer science,
cognitive science, social science and design science. The results from this
project provide as feedback to design and innovation educators initially at
George Mason University and then to design and innovation educators at other
universities through the use of demonstrations. The results from this project
are disseminated via conference papers, journal papers and a website. The
laboratory is publicly available publicly so that others can experiment with it
through the website.