* 0915178
* Development of fast and high-order accurate time-domain PDE solvers for complex geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mark Lyon, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 47,003.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops fast
and high-order accurate time-domain Partial Differential Equation (PDE) solvers
for complex geometries, in particular focusing on unconditionally stable methods
that utilize advanced Fourier series techniques for boundary conditions
involving normal derivatives. A recently developed methodology uses a fast
Fourier continuation method which effectively extends a non-periodic function to
a periodic function over a larger domain. This high-order accurate approximation
allows for the fast evaluation of the function and its derivatives by means of
Fast Fourier Transforms. This Fourier Continuation is utilized within an
Alternating Direction scheme in the new methodology for PDE solution, FC-AD,
which is high-order accurate, is unconditionally stable, and can be directly
applied to complex domains without prohibitive domain mappings or coordinate
transformations. These FC-AD techniques have the potential to be transformative
and produce solutions to problems that would otherwise be intractable, in
particular, for any type of wave propagation problem (Radar/Sonar, Ultrasound,
Communications ...) where traditional techniques are limited by ?pollution? type
errors. Due to the alternating directions though, the application of the FC-AD
techniques to problems with normal derivatives provides a significant challenge
that this project seeks to overcome. The boundary conditions will be
incorporated using fast boundary integral equation methods at each time step on
a sub-problem and then incorporated back into the full solution. The resulting
coupled methods will represent a broad class of general high-order solvers that
are applicable to a range of PDEs including non-linear problems, where boundary
integral methods alone will not work. The development will include the
consideration of several important applications, including the computation of
stress concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant problems remain unsolved
because current algorithms are not yet efficient enough to obtain sufficiently
accurate solutions. The new computational tools being developed in this project
provide a new more efficient means to solve some of the basic equations used in
scientific models and to be able to solve them efficiently on the complex
geometries encountered in real life. Due to the FC-AD?s ability to solve PDEs
directly on complex geometries without domain mappings or the costly mesh
generation of standard techniques, it has the significant potential to make a
contributions in many scientific fields. By providing numerical solutions with
better accuracies, a greater understanding of the underlying physical processes
can be developed, better predictions can be made from the models, and
engineering designs can be further optimized to provide greater safety or reduce
costs. Potential application areas include: Radar/Sonar, Biomedical applications
including cancer treatments, Communications, Stress and Failure analysis, and
Fluid Dynamics applications including pollution transport and aspects of climate
change.