* 0915374
* NetSE: Small: Cooperation and Security for Opportunistic-Coding-based Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sheng Zhong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 304,179.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A recently developed technology, called opportunistic coding, can greatly
improve the e±ciency of wireless networks. However, the problems of cooperation
and security in opportunistic-coding-based (OCB) wireless networks have not
received su±cient attention. Here cooperation problems are the problems
introduced by the existence of sel¯sh nodes in the wireless networks, while
security problems are the problems introduced by the existence of adversarial
nodes. This work is to design and implement solutions that can provide
cooperation and security guarantees for OCB wireless networks. The research work
can be divided into studied of three problem areas, namely the cooperation
problems, the security problems, and the interplays of cooperation and security.
The work also includes the dissemination of related knowledge to students at
various levels.

Intellectual Merit: The results of this work will signi¯cantly improve OCB
wireless networks in terms of cooperation and security. Furthermore, these
results will also have broader theoretical interests, because a part of the
techniques to be developed will be applicable to economic incentives problems in
other settings as well.

Broader Impacts: First, the developed technical solutions will bene¯t the
society because they make it possible to widely deploy OCB wireless networks to
environments with sel¯sh or adversarial nodes. Second, the educational component
of this work will build capacity in cooperation and security at various levels.