* 0915235
* Texas Algebraic Geometry Seminar (TAGS) 2009; College Station, TX; Spring 2009
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Frank Sottile, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 04/30/2010
* USD 8,690.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Rojas, J. Maurice
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS - 0915235 &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas A&amp;M
Research Foundation &lt;br/&gt;Title: Texas Algebraic Geometry Seminar (TAGS)
2009&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas Algebraic Geometry Seminar (TAGS), sponsored
by Texas A&amp;M University, the University of Texas at Austin, and Rice
University, is designed to enhance both the educational and the research
atmosphere of the growing community of Texas algebraic geometers and researchers
in related areas. This proposal is for partial funding of this important
conference. The conference is committed to bring researchers of national and
international stature to Texas to discuss research in algebraic geometry and to
interact with mathematicians from Texas and surrounding states. A principal area
of mathematics, algebraic geometry is also the source of algorithms behind much
of modern technology. For example, a thorough technical understanding of
cryptography, coding theory, or quantum computing is impossible without the
language of algebraic geometry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference makes it
possible for the community of algebraic geometers from Texas and surrounding
states (a large geographic region) to meet and share new results on a regular
basis. This both stimulates individual research and generates productive
cooperative efforts between schools. Also, the conference is dedicated to the
development of graduate students and young faculty in algebraic geometry.
Finally, the unique environment at Texas A&amp;M, where classically trained
algebraic geometers work on applied problems with impact in areas such as signal
processing and computer science, insures that the conference will have an impact
that goes well beyond mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;