* 0915842
* NeTS:Small: A Joint Layered Coding Scheme for Unified Reliable and Secure Media Transmission over Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Chang Wen Chen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2012
* USD 329,070.00

The objective of this research is to develop a joint layered coding scheme to
meet the needs of end-to-end simultaneous error protection and secure media
transmission over wireless networks. The approach takes advantage of the
hierarchical structure of digital media compressed by media coding standards,
such as JPEG2000 and MPEG-4/H.264. Simultaneous error and authentication
protection is a significant goal of this project.

The intellectual merit of this research lies in the integrated investigations
into authentication strategy and data unit selection; joint media error and
authentication protection; and optimal rate allocation for all components of the
media transmission system. The proposed joint layered coding scheme has the
potential to enable the design of both error protection and authentication
within the same framework and to achieve optimal resource and bandwidth
allocation.

With respect to broader impact, the integration principle investigated here has
the potential to be applied to more general system designs where components are
competing for limited resources. Also, the layered coding-based integrated media
authentication scheme has the potential to be resilient to denial-of-service
attacks, thus addressing an important security need. By working with the Center
of Excellence in Information Assurance Research and Education at SUNY at
Buffalo, this project provides undergraduate students with hands-on training
opportunities.