* 0915396
* CSR:Small:Failure-Aware Monitoring and Management of Online Availability and Performance for Dependable Computing Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Song Fu, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 185,058.00

CSR:Small:Failure-Aware Monitoring and Management of Online Availability and
Performance for Dependable Computing
Clusters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational clusters and clusters coalitions
continue to grow in scale and in the complexity of their components and
interactions. In these systems, component failures become norms instead of
exceptions. Failure occurrence as well as its impact on system performance and
operation costs is becoming an increasingly important concern to system
designers and administrators. The success of petascale computing will depend on
the ability to provide dependability at scale. Failure management and failure-
aware resource management are crucial techniques for understanding emergent,
system-wide phenomena and self-managing resource
burdens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a set of innovative
techniques on failure-aware monitoring and management for system-level
availability assurance. In this project, we will develop a framework along with
mechanisms for failure-aware autonomic resource management in large clusters,
quantify the temporal and spatial correlations among failure occurrences for
proactive failure management, and devise resource allocation and reconfiguration
approaches to deal with the system availability and productivity issues caused
by component failures that occur frequently in modern large and complex
clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include the
publication and dissemination of research results and developed software
artifacts. The research enables collaborative research opportunities for
students and faculty in the program, as well as undergraduate science and
engineering students in New Mexico. Research-based materials about dependable
high-performance computing will also be instilled into the undergraduate and
graduate computer science and engineering curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;