* 0915010
* CSR:  Small:  Data-Adaptable Reconfigurable Embedded Systems (DARES)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jerzy Rozenblit, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 469,405.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant increases in application
complexity demand processing requirements that exceed the performance achievable
by current processors using software only implementations. For example, recent
multimedia standards, such as JPEG2000, have significantly increased
computational demands compared to previous standards. In an effort to alleviate
the cost of developing software and/or hardware solutions capable of fully
supporting such standards, many define several profiles ? specific settings for
various configurable parameters ? that reduce the level of complexity needed to
implement a specific profile. However, the number and variability of profiles
even within a single domain still precludes traditional hardware implementations
as a viable option for most applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data-
Adaptable Reconfigurable Embedded Systems (DARES) project focuses on developing
hardware/software codesign and reconfigurable computing methodologies driven by
data-adaptability. This data-adaptable approach allows designers to directly
model data configurability of an application, thereby enabling a solution that
can be dynamically reconfigured at runtime based on the profile of incoming
data. The DARES project combines modeling techniques for capturing the data
configuration space with new hardware/software codesign techniques to synthesize
reconfigurable circuits and communication resources directly from the
data/application model. The resulting hardware/software implementation provides
the flexibility of software with the performance of
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the DARES project will provide a
new design approach for dealing with the trend towards applications with
increasing flexibility and configurability and will provide new methodologies
for exploiting the reconfigurability of FPGAs beyond current approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;