* 0915238
* Efficient Solution of Advection Dominated PDE Constrained Optimization Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,825.00

The aim of this proposal is to develop, analyze and implement
optimization&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that integrate multilevel iterative solvers,
adaptive mesh refinement methods, &lt;br/&gt;and so-called `all-at-once' methods
for the solution of optimization problems &lt;br/&gt;governed by advection
dominated partial differential equations (PDEs). &lt;br/&gt;The presence of
strong advection in the governing PDE creates many challenges for&lt;br/&gt;the
numerical solution of these optimization problems, beyond the challenges
already&lt;br/&gt;encountered in the numerical simulation of single advection
dominated PDEs and beyond&lt;br/&gt;the many difficulties in solving PDE
constrained optimization problems with weak or no advection. &lt;br/&gt;One
reason for the additional challenges arising in the optimization context is the
presence of the &lt;br/&gt;so-called adjoint equation, which is also an
advection dominated PDE, but with advection &lt;br/&gt;given by the negative of
the advection in the governing equation. This can cause significant
&lt;br/&gt;and perhaps unexpected differences in the behavior of discretization
schemes and iterative &lt;br/&gt;solvers when they are extended from the
application to single advection dominated PDEs &lt;br/&gt;to the solution of PDE
constrained optimization problems. This research will analyze &lt;br/&gt;the
sources of these differences, their impact on the quality of computed
solution&lt;br/&gt;and on the efficiency of solution algorithms. Another goal is
to devise modifications of &lt;br/&gt;multilevel iterative solvers, adaptive
mesh refinement methods, and so-called KKT solvers to&lt;br/&gt;make them robust
against the presence of advection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
important real-life applications such as the shape optimization of technological
devices, &lt;br/&gt;the optimal control of systems, and the identification of
parameters in environmental&lt;br/&gt;processes lead to optimization problems
governed by systems of advection dominated&lt;br/&gt;partial differential
equations. This research addresses mathematical and algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;issues
that are crucial for the reliable and efficient solution of these problems. It
will lead&lt;br/&gt;to a better theoretical understanding of the solution
properties of these optimization problems &lt;br/&gt;as well as to new
computational tools for their reliable and efficient solution. Furthermore,
&lt;br/&gt;it will provide training opportunities for students in an important
area of computational science.