* 0915035
* HCC: Small: Enabling Focus Cues in Stereoscopic Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Hong Hua, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 497,600.00

Although many different approaches to 3D displays have been explored for
decades, the dominant technology in practical use has been of the stereoscopic
type, which provides a sense of depth by presenting two perspective images, one
for each eye, of a scene from two slightly different viewing positions. A
problem inherent to this approach is the lack of correctly rendered focus cues,
which stems from the fact that the pairs of stereoscopic images are typically
presented on 2D flat surfaces at a fixed distance from the eye. As a result,
retinal image blur does not vary with the distances from an eye fixation point
to other points at different depths in the simulated scene, but remains
consistent with the fixed distance of the display surface. And the eye
accommodation depth tends to be at the fixed distance of the 2D display while
the eyes are forced to converge at different distances to view objects at
different depths. Psychophysical studies have suggested that these incorrect
focus cues may contribute to the compressed depth perception and visual
discomfort commonly reported when viewing stereoscopic images, which have
profound implications for adopting stereoscopic displays for a wide range of
applications. In this project, the PI will develop an alternative 3D display
based on depth-fused multifocal plane technology that offers more accurate
rendering of the focus cues than conventional stereoscopic displays. Instead of
focusing on the engineering aspects of developing a better 3D display, she will
pursue a human-centered approach wherein human observers participate in the
design process for a multi-modal 3D display platform that allows flexible
adaptation of the display along multiple display modalities with different
levels of focus cue accuracy, from the basic stereoscopic display mode to
advanced display modes with correct or partially correct focus cues. The PI will
carry out pilot experiments to validate the functions of different display
modalities and to evaluate the effects of focus cues on depth
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The new technology will offer
a display solution with higher depth perception accuracy, higher stereo acuity,
faster task performance, and less eye fatigue than currently available systems.
Project outcomes will furthermore provide a much-needed research tool that
supports investigation under controlled conditions of the various factors
potentially contributing to depth perception accuracy and visual fatigue, as
well as exploration of critical health issues such as the consequences for
vision development in children of protracted viewing of stereoscopic images.