* 0915069
* 2009 Summer School in Statistical Inference for Astronomers; June 8-13, 2009; Pennsylvania State University, College Park
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2011
* USD 33,359.00

AST-0915069 Babu

2009 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; June 8-13, 2009; Pennsylvania
State University, College Park

Astronomical research often involves imaging, photometric and spectroscopy
surveys of the sky producing terabyte to petabyte databases and billion-object
catalogs. While the scientific promise is tremendous, achieving the goals
depends critically on extraction of useful knowledge using statistical
inference, and especially the use of advanced statistical methods. Due to the
structure of undergraduate and graduate curricula, U.S. astronomers are not well
trained in statistics, and most of them learn elementary methods through books
written by and for physical scientists. Advanced methods are badly
underutilized: statistics is an available technology that should be tapped to
advance the needs of astronomy and astrophysics.

The 2009 Summer School for young astronomers in statistical inference at an
intermediate level helps to alleviate this educational gap, continuing the
intensive week-long Summer Schools in Statistics for Astronomers, initiated in
2005 by the group at Pennsylvania State. The school gives a broad exposure to
fundamental concepts and a wide range of resulting methods across many fields of
statistics. Experienced statistics professors will teach an innovative
curriculum, accompanied by software tutorials with applications to astronomical
datasets. This will have a substantial impact on the training of many young
researchers.