* 0915699
* NeTS: Small: A Practical and Efficient Trading Platform for Dynamic   Spectrum Distribution
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Haitao Zheng, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 269,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Historical static spectrum assignment has led to a critical spectrum shortage.
While new prominent wireless technologies starve for spectrum, large chunks of
spectrum remain idle most of the time under their current owners. With proper
economic incentives, spectrum redistribution based on an open market can
eliminate the artificial shortage. This project develops S-TRADE, an auction-
driven spectrum trading platform to implement the spectrum marketplace. S-TRADE
differs significantly from conventional FCC-style spectrum auctions that target
only a few large corporate players and take months or years to conclude.
Instead, S-TRADE serves many small players and enables on-the-fly spectrum
transactions. In essence, S-TRADE selectively buys idle spectrum pieces from
providers and sells them to a large number of buyers matching their individual
demands. By effectively multiplexing spectrum supply and demand in time and
space, the proposed marketplace also significantly improve spectrum utilization.
The design of S-TRADE focuses on achieving spectrum multiplexing/reuse to
improve spectrum utilization while guaranteeing economic robustness to encourage
player participation and minimize market manipulation. This project focuses on
tightly integrating novel algorithms of dynamic spectrum allocation with
economic mechanism design. The research outcomes deepen our understanding of the
way spectrum should be distributed and the role of economics in distributing it.
By integrating economics mechanism design with wireless networking, this project
forms an integral part of interdisciplinary training programs at both
undergraduate and graduate levels.

