* 0915148
* RI: Small: Randomized Feedback Motion Planning with Computational Lyapunov Certificates
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Russell Tedrake, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 06/30/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Recent advances in the direct computation of Lyapunov functions using convex
optimization make it possible to efficiently evaluate local regions of stability
for smooth nonlinear systems. These tools can be combined with randomized motion
planning algorithms to obtain new feedback motion planning algorithms which
probabilistically cover a bounded reachable state-space with verified regions of
stability; efficiently constructing a global feedback controller out of many
locally valid controllers. If successful, the proposed work will generate a
class of algorithms capable of computing covering feedback policies for
nonlinear systems with dimensionality beyond that of dynamic programming. In
addition, the algorithms operate directly on the continuous state and action
spaces, and thus are not subject to the pitfalls of discretization. By
considering feedback during the planning process, the resulting plans are robust
to disturbances and quite suitable for implementation on real robots.

Through both theoretical and experimental validation of these algorithms, this
work aims to have broad impact on the experimental control of nonlinear and
underactuated systems, including walking robots, aerial vehicles, and robots
which grasp and manipulate the environment. The algorithms and robotic
experiments will be integrated in the PI's graduate robotics curriculum and
outreach activities, and the algorithms will be disseminated through a software
distribution.