* 0915062
* High Relative Accuracy Iterative Algorithms for Large Scale Matrix Eigenvalue Problems with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 178,250.00

Eigenvalue computation is a fundamental problem in numerical&lt;br/&gt;linear
algebra. While there are numerous established algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for this,
they do not guarantee in general to compute, in a&lt;br/&gt;floating point
arithmetic, smaller eigenvalues to high relative&lt;br/&gt;accuracy. Indeed, the
relative errors of smaller eigenvalues&lt;br/&gt;computed by conventional
algorithms are proportional to the&lt;br/&gt;condition number of the matrix.
Research over the last two&lt;br/&gt;decades has resulted in several classes of
special matrices&lt;br/&gt;for which the eigenvalues/eigenvectors can be
computed to high&lt;br/&gt;relative accuracy (i.e. independent of the condition
number).&lt;br/&gt;All existing high relative accuracy algorithms, however,
appear&lt;br/&gt;to concern small (dense) matrices only. Yet, large matrices
are&lt;br/&gt;often inherently ill-conditioned and it is typically a
few&lt;br/&gt;smaller eigenvalues that are of interests. The goals of
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal are to study high relative accuracy
iterative&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for computing a few eigenvalues/eigenvectors of
a&lt;br/&gt;large symmetric positive definite matrix. The investigator
will&lt;br/&gt;develop algorithms for matrices arising in some
important&lt;br/&gt;applications such as discretization of differential
operators&lt;br/&gt;and dimensionality reduction in machine learning, where
special&lt;br/&gt;structure/properties of the matrices may be exploited
to&lt;br/&gt;achieve higher accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectral (eigenvalue)
analysis is a widely used mathematical&lt;br/&gt;tool in science and
engineering. Eigenvalues of differential&lt;br/&gt;operators describe the
natural vibrating frequencies of&lt;br/&gt;mechanical structures. Dimensionality
reduction of&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional data in machine learning often leads
to&lt;br/&gt;minimization of certain quadratic functionals, the solutions
of&lt;br/&gt;which are eigenvectors. Solving such eigenvalue problems
to&lt;br/&gt;high relative accuracy pose a challenge to existing
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the proposed works will not only advance
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;foundations and algorithm developments for large
scale&lt;br/&gt;eigenvalue problems, but also contribute to the general
areas&lt;br/&gt;of applied science/engineering and machine learning
by&lt;br/&gt;significantly improving the accuracy of the algorithms used
in&lt;br/&gt;these applications.