* 0915210
* International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring 2009: Transformational Change on Health Management and Materials/Structures Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2010
* USD 19,998.00

Structural health monitoring is a sensor dependent emerging technology, which
integrated advanced sensors and sensing systems with diagnostics, prognostics
and knowledge of material/structural damage characteristics to assess the health
condition of the structures. The health monitoring can be made while the
structure is in service, for prevention of man-made or natural catastrophes, to
minimize down time, and sustain performance, and to reduce maintenance costs. An
international workshop on Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) will be held at
Stanford University Sept 9-11, 2009. The workshop aimed at examination of the
state-of-the-art technology in structural health monitoring and at future
research program development. Distinguished individuals in the field will be
invited to attend and products and demonstrations will be
exhibited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Promotion of intellectual
exchange in SHM technology development and building up the sensors technology
research community across the board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Expected outcomes include proceedings of technical presentations, formation of
technical committee consisting of government, industry and academic specialists,
development of guidelines and recommendations for promotion of SHM
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;