* 0915211
* Numerical real algebraic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Frank Sottile, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 435,757.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Numerical methods are the future of computation in algebraic geometry. The
reason for this is that increases in computing power will be due to massive
parallelization and symbolic algorithms do not appear to be parallelizable while
numerical algorithms are easily parallelized. This project aims to help build
the infrastructure for this numerical future. It will do this through two main
research programs and through the training of students and a postdoctoral
fellow. One project is to develop and implement a radically new numerical
continuation algorithm that computes only the real solutions to a system of
polynomial equations, in contrast to homotopy continuation, which necessarily
computes all solutions, both real and complex. The other is to use numerical
methods to study subtle geometric invariants of important geometric problems,
namely the Galois groups of Schubert problems. The first will extend the toolbox
of numerical algebraic geometry, while the second will showcase its potential
for pure mathematical research. A primary goal of this project is the training
of one or more students in this area and the training and professional
development of a postdoctoral researcher. Both projects are multi-year tasks
requiring software development that will involve team-based research and
collaborators at Colorado State and Georgia Tech and will result in
publications, software packages, and Ph.D. theses.

Algebraic geometry is concerned with theoretical questions about solutions to
systems of polynomial equations, but it has great potential in applications, in
particular through implemented algorithmic tools. Numerical algebraic geometry
is a new field that uses numerical methods in algebraic geometry and has been
driven by applications of mathematics. This project will further its progress by
developing new numerical tools for studying real solutions, applying it to pure
mathematical research, and the training of students and postdoctoral fellows.