* 0915220
* Optimization, Differential Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 290,000.00

The investigators conduct research on several fundamental topics in
computational science, which include optimization methods, numerical optimal
control, parameter estimation, inverse problems, evolution partial differential
equations with constraints, and parallel adaptive finite element methods. A
feature common to all of these topics is the parallel implicit solution of
optimization problems with ordinary and partial differential equations
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;Many fundamental physical systems are described by
(generally nonlinearly) constrained ordinary or partial differential equations
of motion (also generally nonlinear) in the sense that exact solutions to the
equations of motion always satisfy a given set of constraints. Examples include
Maxwell's equations, the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, the Yang-Mills
equations, and Einstein's equations, among others. Accurate discretizations of
differential equation constraints lead to very large sparse constrained
optimization problems, where much of the structure reflects the discretization.
The problems are highly nonlinear, with reliability of the optimization being
the dominant factor in the formulation of successful
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimization of functions subject to
differential equation constraints arises in many contexts in engineering and
scientific computation, since physical reality is often expressed through models
involving ordinary and partial differential equations. The investigator's
research program is motivated and guided by some challenging applications of
computational science in engineering and science. These applications include the
design of large neurobiological network models, off-shore petroleum exploration,
the numerical modeling of gravitational waves, and trajectory planning for
spacecraft and unmanned autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
investigators are active in the development and dissemination of computer
software that embodies the advanced computation techniques developed as part of
their research program. Software developed by the investigators provides an
effective method of technology transfer and provides US scientists and engineers
with instant access to state-of-the-art methods. Within the Center for
Computational Mathematics, the Investigators offer a program of instruction and
research that emphasizes the role of computational science in the formulation,
modeling, and solution of problems from diverse and changing areas. The program
of research conducted by the investigators helps to attract advanced graduate
students into the area of computational science, which plays a vital role in the
study of systems arising in manufacturing, engineering and the natural sciences.