* 0915598
* HCC: Small:  Plan-Based Models of Narrative Structure for Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Young, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 513,860.00

The primary objective of this research is to develop new cognitively informed
plan-based models of narrative action and to demonstrate that these models can
be used both to control a virtual environment and to make effective predictions
about the results of users' mental models of the stories that they characterize.
Motivated by psychological models of plans and plan reasoning, this research
builds on prior work in plan generation and plan-related communication to
develop an architecture for creating understandable interaction in narrative-
oriented virtual environments. The specific research program can be divided into
two high-level thrusts: 1) Developing new generative knowledge representation
schemes for the control of narrative action, focusing on the structures of
conflict and goal dynamics. 2) Formally validating the results from the items
via large-scale empirical evaluations.

This work will develop computational models of narrative, focusing on elements
of creativity in narrative (as defined roughly by coherence and expectation
violation). The project will explore the hypothesis that creativity in the
design of many artifacts (and in the design of narrative in particular) is not
only a property of the algorithms used to create the artifacts but also a
property of how the artifacts are experienced or understood by human users.

This work will have a significant impact on the theory and understanding of the
relationships between computation and cognition, particularly in the context of
narrative. Because of the multidisciplinary nature of the research objectives,
the project will produce significant advances in both computer science and
cognitive science. It is anticipated that the resulting model will serve as a
foundation for a new generation of tools that support mixed-initiative virtual
world design, particularly focusing on the generation of narrative systems. In
addition, the research will explore the use of the models to create customized,
context-sensitive storylines for computer game-based learning environments.

The project will contribute to the infrastructure of science and education by
training new researchers (graduate research assistants) in an area that is
broadly multidisciplinary (computer science, cognitive science and narrative
theory). These new researchers will gain from the project a unique integrated
view of the contributing disciplines. The project will train undergraduates
through involvement in formal and informal research exposure efforts supported
in part by REU supplements.