* 0915462
* HCC: Small: Simulating and Animating Materials with Dynamic Geometry
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James O'Brien, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract ? O?Brien (0915462) This research project focuses on numerical and
geometric methods for physically realistic simulation of objects and materials
whose shapes are grossly deforming or changing. These methods use several
techniques for dynamic mesh generation, wherein unstructured tetrahedral volume
meshes and triangular surface meshes evolve or change through time to
accommodate the movement of a highly deformable material. This research is
leading to unprecedented simulation capabilities to evolve the meshes used for
numerical techniques such as finite element methods and finite volume methods,
while maintaining high-quality tetrahedra and triangles. These new algorithms
will enable the simulation of phenomena that could not previously be modeled
well because of the difficulty of simulating materials whose shapes change
radically, such as body tissues during surgery or ballistics undergoing high-
speed impacts. The technical contributions of this research fall into two
classes. The first contribution is numerical methods that use dynamic mesh
generation to bring better accuracy to simulations of elastoplastic solids and
viscous fluids undergoing plastic flow, cutting, and fracture. The simulation
and dynamic mesher are being coupled so that they locally conserve mass, energy,
and momentum as a mesh evolves, and so that the refinement and anisotropy of the
mesh are tailored to the physical problem. The second contribution is extensions
of dynamic geometry algorithms developed by the researchers that more accurately
model surface evolution, that enable a finer surface resolution than volume
resolution, and that easily handle topological changes and self-collisions.