* 0915242
* Rigid motion steerability for multiscale stochastic models of 3D-textures applied  to soft tissue segmentation/identification in 3D-biomedical images
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 490,712.00

Modern medicine and biology have been enormously benefited from the advancement
of imaging. New devices and acquisition methods enabled the first images of
viruses. Resolution levels for diagnostic imaging are now at the order of a few
hundred microns and in 3D; e.g. MRI or CT scans. Despite of all these advances
some information in medical images is latent and extracting it is often a
tedious task. Achieving finer resolution levels does not automatically make
every tissue visible to the eye of the practitioner. The expansion of the
imaging frontiers not only increases grossly the volume of the available data
but also makes to want to extract more information from an image. Thus, there is
an ever growing demand for the development of reliable, automated or semi-
automated image analysis tools. With this goal in mind the interdisciplinary
group of investigators in this project aims in making theoretical and
algorithmic contributions that can lead to the development of such
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem motivating this project is how to
identify or segment soft-tissues that are of interest to medical practitioners
or biologists with high spatial accuracy in 3D-images. To our detriment, most of
the time tissues of diagnostic interest have great variability, small volume,
low contrast and are corrupted by non-standard noise. Based on the premise that
soft-tissues are associated with 3D-textures, the investigators approach soft-
tissue discrimination/identification as segmentation/identification of the
3D-textures resulting from the tissues of interest. Notable efforts have been
made to solve this problem in 2D but in 3D it is practically untouched. To
achieve high spatial accuracy in the segmentation/identification of 3D-textures
the investigators will build novel probabilistic models for 3D-rigid motion
invariant texture signatures. This will reduce or may even eliminate
classification errors due to the positioning of a tissue in the 3D-space. To
extract such signatures we will characterize and thoroughly study multiscale
data representations that are covariant (steerable) with respect to 3D-rigid
motions. A major challenge of this project is to extract 3D-rigid motion
invariant texture signatures with reasonable length and adopt probabilistic
models governing the classification of these signatures in a computationally
manageable manner. The envisioned tools will be tested in (3D) CT-angiography
scans and 3D-confocal microscopy images of pyramidal neurons. In the first case
we wish to segment various soft tissues such as cardiac muscle, epicardial fat,
lumen and calcium while in the second we wish to identify dendrites in a noisy
background. The investigators aim in developing an algorithmic platform for
soft-tissue segmentation based on novel 3D-data representations rather than a
customized application. This research program requires the development of novel
mathematical ideas both in mathematical analysis and in probability theory.
These new mathematical concepts and methods will endow the envisioned algorithms
with a unique ability native to human vision but not yet achieved in computer
and robotic vision: the identification of structures and patterns independently
of their position in the 3D-space. Indeed, tissues must be correctly
identifiable by any automated image analysis system regardless of their position
in the 3D-space or in the human body. A system with this ability will be able to
circumscribe tissue boundaries with the same high accuracy in every direction in
the 3D-space. This algorithmic platform can be adopted for a wide variety of
imaging applications in medicine and biology, such as CT-angiography used to
diagnose stenosis in coronary arteries or contrast CT for the detection of liver
cancer. Detecting abnormalities in the walls of coronary arteries especially of
their regions proximal to the ascending aorta will help prevent the most life-
threatening infarctions and possibly monitor the treatment of the
atherosclerotic plaque without the frequent use of the grossly invasive
intravascular ultrasound probes. Identifying cancerous lesions in the liver at
their early stages of development can significantly increase the chances of
survival in this type of cancer. Capturing accurately the structure of dendrites
and of their protruding attachments called spines in images acquired with
3D-confocal microscopes is a prime time goal as spines seem to hold the key of
understanding the biological basis of depression and bipolar
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;