* 0915054
* III: Small: BeliefDB - Adding Belief Annotations to Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 508,000.00

In many scientific disciplines today, a community of users is
working&lt;br/&gt;together to assemble, revise, and curate a shared data
repository. As&lt;br/&gt;the community accumulates knowledge and the database
content evolves&lt;br/&gt;over time, it may contain conflicting information and
members can&lt;br/&gt;disagree on the information it should store. Relational
database&lt;br/&gt;management systems (RDBMS) today can help these communities
manage&lt;br/&gt;their shared data, but provide limited support for
managing&lt;br/&gt;conflicting facts and conflicting opinions about the
correctness of&lt;br/&gt;the stored data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a Belief Database System (BeliefDB) that allows&lt;br/&gt;users to
express belief annotations. These annotations can be
positive&lt;br/&gt;(agreement) or negative (disagreement), and can be of higher
order&lt;br/&gt;(belief annotations about other belief annotations). The
approach&lt;br/&gt;allows users to have a structured discussion about the
database&lt;br/&gt;content and annotations. A BeliefDB gives annotations a
clearly&lt;br/&gt;defined semantics that lets a relational database understand
and&lt;br/&gt;manage them efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits:
(i) Definition of a Belief Database Model: The&lt;br/&gt;project develops a
formalism that extends a relational database with&lt;br/&gt;belief annotations
on data and on previously inserted annotations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Design
of a Belief Query Language: The project complements the&lt;br/&gt;data model
with a new query language that extends SQL. (iii)&lt;br/&gt;Development of a
canonical Belief Database Representation: The&lt;br/&gt;projects develops
approaches to store and manipulate belief databases&lt;br/&gt;on top of a
conventional RDBMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Curated databases and
shared data repositories are&lt;br/&gt;becoming widespread in the scientific
communities. A BeliefDB&lt;br/&gt;provides a new data management system that
addresses the need of these&lt;br/&gt;communities to manage conflicting data. If
successful, the project&lt;br/&gt;will be one of the pieces that will help data
management technology&lt;br/&gt;undergo a new paradigm shift, from managing data
as content, to&lt;br/&gt;supporting a community of users in collaboratively
creating partly&lt;br/&gt;conflicting database
contents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information on the project see the
project web page::&lt;br/&gt;http://db.cs.washington.edu/beliefDB/&lt;br/&gt;