* 0915992
* CSR: Small:  Meta Analysis Directed Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Shashi Gadia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2015
* USD 116,000.00

This project aims to modify the representation of binary executable files by
retaining information generated during various program transformations using an
XML notation. If retrievable, the information lost during transformation
processes could potentially improve the hardware/runtime system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While high level programming languages support software
development, computer architecture is implemented more efficiently around low
level assembly/machine programming language. This gap between high level and
machine level programming languages is bridged by translations performed by a
compiler. A compiler performs significant analysis and translation on the high
level program code program in order to generate optimized low level code.
However, the original program's structural information is lost by the time the
program has been translated into a low level representation. Consequently, an
existing processor's architectures cannot benefit from such structural
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many dynamic optimizations performed in a
processor, such as branch and value prediction, and many dynamic compiler
optimizations, such as dynamic loop unrolling, can be expressed in a
semantically rich binary file format. This project uses an XML based binary file
format to express program structure. The program metadata is expressed as XML
namespace tags. A processor, consisting of a meta-engine to interpret the
program level structure semantic metadata, transforms the binary program in
order to affect the specified dynamic optimizations before handing it over to a
classical execution engine. This approach opens up many performance enhancement
opportunities, controlled by the program itself. In this seed project, the
execution engine is realized through a simulation environment based on Open DOS
(Open Source Dynamic Optimization). A proof-of-concept compiler, XMLgcc,
generates the metadata tagged binary files. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will result in a transformative view of processor and compiler design. This may
spur processor development activity due to "soft"ization of many of the current
hard features of an architecture - a corresponding compiler development has
significantly lower overhead. The empirical nature of computer architecture and
compilers requires a platform on which architecture and compiler variations can
be implemented with low cost. Such a platform is an ideal pedagogical tool for
exposing such "what if" iterative design process to computer architecture and
compiler students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will also develop
instructional modules based on the SeeMe platform for various computer
architecture and compiler (dynamic optimization) topics for graduate classes.