* 0915139
* ATD: Statistical Methods for Nuclear Material Surveillance Using Mobile Sensors
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Minge Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 373,933.00

The research in this proposal outlines a robust system of a mobile sensor
network and develops statistical algorithms and models to provide consistent,
pervasive and dynamic surveillance for nuclear or biological materials in major
cities. Specifically, the project proposes a novel design of sensor network, in
which nuclear sensors and Global Position System (GPS) tracking devices are
installed on a large number of vehicles such as taxicabs and police vehicles.
Real time information from this network is processed at a central surveillance
center, where mathematical and statistical analyses are performed. The proposed
statistical approaches include multiple spatial cluster detection method using
latent models and state-space model for real-time detection and tracking of
possibly moving nuclear sources using sequential Monte Carlo method. The methods
are general and flexible and can be used in other settings involving a massive
network of sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Threats to national and homeland
security have become more dynamic and complex in the past decade due to global
terrorism, increased opposition to U.S. interests, and increased access by
adversaries to sophisticated technologies and materials. Among the threats,
nuclear attacks is one of the most devastating acts, with severe losses of human
lives as well as long term and large scale damages to infrastructures. As a
result, there have been growing concerns regarding the prospect of detonating
nuclear materials or dirty bombs in the populous metropolitan areas. It becomes
more and more vital to have sophisticated nuclear surveillance and detection
systems deployed in major cities in the U.S. to protect infrastructures and
human lives. The proposed research on surveillance systems of a mobile sensor
network can have broad impacts in advancing our detection capabilities of
terrorist threats hence improving homeland security. During the course of the
proposed project, activities related to education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students will be actively engaged, in preparation for their
possible careers in this area.