* 0915976
* SHF: Small:  Automating the Deployment of Distributed Real-time and Embedded System Software using Hybrid Heuristics-based Search Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Aniruddha Gokhale, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 472,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern automobiles and flight avionics
systems form complex distributed real-time and embedded (DRE) systems. A high-
end luxury car can have over 80 Electronic Control Units (ECUs), which are small
embedded processors, and multiple networks linking the processors. Furthermore,
several hundred software components can be distributed across these multiple
networked ECUs. Optimizing the deployment of these software components, by
packing the software more tightly onto the processors, can reduce the size of
the required underlying infrastructure and have numerous positive side-effects,
such as weight and power consumption savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining
how to deploy software to hardware in DRE systems is a challenging problem due
to the large number of complex constraints that must be dealt with, such as
real-time scheduling constraints, component placement restrictions, and fault-
tolerance guarantees. This research effort focuses on developing new hybrid
heuristic and meta-heuristic techniques for determining how to deploy software
to computational nodes. The algorithms and tools will be made available in open
source through the Generic Eclipse Modeling System
(http://www.eclipse.org/gmt/gems), which is distributed by 45 world-wide
mirrors, and the ESCHER tool repository. Opportunities for outreach will be
sought through existing mechanisms in place at Vanderbilt University, such as
the NSF Science and Technology Center called TRUST and Vanderbilt Center for
Science Outreach (CSO) to host summer research students. We will continue to
support graduate students belonging to underrepresented groups.