* 0915487
* AF: Small: Spectral Graph Theory, Point Clouds, and Linear Equation Solvers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Spielman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2013
* USD 496,924.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the most important abstractions
in Computer Science are graphs and point clouds. A graph abstracts relations
between things: two vertices in a graph are connected by an edge if the objects
associated with the vertices are related. Directed edges indicate a connection
from one vertex to another. Both social networks and the web are modeled as
graphs: vertices could represent people with edges between friends, or they may
represent web pages with directed edges representing links. Point clouds are
sets of vectors, each vector providing a list of numerical attributes. In many
computer science applications, one associates a vector with each object being
examined. For example, one may rate on a numerical scale different properties of
a chemical, or how much a person likes movies from certain
genres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will unify these two abstractions by
translating point clouds into graphs. Each vector becomes a vertex in a graph,
with the strength of the edge connecting two vertices indicating the degree of
similarity of the corresponding vectors. This translation will enable the
application of numerous techniques that have been developed in graph theory to
the study of point clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical objectives of the
project include the determination of the best graph to associate with a point
cloud, the development of efficient algorithms for the construction of such a
graph, and the development of new approaches to the analysis of graphs. In
particular, a spectral analysis of directed graphs will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both graduate students and undergraduates will
be trained in research while working on this project. Educational materials
developed during the course of the project will be disseminated through the
internet as well as incorporated into a book under development.&lt;br/&gt;