* 0915005
* TLS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Tracking Scientific Innovation from Usage Data: Models and Tools to Support a Science of Science
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Carl Bergstrom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 217,002.00

This project develops a set of tools that allow organizations investing in
Science and Engineering to identify and predict the emergence of innovative
research. Such a capacity would permit organizations to efficiently allocate
resources to stimulate rapid and effective research process in these areas.
Several key attributes are needed: the tool should be able to operate in real-
time, be representative of the widest possible sample of scientific activity,
and support a cost-benefit analysis of allocated resources.

Intellectual merit: This research aims to support the development of such tools
by focusing on two scientific and methodological issues. First, the project
studies the potential of early indicators of scientific activity such as usage
data and search query logs. Second, the project aims to develop models that can,
on the basis of such early indicators, identify and predict emerging trends in
real-time.

The project leverages the efforts of two well-established projects, namely the
MESUR project (www.mesur.org) and the Eigenfactor project (www.eigenfactor.org).
The MESUR project has, over the course of the past 2 years, captured a
significant sample of the world?s scientific activity, via a collection of more
than 1 billion article-level usage events acquired from some of the world's most
significant publishers, aggregators and university consortia. The Eigenfactor
project has demonstrated the power of mathematical network models (cf. Google's
PageRank) to rank disciplines and journals according to the lattice work of
scientific citations that records the collective history of S&E research.
Predictions of the "flow" of scientific activity have been used to produce
detailed maps of scientific activity that may identify potential foci of
scientific innovation.

This project expands the Eigenfactor models to include MESUR's indicators of
actual, real-time scientific activity. On that basis the project develops a set
of early indicators that can detect the emergence of scientific innovation in
real-time - before such trends are visible in citation data - and relates these
indicators to public policy and decision making. The project also develops
explanatory and predictive frameworks that connect observations of individual
behavior with emergent, collective phenomena such as scientific innovation.
Since the focus of the research is whether it is possible to develop analytic
and predictive tools that indicate why, how and where scientific innovation is
most likely to occur, the existing eigenfactor.org services will be leveraged to
produce freely available, expandable tools that rank, analyze, predict and chart
areas of scientific innovation.

Broader Impact: this research project produces freely available, expandable
services to form an "early warning" system for scientific innovation that are
expected to lead to a better public understanding of science as a complex,
dynamic system. Such services should foster public participation in efforts to
establish a more diverse, innovative research landscape that can meet the
challenges of the 21st century. This work should thereby support a "healthier"
system of scientific evaluation that fosters innovation by acknowledging a
greater diversity of influences and contributions that shape the scientific
landscape.