* 0915645
* TLS: Science &amp; Technology Innovation Concept Knowledge-base (STICK): Monitoring, Understanding, and Advancing the (R)Evolution of Science &amp; Technology Innovations
* SBE,SBE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2013
* USD 718,644.00

This project provides much needed data and tools for analyzing innovations of
all possible outcomes, included failed innovations. This approach overcomes the
bias in the science policy which studies only popular or ultimately successful
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This comprehensive
endeavor enables SciSIP researchers to build and test theories that explain the
differentiated trajectories of science and technology innovations and their
associated communities. The project also spans disciplinary boundaries by
bridging the artificial divide in SciSIP research between the production and the
use of innovations, piecing together a holistic view of the dynamic supply and
demand in the innovation ecosystem. Specifically, the project builds a large-
scale, multi-source, longitudinal database, Science &amp; Technology Innovation
Concept Knowledge-base (STICK), and develops a set of visual analytic tools for
monitoring and understanding the emergence and revolution/evolution of
innovations in three exemplar science and technology fields: information
technology, biotechnology, and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
knowledge-base captures innovations, the individual and organizational actors
associated with the innovations, and the relationships among the innovations and
the actors through a hybrid approach that combines computational analysis of
text (e.g., natural language processing) and social information processing
(e.g., social tagging and collaborative writing by the users of the knowledge-
base). State-of-the-art visualization tools are customized for SciSIP
researchers and other innovation stakeholders to visualize innovation networks
and analyze patterns and trends. The design of the knowledge-base and toolset is
grounded in a demonstration study on the popularity of innovations. The study
aims to address important questions concerning the complex relationships among
innovations and the evolution of communities, with implications to the
popularity and ultimate success of innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: STICK is institutionalized at the University of Maryland at College
Park as a free public service that offers web access to the data and tools
developed in this project. This service also produces quarterly reports on the
status of science and technology innovations, including the National Innovation
Popularity Index, analogous to the Consumer Confidence Index for the state of
the economy. This research-based service is an intuitive tool for science and
technology education. For most fields where specialization is the theme,
students' and the public's interests increase with the capability to monitor and
make sense of the fast-changing arenas where innovations emerge, converge, and
diverge. For scientists and engineers, STICK's visual analytic toolset helps
accelerate scientific discoveries and innovations by identifying and
establishing collaborations within and across innovation communities. Finally,
STICK helps science and technology policy makers monitor and understand the
evolutionary paths of innovations, appraise the significance of innovations in
rigorously charted terrains, and proactively foster, promote, and advance
innovations with benefits to the society.&lt;br/&gt;