* 0915954
* AF: Small: Algorithmic and Quantitative Problems in Semi-algebraic and O-minimal Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 09/30/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The goal of the proposed research is to further our
understanding of algorithmic and quantitative semi-algebraic geometry, develop
new techniques especially coming from algebraic topology and the theory of
o-minimal structures, and broaden the applications of semi-algebraic geometry in
other areas such as discrete and computational geometry.

Algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry lies at the heart of many problems in
several different areas of computer science and mathematics including discrete
and computational geometry, robot motion planning, geometric modeling, computer-
aided design, geometric theorem proving, mathematical investigations of real
algebraic varieties, molecular chemistry, constraint databases etc. A closely
related subject area is quantitative real algebraic geometry. Results from
quantitative real algebraic geometry are the basic ingredients of better
algorithms in semi-algebraic geometry and play an increasingly important role in
several other areas of computer science: for instance, in bounding the geometric
complexity of arrangements in computational geometry, computational learning
theory, proving lower bounds in computational complexity theory, convex
optimization problems, etc. As such, algorithmic and quantitative real-algebraic
geometry has been an extremely active area of research in recent years.

The proposed research will develop new techniques in real algebraic geometry
that would lead to new and better algorithms, for computing topological
invariants of semi-algebraic sets in theory, as well as practice. In addition,
several open problems in quantitative real algebraic geometry and closely
related problems in discrete and computational geometry will be attacked with
the mathematical tools developed by the PI. All these research objectives will
be integrated in a broad program of training graduate students and curriculum
development.