* 0915912
* SHF: Small: Virtual Probe: A Statistically Optimal Framework for Affordable Monitoring and Tuning of Large-Scale Digital Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Xin Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

ID: 0915912&lt;br/&gt;Title: Virtual Probe: A Statistically Optimal Framework
for Affordable Monitoring and Tuning of Large-Scale Digital Integrated
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xin Li and Rob Rutenbar, Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-chip
variability monitoring and post-silicon tuning have emerged as a joint-strategy
to combat the deleterious effects of nanoscale process variations, to maintain
the aggressive scaling of integrated circuits (ICs). However, the design
overhead (e.g., die area, power consumption, etc.) of these new techniques is a
growing problem as devices continue to shrink, and the relative magnitude of
critical process fluctuations continues to grow. This project proposes to
develop a novel statistical framework called virtual probe (VP) to minimize the
overhead of variability monitoring and post-silicon tuning. VP accurately
predicts full-chip spatial variation from the smallest possible set of
measurement data, thereby enabling lowest-cost / highest-accuracy silicon
testing, characterization and tuning as IC technologies move further into the
nanoscale regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to create a
radically improved platform for on-chip statistical monitoring and tuning of
large-scale digital ICs; it is expected to yield 5-10 times performance
improvement for advanced ICs in a broad range of applications, from consumer
electronics to aerospace controllers. In addition, the proposed mathematical
framework is applicable to many other scientific and engineering problems and,
hence, offers a new avenue to study and understand these. Finally, given its
broad coverage over multiple research areas, the proposed project motivates
close collaboration among statistician, computer scientists and circuit
designers, thereby creating enormous opportunities for interdisciplinary
innovations. The interdisciplinary nature of this project also offers an
excellent opportunity to train the next generation of U.S. researchers in
multiple science and engineering domains.&lt;br/&gt;