* 0915888
* TC:Small: Formal Reasoning about Concurrent Programs for Multicore and Multiprocessor Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Formal reasoning about concurrent programs is usually done at a&lt;br/&gt;high-
level with strong assumptions such as built-in thread
primitives&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., locks) and simplified memory models (e.g.,
sequential&lt;br/&gt;consistency). Existing formal techniques (including Hoare
logic and&lt;br/&gt;type system) have consistently ignored important issues such
as&lt;br/&gt;relaxed memory models, hardware interrupts, implementation
of&lt;br/&gt;synchronization primitives, and support for software
transactional&lt;br/&gt;memory and privatization. This severely limits their
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on extending and
adapting existing formal&lt;br/&gt;techniques so that they can also support
realistic low-level&lt;br/&gt;concurrent programs running on modern multicore
and multiprocessor&lt;br/&gt;machines. The PI is developing a new operational
approach for&lt;br/&gt;reasoning about programs running under relaxed memory
models;&lt;br/&gt;designing new program logics for certifying both weak and
strong&lt;br/&gt;memory operations (including the memory-fence and compare-and-
swap&lt;br/&gt;instructions); and showing how to scale his approach to real-
world&lt;br/&gt;thread implementation and to machines with relaxed memory
models. If&lt;br/&gt;successful, this research will help improve the reliability
of&lt;br/&gt;concurrent software components, which form the backbone of
many&lt;br/&gt;critical systems in the world. It will also facilitate
the&lt;br/&gt;community-wide effort for finding new programming models for safe
and&lt;br/&gt;scalable multicore computing.