* 0915337
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Combining Static Analysis and Dynamic Run-time Optimization for Parallel Discrete Event Simulation in Many-Core Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Philip Wilsey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 166,911.00

Proposal Title: CSR:Small:Collaborative Research: Combining Static Analysis
and&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic Run-time Optimization for Parallel Discrete
Event&lt;br/&gt;Simulation in Many-Core Environments&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY
at Binghamton&lt;br/&gt;Abstract Date: 07/06/09&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates how a new processor paradigm (multi-core
architectures)&lt;br/&gt;changes the way Parallel Discrete Event Simulation
(PDES) is done. This topic is&lt;br/&gt;important given the wide use of
simulation and the emergence of multi-core&lt;br/&gt;architectures. PDES is
likely to play an increasingly important role in discrete
event&lt;br/&gt;simulation as Moore?s Law is sharply curtailed and explicit
parallelism becomes the&lt;br/&gt;major avenue for improving performance of
sequential applications. Improving PDES&lt;br/&gt;performance translates to
improved.&lt;br/&gt;Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is widely used for
performance evaluation in many&lt;br/&gt;application domains. The fine grained
nature of PDES causes its performance and&lt;br/&gt;scalability to be limited by
communication latency. The emergence of multi-core&lt;br/&gt;architectures and
their expected evolution into manycore systems offers potential
relief&lt;br/&gt;to PDES and other fine grained parallel applications because
the cost of communication&lt;br/&gt;within a chip is dramatically lower than
conventional networked communication. Absent&lt;br/&gt;this dominant effect,
PDES performance will be determined by issues such as load&lt;br/&gt;balancing,
synchronization and optimism control, and the choice and configuration
of&lt;br/&gt;various other algorithms and data structures of the simulator.
Operation in a manycore&lt;br/&gt;environment introduces new system tradeoffs
that must be effectively balanced by the&lt;br/&gt;system software. Primarily,
the pressure on the memory system and resilience to load&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations
will emerge as critical issues that we address in the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the more predictable nature of communication cost
in this environment (due in&lt;br/&gt;part to the more frequent synchronization
possible between nearby cores) can be&lt;br/&gt;exploited, especially by static
analysis, for effective simulation.&lt;br/&gt;As multi-cores become the default
microprocessor architecture, applications that are&lt;br/&gt;performance
constrained must evolve to use parallelism to take advantage of
the&lt;br/&gt;resources available on the cores. This project?s new PDES can have
a significant&lt;br/&gt;impact on a number of applications that rely on discrete
event simulations. The PIs plan&lt;br/&gt;to incorporate the research results
into a graduate level course on parallel simulation&lt;br/&gt;techniques and to
involve undergraduate students in the project.