* 0915247
* Local and Direct discontinuous Galerkin methods: New algorithms and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jue Yan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 99,235.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recoveryand
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

The goal of the project is to design, analyze and implement new discontinuous
Galerkin(DG) finite element methods solving partial differential equations
arising from physics and engineering. DG method is a highly accurate numerical
method with the advantage to handle complicated geometries, and apply h-p
adaptive strategies in applications. The PI will focus on the development of two
discontinuous Galerkin methods. 1)Local discontinuous Galerkin methods: a new DG
method is proposed to directly solve Hamilton-Jacobi equations. There is a
concept difficulty to design DG methods for Hamilton-Jacobi equation, because it
is a nonlinear partial differential equation not in a ?conservative? form. When
applied to level set related problems, the method can sharply capture the
interface, and has a great potential for further practical applications on two-
phase flow problems. To solve static Hamilton-Jacobi equations, the LDG method
coupled with fast sweeping method will be developed. The PI and her
collaborators will continue to study LDG methods for other nonlinear wave
equations. 2)Direct discontinuous Galerkin methods(DDG): a new DG method is
proposed to solve diffusion type equations. The novelty of the method is to
figure out what terms essentially contribute the most to the solution derivative
at the discontinuity. A class of admissible numerical fluxes will be studied and
stability and error analysis will be carried out. Interface correction terms are
introduced to obtain optimal order of accuracy for the DDG method. Furthermore,
the PI will investigate DDG methods on incompressible Navier-Stokes equations in
vorticity stream-function formulation. With the successful development of DDG
method, efficient and accurate DG methods can be designed to solve problems
arising from computational fluid dynamics.

The proposed activity lies in its comprehensive coverage of algorithm
development, analysis and implementation. The nonlinear problems studied in this
project have rich applications and involve interesting physical phenomena. Many
fluid problems involve multi-component, examples include bubble/drops, jets,
waves and films. These problems have interfaces to separate different materials,
and special numerical techniques are required to treat the interface accurately.
Discontinuous Galerkin methods produce very small dissipation errors when
applying with high order polynomial approximations, thus it is an attractive
numerical method for interface capturing. The proposed activity is expected to
make positive contributions to broad areas of applications, including (but not
limited to) fluid dynamics, computer vision, optimal control, semiconductor
device simulation and weather forecasting, among many others. In addition, the
investigator will integrate the project with graduate computational mathematics
education in order to communicate in a broader context.