* 0915969
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Cooperative Sensing and Communications for Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Azadeh Vosoughi, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2013
* USD 255,360.00

The emerging cognitive radio network (CRN) paradigm has a great potential to
solve what seems to be a spectrum crisis, by allowing the unlicensed or
secondary users (SUs) to opportunistically and dynamically utilize the white
spaces within the licensed bands, without causing harmful interference to the
licensed or primary users (PUs). This research investigates two essential
components of CRNs: spectrum sensing and spectrum access and sharing. More
specifically, the PIs study: 1) novel integrated signal processing and
communication designs for data fusion in cooperative spectrum sensing, and 2)
novel cooperative spectrum sharing and communication schemes that benefit both
PUs and SUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the existing data fusion rules
that assume error-free communication channels with capacity constraints, this
research involves novel integrated designs that consider the deteriorating
effects of communication channels between the radios and the fusion point and
therefore are robust against channel errors and provide higher detection
reliability. The robustness can further be improved by employing distributed
space-time coding and harvesting diversity gain. Novel cooperative communication
schemes are developed based on modern coding and enable SUs to relay PUs?
rateless coded data packets in a fashion that is completely seamless to PUs. The
schemes have mutual benefits for both PUs and SUs and differ from the existing
ones in which SUs are silent during PUs? transmission. Broader impacts include
(1) bonding the research groups from OSU and the UR and enhancing research and
education through this partnership, (2) making a significant impact on the
theory and practice of CRNs, (3) increasing the participation of under-
represented students in PIs? research groups and promoting engineering among
high school students, and (4) integrating research and education through
development of new courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;