* 0915674
* Collaborative Research:  TLS:  An Experimental Producer Price Index for Clinical Trials
* SBE,SBE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Ernst Berndt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 324,019.00

Project Description.&lt;br/&gt;This research project studies the feasibility of
constructing price indexes specifically for clinical trials, an important
component of healthcare R&amp;D. Increasing health care R&amp;D spending is an
important policy issue, but changes in expenditure are very difficult to
evaluate without knowing whether these increases are due to changes in the
prices of inputs to biomedical research, as opposed to changes in the quantity
of research being performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project constructs a "price deflator" that decomposes growth
in total expenditure into price and quantity components. Very few of these price
indexes have been constructed specifically for scientific research, not least
because R&amp;D activities tend to be highly heterogeneous, and therefore
difficult to compare meaningfully year-to-year or across different contexts.
Sufficiently detailed data make it possible both to make price comparisons that
hold constant factors such as the stage of clinical development, therapeutic
area, and number of patients, and to control for the complexity and work burden
associated with different trial designs, The methodology that is used "hedonic
price analysis" has been well-established in many areas, such as constructing
deflators for IT products, but not has not previously been applied to scientific
research activity. These price indexes, combined with data on clinical trial
activity published in public registries such as clinicaltrials.gov, allow the
construction of broad-based estimates of clinical trial expenditures broken out
by state, country, and type of R&amp;D performer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact.&lt;br/&gt;Along with evidence on the evolution of the price of clinical
research, this project sheds light on a number of methodological issues relating
to the integration of R&amp;D investment into the national income accounts, and
informs important policy debates surrounding the "outsourcing" and "offshoring"
of US R&amp;D, and the global competitiveness of American medical research
establishments. Clinical trials are increasingly being performed outside
traditional US academic medical centers, at physicians' offices, clinics, and
provider networks, as well as by specialized for-profit entities. Moreover,
trials have become increasingly global, with a single protocol collecting data
from sites in many different countries. These new features of clinical trials
are one example of broader changes under way in the distribution of R&amp;D
activity across geographies, actors, and institutions. This research project
helps develop a better understanding of the economic forces underlying this
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach can be used by BEA and other
agencies in developing estimates of the impact of R&amp;D on real and nominal
gross domestic product, even at the state or regional level, which is very
difficult to do with current data.