* 0915677
* Collaborative Research: TLS: An Experimental Producer Price Index for Clinical Trials
* SBE,SBE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Iain Cockburn, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 07/31/2011
* USD 169,870.00

Project Description. This research project studies the feasibility of
constructing price indexes specifically for clinical trials, an important
component of healthcare R&D. Increasing health care R&D spending is an important
policy issue, but changes in expenditure are very difficult to evaluate without
knowing whether these increases are due to changes in the prices of inputs to
biomedical research, as opposed to changes in the quantity of research being
performed.

Intellectual Merit The project constructs a "price deflator" that decomposes
growth in total expenditure into price and quantity components. Very few of
these price indexes have been constructed specifically for scientific research,
not least because R&D activities tend to be highly heterogeneous, and therefore
difficult to compare meaningfully year-to-year or across different contexts.
Sufficiently detailed data make it possible both to make price comparisons that
hold constant factors such as the stage of clinical development, therapeutic
area, and number of patients, and to control for the complexity and work burden
associated with different trial designs, The methodology that is used "hedonic
price analysis" has been well-established in many areas, such as constructing
deflators for IT products, but not has not previously been applied to scientific
research activity. These price indexes, combined with data on clinical trial
activity published in public registries such as clinicaltrials.gov, allow the
construction of broad-based estimates of clinical trial expenditures broken out
by state, country, and type of R&D performer.

Broader Impact. Along with evidence on the evolution of the price of clinical
research, this project sheds light on a number of methodological issues relating
to the integration of R&D investment into the national income accounts, and
informs important policy debates surrounding the "outsourcing" and "offshoring"
of US R&D, and the global competitiveness of American medical research
establishments. Clinical trials are increasingly being performed outside
traditional US academic medical centers, at physicians' offices, clinics, and
provider networks, as well as by specialized for-profit entities. Moreover,
trials have become increasingly global, with a single protocol collecting data
from sites in many different countries. These new features of clinical trials
are one example of broader changes under way in the distribution of R&D activity
across geographies, actors, and institutions. This research project helps
develop a better understanding of the economic forces underlying this
phenomenon.

This approach can be used by BEA and other agencies in developing estimates of
the impact of R&D on real and nominal gross domestic product, even at the state
or regional level, which is very difficult to do with current data.