* 0915100
* Numerical Multilinear Algebra in Signal Processing and Environmetrics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Carmeliza Navasca, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 182,142.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her collaborators will
develop tensor-based numerical methods for applications primarily to signal
processing and environmetrics, and secondarily to image processing, data mining
and scientific computing. In the past, these subjects benefited from advances in
numerical linear algebra. In analogy, numerical multilinear algebra aims to find
useful decompositions of a given tensor into sums of simpler tensors, such as
simple tensor products. This leads to efficient data compression. By using a new
tensor norm called the trace-class norm for tensors, one can substantially
improve de-noising, compression, and reconstruction of signals. This norm has
attracted much attention in matrix rank minimization because of compressed
sensing applications. Also, the PI will develop new regularization methods for
tensor decomposition. Many of the problems in tensor applications are ill-posed,
such as reconstruction of multi-channel signals in the presence of noise. New
numerical stable methods will be studied in the framework of inverse and ill-
posed problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics has applications to
environmetrics. The EPA and other agencies use air quality models, to decide how
to regulate emissions. These models include receptor modeling, source
apportionment and pollution identification. The PI and her collaborators will
work on new computations methods to provide more accurate estimation and
analysis of environmental data. Tensor-based signal processing also has many
applications in biomedical imaging, such as magnetic resonance imaging diagnosis
and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy in tumor detection. Better data
analysis tools will be facilitated by new higher-order tensor decompositions. A
key component of the research project is collaboration with other scientists as
well as students. Through summer research programs for undergraduates, as well
as inclusion of graduate students, they will train a new generation of applied
mathematicians in the methods of tensor based analysis.&lt;br/&gt;