* 0915003
* MCS: Research on Detection and Classification of 2D and 3D Shapes in Cluttered Point Clouds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Klassen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Images form the largest source of data and information in our digital society.
Many application domains, such as medical diagnostics, homeland security,
military surveillance, and Internet communication, can benefit from automated
techniques for analyzing images and, in particular, for detection,
classification, and analysis of objects in images. Fast techniques for object
detection in images often work in two steps: (1) Extract certain basic
primitives (prominent points, edges, arcs, etc) from images using fast
techniques and, (2) glean objects of interest in these extracted primitives.
This second step -- a statistical framework for shape-based discovery of objects
in 2D and 3D point clouds -- is the focus of this research. Since the extracted
primitives may belong either to objects or backgrounds, the given data is both
noisy and cluttered. In simple terms, this problem is akin to finding the big
dipper in the sky on a starry night. A simple combinatorial search is
impossible, as the computational cost of organizing points into polygonal shapes
are prohibitive. The framework proposed here is analysis by synthesis: one
starts by synthesizing continuous shapes √ê contours for 2D and surfaces for 3D
-- for the shape classes of interest and samples these shapes into sets of
points. These synthesized point sets are then (probabilistically) compared with
the given point cloud to decide if a shape class is present in the image.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will take a Bayesian approach to
shape classification where one estimates the posterior probabilities of
different shape classes being present in the given point cloud. This involves a
fundamental step of integrating out certain nuisance variables: (i) the unknown
shape of object present in the data, (ii) the unknown pose and scale at which it
appears in the scene, and (iii) the unknown sampling of a continuous shape into
discrete points. The investigators will develop class-specific statistical
models to capture variability of these nuisance variables, and will use a Monte
Carlo approach that simulates from these models to approximate the desired
posterior. This framework relies on the following ingredients: (1) Statistical
shape models: Firstly, the investigators will derive mathematical
representations of shapes (of curves and surfaces), impose Riemannian metrics on
their shape spaces and develop algorithms for computing geodesics. Secondly,
they will define and estimate probability models on the resulting shape spaces
and simulate shapes from those models for use in generating stochastic
inferences. Since shape spaces are typically infinite-dimensional, nonlinear
manifolds, the prospect of efficient statistical inferences of shapes is both
novel and challenging. (2) Shape Sampling: To synthesize a hypothesized point
set, one takes a continuous shape and samples it with a finite number of points.
The researchers will develop mathematical representations and stochastic models
for this sampling process. (3) Likelihood Evaluation: Lastly, one needs to
calculate the likelihood of the given point cloud. This involves optimally
registering and transforming (rotating, translating, and scaling) the synthetic
point set to match the given data. The cost function is based on probability
models for the observation noise and the background clutter. This project will
research, develop, and implement these fundamental ingredients for finding
shapes in point clouds. The proposed framework will be tested for performance
and efficiency in detecting and classifying objects in images.