* 0915327
* Small: RI: Broad-Coverage High-Accuracy Machine Translation into Morphologically-Rich Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alon Lavie, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Machine Translation (MT) into morphologically-rich languages poses
unique&lt;br/&gt;challenges that have so far not been adequately addressed in
state-of-the-art&lt;br/&gt;approaches. Even the best available MT systems into
languages such as Arabic&lt;br/&gt;frequently produce translations that are
disfluent and lack proper grammatical&lt;br/&gt;structure. This project explores
novel approaches that address these issues by&lt;br/&gt;the development of a
statistical MT framework that incorporates deeper levels&lt;br/&gt;of modeling
of syntax and morphology. While the methods explored are
largely&lt;br/&gt;language independent, the research is conducted and
experimentally evaluated&lt;br/&gt;within the context of a large-scale English-
to-Arabic MT system constructed&lt;br/&gt;using vast corpora available from
LDC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project focuses on novel
approaches for combining&lt;br/&gt;syntactic and non-syntactic translation
resources that are automatically&lt;br/&gt;acquired from vast amounts of
parallel data and on exploring several&lt;br/&gt;alternative pathways for the
integration of information provided by a&lt;br/&gt;high-accuracy morphological
analysis and generation engine for Arabic into the&lt;br/&gt;MT framework. The
project also explores methods for improving the syntax of MT&lt;br/&gt;output in
Arabic using syntactic transfer rules that model syntactic&lt;br/&gt;divergences
between English and Arabic. The goal is to develop an&lt;br/&gt;English-to-
Arabic MT system that produces significantly more fluent,&lt;br/&gt;grammatical
and accurate Arabic output than the current best systems, as&lt;br/&gt;measured
by MT evaluation metrics (such as BLEU and METEOR), and as judged
by&lt;br/&gt;human evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of high-
accuracy fully-automatic Machine Translation from&lt;br/&gt;English into Arabic
has high potential value to the Arabic-speaking population&lt;br/&gt;at large,
by opening up access to all English content available over the
web.&lt;br/&gt;Such high-quality MT into Arabic may potentially also improve
access to&lt;br/&gt;markets in the Arabic-speaking world for US and
international companies.&lt;br/&gt;