* 0915599
* NeTS: Small: Cross-layer Design for Seamless Mobility Support in Hybrid Wireless Mesh Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jiang (Linda) Xie, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,000.00

The wireless mesh network technology has recently emerged as a promising
solution to building large-scale wireless Internet with quick and easy
deployment. It has numerous applications, such as broadband Internet access,
building automation, and intelligent transportation systems. The indispensable
technology enabling large-area roaming in wireless mesh networks is mobility
management. Mobility management has been extensively studied in infrastructure-
based single-hop wireless access networks. However, Internet-based hybrid
wireless mesh networks involve multihop wireless access from users to the
Internet. In such an environment, routing and wireless channel access over
multihop wireless links can produce detrimental effects on the performance of
mobility management in wireless mesh networks. This research develops scalable
and cost-effective mobility management mechanisms for Internet-based hybrid
wireless mesh networks. It emphasizes the integrated design of mobility
management with efficient medium access control and wireless multihop routing,
which was not considered in traditional mobility management design. This
research will provide innovative techniques to numerous applications of the
wireless mesh network technology. It also provides an excellent opportunity for
graduate and undergraduate research students.