* 0915895
* SHF:Small: Scalable Synchronization for Distributed Embedded Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Binoy Ravindran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 331,000.00

The project seeks to develop scalable synchronization mechanisms based on
software transactional memory (or STM) for handling concurrency control in
distributed, embedded, multiprocessor real-time systems. The project explores
several competing abstractions for supporting STM (in such systems), investigate
the relative merits of these approaches, and design and develop the protocols
and algorithms necessary to support them. The project also seeks to identify the
tradeoffs between semantic simplicity and efficient implementations of different
STM systems, with particular emphasis on augmenting obstruction-free STM
implementations with real-time contention managers. Among the algorithms that
are being designed include real-time distributed commit protocols, distributed
real-time cache coherence protocols, scheduling algorithms that can provide
timeliness assurances given the retry behavior of STM, and efficient STM
implementations. &lt;br/&gt;The project?s algorithms and protocols are being
implemented and made publicly available in an open source form suitable for a
real-time operating system or a real-time virtual machine. The project?s
algorithms, protocols, analysis techniques, and implementations will allow
distributed embedded real-time system programmers to use STM to simplify
(distributed) concurrency control.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project are
sought through efforts to transition the project's results by collaboration with
The MITRE Corporation and US Naval Surface Warfare Center, and increasing
cultural interaction between students and faculty in the US and students and
faculty in the Middle East and North Africa region, through graduate advising
and teaching in the VT-MENA (Virginia Tech ? Middle East and North Africa)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;