* 0915262
* ATD: Mathematical Algorithms for Characterizing Spectral Signatures of Chemical and Biological Agents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Kirby, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 478,432.00

This proposal concerns the development and evaluation of new mathematical
algorithms for the detection and classification of chemical and biological
agents. An automatic detection and classification system operates by first
identifying the existence of a signal of interest followed by classification of
the signal. The classification stage consists of comparing the observation of
interest to a small library of spectra of materials of interest. There are a
host of significant challenges, both logistical and technical, surrounding such
automatic detection and classification of threat agents in the field. The actual
spectra collected in the field may have signatures which are not a direct match
to the Raman spectrum collected under controlled conditions and the amplitude of
the signal of interest is generally much smaller than the amplitude of the
continuously changing background spectra. New mathematical algorithms will be
developed for characterizing spectral signatures using an integrated geometric
and statistical approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research
program are intended to be employed in mobile field-operable systems for the
laser interrogation of surface agents (LISA) to enabled real time sensing and
characterization of potential civilian and military exposure biological and
chemical agents. As an example, a portable Mini-Raman Lidar System (MRLS) has
been developed capable of measuring Raman spectral signatures at short standoff
distances, e.g., 1-2.5 meters. These systems may be mounted on vehicles and
could be used to support military operations by detecting toxic fingerprints and
alerting military personnel to potential threats from chemical or biological
weapons. This new technology has created the need to produce an automated
biological and chemical threat agent detection system based on exploiting the
characteristic signatures of Raman spectra associated with different compounds
including warfare agents. The main objective of the proposed investigation is to
develop algorithms capable of agent identification with&lt;br/&gt;a false
positive rate of less than one in 90,000. This project will train two graduate
students in an area of mathematics that has applications to National Security.
&lt;br/&gt;