* 0915164
* CSR: Small: CoreTime: Dynamic Computation Migration for Multicore System Software
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This proposal develops a technique for allowing the multiple on-chip caches
available in multicore processors to be utilized more effectively by systems
software. CoreTime is a framework to help data-intensive software obtain good
performance on multicore processors. Data-intensive software, such as operating
systems and web servers, may not be able to obtain full benefit from the
increasing processing power of multicore processors, instead being bottlenecked
by access to off-chip Dynamic random access memory (DRAM). One example of an
idea the CoreTime project is investigating is a global replacement policy among
the per-core caches of a multicore chip. Such a policy has the potential to
significantly increase caching effectiveness, for example by preventing waste of
cache space on redundant per-core copies of popular data. A key principle in
CoreTime's design is that software should control the policy for how cached data
is spread over a multicore processor's on-chip caches.

The long-term importance of CoreTime is that it will increase the scalability of
memory-intensive software on future multicore processors by mitigating the DRAM
botteneck. CoreTime software will be distributed as open source. The ideas and
software will be used in MIT's undergraduate operating systems course, to give
students experience with multicore processors and concurrency. Both
undergraduates and graduate students will perform the research.

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).