* 0915085
* HCC: Small: Eye Movement in Stereoscopic Displays, Implications for Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Donald House, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 587,448.00

In this project the PI will investigate human eye movement within stereoscopic
displays, with the goal of improving the perceptual effectiveness of these
displays for visualization. While numerous studies have looked at eye motion for
conventional displays, there has been very little work on stereo displays. The
challenge and the opportunity for eye tracking in stereoscopic displays is that
both eyes can be tracked, yielding data on gaze position on the screen and eye
vergence, which affords an estimate of where the subject is fixating in three
dimensional space (not just in screen space). Such data would shed light on the
strategies users employ to explore and interpret information in these displays,
which in turn may enable display designers to increase the effectiveness of
their displays in transmitting information. This research will include
technology development, perceptual experimentation, and visualization system
development phases. The PI will initially devise an experimental methodology for
binocular eye tracking devices, develop protocols and software, and run
preliminary experiments to collect a baseline set of stereo tracking data which
establish what tracking precision is possible and provide a basic understanding
of how humans perform eye movements on stereo displays. Later, the focus will be
on experiments exploring issues in the design of perceptually optimal
visualizations on stereoscopic displays; eye tracking will illuminate how users
scan such displays, providing insight into the visual strategies used to
navigate, interpret, and extract information. Finally, the PI will employ what
he has learned to design, construct, and evaluate an eye-tracking enhanced
stereo 3D visualization system.

Broader Impacts: The potential impacts of this project are as broad as the
possible application of stereoscopic displays. For example, the visualization of
geographic data often requires the display of layered surfaces; studies have
shown that when using a stereoscopic display such visualizations can be designed
so that the user's perception of the shapes of two overlapping surface layers is
well preserved, but we lack empirical stereo eye tracking data at present to
inform and guide this design. In the medical domain, stereoscopic displays have
been shown to significantly improve endoscopic performance, in terms of
laparoscopic precision, of both novice and experienced surgeons, but surgeons
generally need to maintain a fixed viewing position in order to maintain
stereoscopic integrity, a problem which could be alleviated by measuring
positional and vergence eye movements and using them to dynamically adjust the
location of the autostereoscopic "sweet spot." This work will contribute to
building a perceptual science underlying stereoscopic display technology, which
will be critical to its continuing perfection and application in domains such as
science, education and training, healthcare, industry, and consumer products.