* 0915325
* CSR: Small: Materialized Views over Heterogeneous Structured Data Sources in a Distributed Event Stream Processing Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Suzanne Dietrich, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 390,086.00

Title: CSR: Small: Materialized Views over Heterogeneous Structured Data Sources
in a Distributed Event Stream Processing Environment&lt;br/&gt;Investigator:
Suzanne W. Dietrich&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 0915325&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract: Software systems are becoming increasingly complex, requiring the
coordination of heterogeneous structured data sources in a loosely-coupled
distributed environment with support for handling events and streaming data.
Some sample systems include homeland security, criminal justice, supply chain
management, health care, and consumer monitoring. Such software systems involve
numerous query expressions for detecting events, monitoring conditions, handling
streams, and querying data. This research analyzes the dependencies among these
query expressions over structured data sources defined in different language
components over relational or data-centric XML to detect common subexpressions
as candidates for materialized views. When views are materialized, the results
of the computed view are stored so that subsequent references efficiently access
the materialized view, avoiding the cost of recomputation. This performance
improvement is even more critical with distributed data sources. However, the
materialized view must be updated if any data source that it depends on has
changed. To avoid costly recomputation, an incremental view maintenance
algorithm uses the change to incrementally compute updates to the materialized
view. A unique aspect of this research is the efficient maintenance of the
materialized views while respecting the native format of the underlying loosely-
coupled, heterogeneous data sources. Using state-of-the-art commercial and open-
source components, a prototype environment that supports a distributed event
stream processing framework provides a research and evaluation platform for the
exploration of the identification, specification, and incremental evaluation of
materialized views over heterogeneous, distributed structured data. This
environment also provides a shared infrastructure for undergraduate research and
curriculum enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;