* 0915543
* AF:Small:Geometric Embedding and Covering: Sequential and Distributed Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Sriram Pemmaraju, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,932.00

Over the last decade, wireless networks of various kinds, including cellular
networks, wireless LANs, sensor networks, community networks, etc. have become
ubiquitous. This award focuses on algorithmic problems motivated by the design
of protocols and applications for some of these networks. One feature of these
networks, that the proposal attempts to take advantage of, is that network nodes
typically reside in the plane or in 3-dimensional space and furthermore
communication and sensing ranges of these nodes may also be modeled
geometrically (for example, as disks or spheres in Euclidean space). As a result
the award focuses on optimization problems in the geometric context and the goal
is to design algorithms for these problems that can eventually be implemented
efficiently on the network nodes. One class of problems considered are geometric
embedding problems in which network nodes seek to discover their locations based
only on information about which other nodes are within communication range.
Solutions to these problems have the potential to improve routing protocols on
these networks. Another class of problems PIs consider are geometric coverage
problems whose aim is to optimally place sensor nodes with given sensing
abilities so as to cover certain target regions. Such coverage problems arise in
a variety of sensor network applications such as monitoring bridges, vineyards,
and factory floors.&lt;br/&gt;