* 0915697
* TC: SMALL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mathematics of Infection Diffusion in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Santosh Venkatesh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 368,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of malware has the potential to slow
down or cripple wireless services. It poses a particularly inimical threat to a
multitude of activities ranging across an entire spectrum from social
interaction and gaming, to the flow of commerce and informational services, and,
at the largest scale, to national security. Current countermeasures are mostly
ad hoc and reactive in that they are used to fend off threats as they arrive or
are preemptively discovered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
theoretical foundations for malware control and counter-measure design in
wireless networks by drawing from epidemiological analogues in containment or
quarantining strategies for limiting the spread of infectious diseases in human
society, and game-theoretic models for interactions among opponents. Optimal
power control quarantining strategies that curtail and regulate the spread of
contagion by exploiting the broadcast property of the wireless medium will be
designed, validated analytically and experimentally, and incorporated in
networking protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will facilitate the
development of new wireless paradigms where a plethora of devices need to
securely communicate with each other and with other entities on the Internet.
The research will not only draw from, but also contribute to, disparate
disciplines such as epidemiology, game theory, optimal control and communication
networks, and may eventually lead to new disciplines at the interfaces of these
areas. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained at the participating
universities through supervision of doctoral and masters level dissertations and
senior design projects.&lt;br/&gt;