* 0915605
* TLS - Applied Visual Analytics for Economic Decision-Making
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Anya Samek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 376,984.00

Scientists have discovered that individuals are often unable to make optimal
decisions when problems are complex due to limitations on cognitive abilities.
This interdisciplinary project employs visual analytics as a transformational
analytical tool in economics. The investigators use visual analytics to improve
decision making and identify key motivations in knowledge creation in various
economic problems. The project?s suite of tools allows users to interactively
explore datasets and decision spaces as well as compare alternate hypothesis and
develop new hypothesis. Further, keystrokes and information pertinent to
understanding decision-making and knowledge generation are recorded, allowing
the investigators to make predictions about the decision-making process on a
broad scale and providing guidance for theoretical models of decision-making.
This is the first thorough investigation of the value of visual analytics for
economic decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together a team of scientists from economics, electrical and
computer engineering and cognitive science, fields that are rarely linked. The
fundamental objective of this three-year project is to improve individual and
group economic decision making through the introduction of visual analytics as a
necessary tool for dealing with complex information sets. The project?s second
objective is to quantify the effectiveness of visual analytics for decision
making. Visual analytics has emerged as an important approach to data analysis
in many fields such as medicine, business, and the physical sciences, and the
investigators are the first to quantify its value for decision-making using
rigorous experimental methods. The final objective is to develop a unique suite
of visual analytics tools to help economists and policy-makers analyze large
datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The use of visual analytics for
economic decision-making is extremely beneficial to policy makers. Use of these
tools should have an immediate and positive impact on the capacity to analyze
complex economic datasets. These tools can also be used in many fields with
problems in analytical reasoning. The visual analytics tools that result at the
completion of the project will be made available online for classroom use, which
will have a broad impact on education. Visual analytics tools are unique in that
they are both simple enough and captivating for K-12 students, while also being
helpful to students at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The project will
use over 650 undergraduate student subjects drawn from a large and diversified
student population and will provide these students with important exposure to
modern research methods. The VSEEL laboratory at Purdue has an excellent record
of involving members of underrepresented minority groups at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels and this project is expected to continue this
tradition. Over 40 percent of these student subjects will be women and about
one-third will be underrepresented minorities. Based on past experience, we
expect that at least one-half of the Ph.D. student researchers will be women
and/or minorities.&lt;br/&gt;