* 0915026
* NetSE: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrating Real Time Traffic Signal Control with Networking Control Strategies to Optimize Urban Traffic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Nicholas Maxemchuk, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2013
* USD 250,001.00

Utilizing real-time networking techniques to optimize urban traffic signals can
significantly improve the transportation system performance. The objective of
this project is to apply communications technologies and communications
networking techniques to control both traffic signals and vehicles. This is an
interdisciplinary proposal that will combine the optimization techniques based
on uncertainties in the measured data that are used in traffic engineering, with
distributed control strategies, based on real-time measurement and data
dissemination that are used in communication networks. The research effort is
organized into an orderly progression that uses increasing amounts of
information and processing complexity to determine the incremental value of the
procedures. We will start by optimizing the flows at isolated traffic signals,
then progress to flows on arterials, and finally to flows in the entire traffic
network. Initially we will control the traffic signals based on real-time flow
information, then progress to using the signals to control the paths of
vehicles, using deflection routing techniques, and finally perform route
planning for individual vehicles. We will use clustering techniques and
information reduction techniques, such as fish-eye routing, that are being
developed in ad hoc networks, to scale techniques that are applicable to small
networks to the traffic networks in large urban areas. The challenges of
understanding and influencing traffic control open up new research issues in
network flows, communication, optimization, and statistical modeling. All of the
procedures will be tested using real data from a selected area of Manhattan.

The broader impacts of this project includes: (1) It will reduce fuel
consumption and commute time by reducing the time spent at traffic signals; (2)
It will establish collaboration between two complementary areas with the similar
goals of increasing throughput and optimizing flows in networks; (3) It will
actively engage graduate and undergraduate students by developing learning
modules and encouraging minority students to be involved in this
interdisciplinary effort. The work will be widely disseminated to the
transportation and networking communities.