* 0915801
* III: Small: Quality Assessment of Computational Protein Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Daisuke Kihara, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2012
* USD 327,606.00

The PI plans to develop a new and robust hierarchical multi-resolution framework
that can be used for assessement of model uncertainty, especially that
associated with prediction of protein structure. The approaches also enable
respresentation of the structure in ways that enable rapid searching of
structure space. It is important to establish quality estimation methods for
predicted structures so that they can be used wisely by knowing the limitations
of the model. Protein tertiary structure prediction has made steady progress in
the past decade. However, current prediction methods are still not capable of
producing highly accurate models on a regular basis. Practical use of prediction
methods by biologists is limited not only the accuracy of current prediction
methods but also the lack of error estimation of the models they produce.
Moderately accurate models are still useful for many purposes, including design
of site-directed mutagenesis experiments and structure-based function
prediction, if the possible error range is understood. Resulting quality
assessment methods will also contribute to improvement of protein structure
prediction methods. In addition, structure models of proteomes of model
organisms will be constructed with quality assessment data and will be made
available to the public through the Internet. The proposed project leverages
Purdue University's efforts in interdisciplinary computational life science and
engineering by training graduate students and undergraduate students of
different backgrounds through interdisciplinary coursework and direct
involvement in the project.