* 0915846
* CIF: Small: Signal Processing for Multi-user Communications under Finite Alphabet Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Chengshan Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 238,310.00

Abstract for NSF Proposal #0915846

Abstract: Channel capacity and mutual information have been studied extensively
for various types of wire-line and wireless multi-user communication channels.
Among the vast information theoretic literature, most of the results are based
on the assumption that the channel inputs are Gaussian distributed. However,
Gaussian inputs can never be realized in practical systems. The inputs are
usually taken from finite alphabets, which can significantly depart from
Gaussian distribution. A large nonlinear gap exists between the theoretical
capacity and practical achievable rate. This nonlinear gap indicates that
Gaussian-input assumption may not provide a realistic design guideline to
practical systems. Maximizing mutual information over channels with finite
alphabet inputs will benefit not only bandwidth efficiency but also bit error
rate performance. However, much less work has been done for this important
topic. This is mainly due to lack of closed-form solution and high computational
complexity.

The project investigates the direct maximization of mutual information and
throughput over multi-user channels with finite alphabet inputs. The
computational complexity problem is tackled by developing mathematically
tractable and practically accurate algorithms via employing graph-based message-
passing techniques. Shaping matrices are introduced to the maximization of
mutual information. Parameterized approaches are developed to solve optimal
shaping matrices which lead to the global maxima of the mutual information.
Research efforts focus on multiple access channels, broadcast channels and
interference channels, which are the fundamental channel scenarios of multi-user
communications. The channel state information and/or channel covariance
information are made available to the transmitter and receiver for the
maximization of mutual information. Both frequency-flat fading and frequency-
selective fading channels are explored.

