* 0915945
* TC: Small: Cyber Security of Electric Power Infrastructure: Risk Modeling and Mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Chen-Ching Liu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 470,950.00

Abstract: Critical infrastructures are complex physical and cyber-based systems
that form the lifeline of modern society, and their reliable and secure
operation is of paramount importance to national security and economic vitality.
In particular, the cyber system forms the backbone of a nation?s critical
infrastructures, thus a major cybersecurity incident could have significant
negative impacts on the reliable, efficient, and safe operations of the physical
systems that rely upon it. Recent findings, as documented in government reports
and literature, indicate the growing threat of cyber-based attacks on our
nation?s power grid and other critical infrastructures. The goal of this project
is to develop a comprehensive cybersecurity framework and algorithms for
securing the electric energy infrastructure, and implement a novel curriculum,
which include: (i) developing an integrated risk modeling methodology that
models both cyber attacks on the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) system and the resulting impacts on the performance and stability of the
power grid; (ii) developing risk mitigation algorithms, both in cyber and power
system domains, to prevent and mitigate cyber attacks on the power grid; (iii)
evaluating the risk models and algorithms through a combination of model,
simulation, and testbed-based evaluations using realistic system topologies and
attack scenarios; (iv) implementing a novel curriculum on cybersecurity of
critical infrastructure systems through graduate courses and undergraduate
projects. This project?s outcome will have broader impacts in securing our
nation?s power grid and other critical infrastructures against cyber attacks,
and creating a skilled workforce in this critical area of national need.