* 0915803
* SHF: Small: Analyzing and Modeling Natural Language Usage in Software to Improve Software Maintenance Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 496,913.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large scale software is
difficult to maintain, modify and keep up to date. There is a dire need for
automated support for software system navigation, search, and comprehension
activities to assist software developers and maintainers. This project addresses
this issue by tackling some foundational issues and providing innovative methods
for useful automated support for software system navigation, search, and
comprehension activities. The research will lead to automatic analyses of the
programmer's words and their relationships, through their usage in code, which
will elucidate the concepts and actions encoded in the program. By building the
conceptual models from the ``sound bites'' using context and program structure,
a more complete picture is recovered enabling transformative improvements in
automated support for software maintenance and program
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analyses are heavily driven by natural
language processing, information retrieval, and machine learning. The research
will advance the theory and development of software maintenance tools, which
will improve the effectiveness of software maintainers, decreasing software
maintenance costs and raising software quality as software evolves. In
developing a new required course on software engineering-in-the-small, the PIs
will incorporate learning how to use and evaluate software maintenance tools,
including those developed in this project.