* 0915403
* SHF:Small:Collaborative Research: Improving Code Clone Categorization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Letha Etzkorn, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 133,242.00

During software maintenance, 50% to 90% of developer effort is spent on program
comprehension activities, which are performed by developers to better understand
source code. Reducing the effort spent by developers on these activities can
reduce software maintenance costs. Researchers have developed techniques and
tools to detect code clones (similar or identical segments of source code),
because their presence can diminish program comprehensibility. However,
knowledge only of the presence of clones does not allow a developer to perform
maintenance tasks correctly and completely; proper performance of these tasks
requires a thorough understanding of the relationships among the detected
clones. Existing approaches for investigating these relationships are limited in
their applicability and effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
collaborative project is to develop an automated and rigorous analysis process
for identifying and codifying the relationships among clones using their
structural and semantic properties. To maximize the impact of the techniques and
tools on the effectiveness and efficiency of performing maintenance tasks when
clones are present, the investigators will perform a domain analysis. After
initial development, the team will validate and refine the techniques and tools.
The research will help developers to maintain software, reducing total software
cost and improving overall software quality.