* 0915023
* Adaptive Kernel-free Boundary Integral Method for Elliptic PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Wenjun Ying, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2010
* USD 51,324.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project is motivated by the principal investigator's research on modeling
the electrical wave propagation in the heart, for which a system of variable
coefficient and anisotropic elliptic-parabolic partial differential equations
(PDEs) must be solved. A major challenge in the research is to take into account
the moving boundary of the geometrically complicated domain (beating heart)
during the simulation. With the standard finite element or finite volume method
to solve the moving boundary problems, the need to frequently regenerate body-
fitted unstructured volume grids as the domain boundary evolves usually makes
the simulation very expensive. This project aims to develop an efficient and
second-order accurate algorithm for solving the general variable coefficient and
anisotropic elliptic PDEs on complex domains with moving boundaries. Recently,
the principal investigator developed a kernel-free boundary integral (KFBI)
method for solving elliptic PDEs in two space dimensions (2D). The KFBI method
is a structured grid based boundary integral method. The structured grids
involved are not required to be aligned with the domain boundary. The KFBI
method does not need the analytical expression for the kernel of the integral
operator. It is applicable for solving general elliptic PDEs on complex domains
with moving boundaries. This project will further develop the KFBI method for
solving variable coefficient and anisotropic elliptic PDEs on complex domains in
both 2D and three space dimensions (3D). To further improve the efficiency, an
adaptive version of the KFBI method will be developed as part of the project.
During his doctoral and post-doctoral studies, the principal investigator has
also developed an adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) algorithm with body-fitted
grids for elliptic/parabolic PDEs on complex but stationary domains in both 2D
and 3D. The body-fitted grid based AMR algorithm, however, is not suitable for
moving boundary problems. The combination and further development of the KFBI
method and the AMR technique will overcome this issue and significantly improve
both the efficiency and the robustness of the algorithm.

The kernel-free boundary integral method is a second-order accurate sharp
interface method. The proposed research is a pioneering effort in applying the
second-order accurate sharp interface method in combination with an adaptive
mesh refinement technique to solve general elliptic partial differential
equations, whose coefficients are spatially variable and anisotropic, on complex
domains with moving boundaries. In addition, the proposed research has clear
broad impacts to engineering applications. The outcome of the project will make
it possible to perform more efficient and accurate modeling and simulation of
clinically important phenomena, such as the cardiac electrical dynamics for
heart diseases, tumor generation, tumor-induced angiogenesis and the intra-
tumoral infusion of drugs, just to name a few.

