* 0915984
* AF: Small: Approximation, Covering and Clustering in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Sariel Har-Peled, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,000.00

Computational geometry is the branch of theoretical computer science devoted to
the design, analysis, and implementation of geometric algorithms and data
structures. Computational geometry has deep roots in reality: Geometric problems
arise naturally in any computational field that simulates or interacts with the
physical world---computer graphics, robotics, geographic information systems,
computer aided-design, and molecular modeling, to name a few---as well as in
more abstract domains such as combinatorial geometry and algebraic topology.

This research focuses on fundamental problems in computational geometry. These
problems include set-cover, hitting set, independent set, and other related
problems. These problems have numerous applications from wireless networking to
optimization.

The main theme of this research is to combine ``classical'' Computational
Geometry techniques (like cuttings, epsilon-nets, etc) together with techniques
used in Operation Research (Linear Programming, rounding techniques, etc).

This research aims to greatly improve our understanding of the structure of
these fundamental problems. The research may lead to improved approximation
algorithms for these problems.

The algorithms and insights obtained from the technical work will benefit
computer science and related disciplines where geometric algorithms are widely
used. This research has potential to broaden the scope of Computational Geometry
by introducing new techniques into the field.

A book partially based on the research in this award will be published in the
near future. This will make the developed techniques available to wide audience
consisting of students and researchers from several disciplines include
engineering, mathematics, and the natural and social sciences.