* 0915272
* Algorithms for Threat Detection:  Detection and management of emerging diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 319,049.00

This proposal outlines new approaches to epidemiological surveillance and
outbreak management that fully integrate ideas from mathematical modeling for
infectious diseases and Bayesian statistics. For surveillance problems, we
develop hierarchical mixture models for outlier identification that take into
account the evolution of the epidemic and its spatial distribution. In these
models, the components in the mixture correspond to alternative dynamics
consistent with different diseases sharing a common set of symptoms. For
outbreak management, we develop simulation-based algorithms for sequential
optimal design under uncertainty that can be used for optimal prospective design
of interventions in epidemics. The algorithm is described in the more general
setting of partially observed Markov decision problems, and can potentially be
applied in other areas such as clinical trial design, control and economics.

The emergence of new diseases, either naturally or as the result of a
biological attack, is one of the most important threats to national security;
early detection and adequate intervention are key to saving lives and minimizing
the damage caused by such an outbreak. However, early detection can be extremely
difficult when symptoms are similar to those of diseases already endemic in the
population (for example, fever and sore throats which are common symptoms of
colds and influenza, are also symptoms of respiratory Anthrax), and a detailed
analysis of the space-time patterns is necessary in order to be able to separate
the presence of a new disease from the random fluctuations inherent to the
dynamics of the preexisting disease. Similarly, the design of interventions
(vaccination, quarantine and culling, just to mention three possibilities) is
impaired in this setting by the lack of knowledge about the infectiousness of
the new disease and the efficacy of available vaccines. This research develops
new algorithms for disease monitoring and outbreak management under uncertainty
that have the potential to greatly improve the ability of government and
international agencies to identify and intervene in outbreaks of emerging
infectious diseases.