* 0915202
* Generalized simple regularization for linear and nonlinear inverse problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patricia Lamm, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The investigator and her colleagues propose to develop a new regularization
method for ill-posed inverse problems, a method which is an extension of the
ideas of the classical "simplified regularization method" (or "Lavrentiev's
method") and the newer method of "local regularization". Both of these methods
are known to preserve special structures of the inverse problem and lead to fast
numerical solution methods, but they are often limited to specialized operator
equations (for example, where the operator is nonnegative self-adjoint or of
Volterra type). The idea behind the new method is to approximate the composition
of the governing (linear or nonlinear) operator and a localized
smoothing/averaging operator by a "generalized simple regularization operator"
which is the sum of a third operator and a function times the identity operator.
Requiring stricter approximation properties than is usually required for
simplified regularization (but which is required for local regularization),
there is hope that the resulting method improves upon the numerical results
usually obtained for simplified regularization. In addition, because the new
method allows for approximation of the original operator by a third operator (as
mentioned above), again in contrast to the simplified regularization method,
there is the potential for the new method to apply to a number of operators
which do not satisfy the restrictive assumptions needed for the classical method
and for local regularization.

Mathematical inverse problems arise in a wide number of applications, from
problems of satellite image reconstruction, biomedical imaging (CT scans,
X-rays) and geophysical exploration, to the determination of ozone levels in the
atmosphere from measurements taken aboard orbiting spacecraft. The methods
proposed by the investigator and her colleagues are applicable to many of these
problems. In particular, these ideas play a specific role in the solution of new
models for ozone determination under study by the investigator and her
mathematical colleagues, as well as proposed systems-level models for attention
deficit disorder (ADD) and addiction in adults, models under investigation by
the investigator and her clinical colleagues.