* 0915862
* RI: Small: Intelligent Compressive Multi-Walker Recognition and Tracking (iSMART) through Pyroelectric Sensor Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fei Hu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 08/31/2013
* USD 333,933.00

Although high-cost, data-intensive multi-camera systems have been widely used
for mobile human tracking and recognition, the pyroelectric infrared (PIR)
sensor has a variety of advantages including dramatically low costs, chemical
stability, high sensitivity to human body thermal variation, and extremely low
sensory data throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project implements an
Intelligent Compressive Multi-Walker Recognition and Tracking (iSMART) testbed
based on PIR Sensor Networks (PSN). The novelties of iSMART include three
aspects: (1) Context-aware region-of-interest (RoI) exploration to achieve an
inherent tradeoff between area of sensor coverage and degree of information
acquisition resolution. This research uses strict mathematical models to measure
RoI context. (2) Decentralized inference / learning for in-network intelligence.
This project develops a belief-propagation-based distributed inference scheme
with data-to-object association for continuous tracking and recognition of
multiple walkers. It uses orthogonal-projection-based distributed learning for
sensor calibration and feature model training. (3) Networked, compressive
sampling structures and sensing protocols. This project extends the latest
progress in compressive and multiplex sensing theories to guide the design of
novel networked sensor receiver pattern geometries and decentralized sensing
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above research efforts will lead to a novel
low-cost, high fidelity wireless distributed sensing system for multiple walker
recognition and tracking. As an alternative to video camera systems, iSMART
systems can be widely deployed to automatically monitor airports, customs /
harbors, and other critical national infrastructures. This project will also
generate interesting hands-on labs on intelligent sensor / sensor networks and
class projects for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;