* 0915040
* DC: Small: The Use of Ternary Associative Memories in Data Intensive Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Ashish Goel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2013
* USD 430,000.00

A Content Addressable Memory (CAM) is an associative lookup memory containing a
set of fixed-width cells that can hold arbitrary data bits. A CAM takes a search
key as a query, and returns the address of the entry that contains the key, if
any. In a Ternary CAM (TCAM), each data bit is capable of storing one of three
states: 0, 1, or *, where a * matches both 0 and 1. This is a powerful
primitive, and has found much use in high performance network routers and
switches. This project will develop general techniques for using TCAMs to
implement sophisticated randomized data structures, and use them in multiple
data intensive applications. TCAMs consume a lot more power (around 20 times)
compared to Random Access Memories (RAMs). Hence, it is important to study
applications where the improvements are of several orders of magnitude,
resulting in an overall decrease in power consumption compared to traditional
software solutions that only use RAM; this will be a guiding principle of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full potential of TCAMs
has not been realized due to a lack of sophisticated applications. This project
will help this technology maximize its potential. This research is expected to
have impact in multiple data-intensive applications such as network flow
processing, document/image-similarity, backups, and WAN compression. Also, the
PIs will train graduate students and develop a new class which will describe
real-life algorithms for similarity search, stream processing, and pattern
matching, incorporating results from this research.