* 0915537
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Design of Power and Area Efficient, Fault-tolerant Network-on-Chip Circuits and Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Glenn Schrader, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 365,545.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proliferation of multiple cores on
the same die has given rise to communication-centric systems, wherein the design
of the interconnection network has become extremely important. To address the
growing wire delay problems and improve performance in CMP architectures, a
growing number of multi-core designs have adopted a more flexible, scalable,
packet-switched architecture called Network-on-Chip (NoC). Of the several
challenges facing current NoC designs, the three prominent ones are power
dissipation, die area, and overall performance. In this research, we propose to
develop energy-efficient, area-efficient, high-performance, and fault-tolerant
NoCs by exploiting innovative technological (circuit) optimizations and
architectural design space. On the technology side, we will develop and design
novel circuit techniques that will achieve significant power savings, fault-
tolerance and considerable reduction in area requirements. On the architectural
side, we will develop novel NoC designs that incorporate the proposed circuit
design techniques and further improve network performance. This research is an
organized effort that will combine circuit analysis, architecture study,
performance evaluation and design synthesis. We will develop a comprehensive NoC
design platform which will analyze the trade-offs among various parameters of
interest ? power, area and performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of
this research is likely to have a significant impact on the design of NoC
architectures for CMPs. The proposed research will tackle some of the major
limitations of NoC design, namely power consumption and reliability, and will
make significant advances in understanding the interplay between performance,
energy, and reliability for NoC architectures. Realistic solutions to these
problems will provide the ability to continue the improvements in computational
performance that the information technology sector of our economy depends on.
This multi-disciplinary research will also play a major role in education by
integrating discovery with teaching and training.