* 0915959
* CSR:Small: A Control-Theoretic Approach to Simultaneously Meeting Timing and Power/Thermal Constraints for Multi-Core Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xiaorui Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 219,516.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

High-performance real-time embedded systems have stringent requirements for key
performance properties, such as end-to-end timeliness and reliability, in order
to operate properly. In recent years, with the continuously decreasing feature
size and increasing demand for computational capabilities, today's high-
performance embedded systems face an increasing probability of overheating and
even thermal failures. As a result, their power consumption and temperature must
be explicitly controlled for improved reliability. On the other hand, multi-core
processors have recently become the main trend in the current processor
development, due to some well-known technological barriers. Consequently, future
high-performance embedded systems can be expected to be equipped with multi-core
or even many-core processors. Therefore, new control algorithms need to be
developed to simultaneously meet the timing and power/thermal constraints for
multi-core embedded systems.

This project aims to develop a holistic framework, based on recent advances in
feedback control theory, to meet both timing and power/thermal constraints for
high-performance embedded systems with multi-core processors. Our framework can
make three major contributions. First, our solution can coordinate different
control strategies to meet both constraints with guaranteed system stability.
Second, we propose novel power/thermal control (capping) algorithms for multi-
core processors to achieve improved control accuracy and system performance.
Third, we propose new feedback scheduling algorithms to utilize the new features
available in multi-core processors, such as shared L2 caches and per-core
dynamic voltage frequency scaling (DVFS), for improved real-time performance. We
also plan to investigate heterogeneous cores, memory power management, and
system controllability for better power/thermal control and timeliness
guarantees.