* 0915028
* Novel Numerical Techniques for Complex Fluids Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Young-Ju Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 144,795.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Newtonian fluids or complex fluids
are abundant in our daily lives. Examples of such fluids include molten
plastics, engine oils with polymeric additives, paints, egg white and blood.
Breakthrough technology can come from experiments or through utilization of new
modeling methods that have the potential to provide rapid screening of possible
processes. More likely is that simulation will play a greater role in providing
a fundamental understanding of the breakthrough technology. Capturing this
fundamental understanding with models provides the connectivity between an
actual practical operating device and fundamental mechanistic information and
allows for a more realistic assessment of process viability. Models provide the
basis of extending the operating parameter space and have a significant impact
on the decision to build the full scale and on the nature of the ultimate
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate design, efficient implementation, and
the use of numerical methods for the computer simulation of such important
fields as non-Newtonian mechanics will result in significant applications. The
computational modeling package, once established, will be made for the public
use.