* 0915926
* TC: Small: Reducing Virus Propagation in Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 515,981.00

Mobile computer systems and software are increasingly subject to a host of
security threats and malicious software (malware) attacks due to vulnerabilities
in their coding. The difficulty in achieving secure systems is further
compounded by prevalence of unsophisticated users and the increasing reliance on
third party software integration by enabling software module plugins for such
user applications as web browsers and search engines. Traditional approaches
have sought to provide an absolute defense to specific malware attacks by
patching software vulnerabilities or detecting and blocking malware. One
difficulty with these approaches for small mobile platforms is that the design
constraints on these devices often favor low power to maximize battery life over
enhancements to support security protocols. The current situation also
represents a programmatic arms race between patching existing vulnerabilities
and exploiting vulnerabilities in new application code. This research develops a
new secure mobile computing environment based on current mobile technology
widely available as consumer end products that seeks to use program
differentiation to reduce the propagation rate of malware when a software
vulnerability exists. This results not in the direct elimination of security
vulnerabilities, but in the dramatic reduction in scope of any security exploit
to infect large numbers of systems. By constraining the outbreak to only a few
systems, counter measures can be employed before significant economic damage can
result. By modifying aspects of the execution of the application, application
executables can be permuted into unique versions for each distributed instance.
Differentiation is achieved using hardware and/or systems software
modifications. Areas of differentiation include function call/return and system
call semantics, as well as a proposal for hardware-supported Instruction
Register File access and intrusion detection monitoring. Differentiation of
executables hinders analysis for vulnerabilities as well as prevents the
exploitation of a vulnerability in a single distributed version from propagating
to other instances of that application. By focusing on prevention of malware
propagation in addition to traditional absolute defenses, we target the
economics of malware in order to make attacks prohibitively expensive and
infeasible.&lt;br/&gt;This approach can be more feasible than some conventional
security approaches since it can be readily applied to the restricted
performance capabilities of mobile systems and the legal constraints on the
export of encryption technology. Further information and software distribution
related to this project can be accessed at:
http://www.cs.fsu.edu/~tyson/differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;