* 0915257
* DAT: Human Capital and Career Mobility in Science and Engineering-Intensive Start-ups: An Open Access Initial Public Offerings Database
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Martin Kenney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 06/30/2013
* USD 210,433.00

This project extends an existing database (1996-2008) of the educational and
employment histories of the entire top management team and board of directors
for firms making initial public stock offering to the period from 1988-1996. The
ultimate database will include more that 3,500 newly public firms and 35,000
managers and directors providing career path information for these individuals.
These individuals are a central channel by which investments in science and
engineering (S&E) research are transformed into economic benefits. In this way,
the project addresses one of the primary goals of the Science of Science and
Innovation Policy, that of evaluating and tracking the tangible but difficult to
measure returns from investments in R&D.

Intellectual Merit: The database permits exploration of many areas of inquiry
regarding innovation and entrepreneurship. The immediate research examines the
following topics: First, because the data is drawn from official biographies, it
is possible to analyze the national origin and positions immigrants occupy in
high-technology startups. This is a powerful contribution, because earlier
research has only studied Indian and Chinese immigrants, the data allows the
identification of immigrants and provides a rigorous definition rather than one
based on extrapolation from surnames. This approach allows a more scientifically
valid analysis. Second, the educational background allows the identification of
particular universities and departments making inordinate contributions to
specific high-technology industries. This can be used to identify key
institutions and programs that might provide templates for wider adoption.
Third, the new data can be used to examine the degree to which these most
successful high-technology firms are located in regional clusters.

Broader Impacts. The creation of a comprehensive database of the individuals
involved in initial public offerings has transformative potential. The key to
the success of the U.S. economy during the last two decades has been S&E-based
entrepreneurship. The analysis of this database contributes to academic studies
of key human capital, and, as importantly, permits the optimization of S&E
policy meant to encourage small business investment and entrepreneurship. The
database is made available to all interested researchers, including business
school scholars, economists, geographers, and sociologists. Research based on
this database should expand our understanding of the individuals responsible for
many of the most successful firms in the U.S. economy.