* 0915988
* NeTS:Small:Collaborative Research: Effective control of wireless networks via topology adaptation and randomization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eytan Modiano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless Mesh Networks have emerged as
a solution for providing last-mile Internet access. By exploiting advanced
communication technologies, they can achieve very high rates. However,
effectively controlling these networks, especially in the context of advanced
physical layer technologies, realistic models for channel interference, and
distributed operation, remains a major challenge. Hence, the project focuses on
developing effective and practical network control algorithms that make
efficient use of wireless resources through joint topology adaptation, network
layer routing, MAC layer scheduling, and physical layer power, channel, and rate
control. The design of the algorithms leverages recent developments in the
control of dynamical systems and randomized algorithms, and takes into account
realistic channel models. This includes: (i) topology adaptation algorithms that
take advantage of channel allocation, power control, and the controlled mobility
capabilities of some of the nodes to dynamically decompose the network into sub-
networks in which low-complexity distributed scheduling and routing algorithms
are guaranteed to achieve high throughput, (ii) randomized distributed
algorithms that solve the scheduling and routing problems in a computationally
efficient manner using only local topological and queue size information, and
(iii) evaluation of the algorithms? performance in terms of throughput, delay,
and complexity. The developed algorithms will enable highly efficient operation
of wireless networks. The project incorporates training of graduate and
undergraduate students, outreach activities to local high-school teachers, and
technology transfer to industry and government laboratories.