* 0915727
* CIF: Small: Scalable Multimedia with Unequal Error Protection
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Pamela Cosman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 337,692.00

Scalable Multimedia with Unequal Error Protection&lt;br/&gt;Pamela C. Cosman
Laurence B. Milstein&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In today?s communications
environment, it is important to have rich media content (images, audio, video)
that can scale up or down depending on availability of resources. In quality
scalable multimedia, some portions of a bit stream contain information that
allows a moderate quality reconstruction of the image or video, and additional
portions of the bit stream allow the source to be reconstructed at progressively
higher quality. We consider the transmission of scalable multimedia data (image
and video) through variable types of channels, with a focus on providing
different levels of unequal error protection (UEP) appropriate for different
levels of information importance and suitable for the channel conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;There are many techniques for providing protection against errors,
including forward error protection (FEC), hierarchical modulation, and leaky and
partial prediction in video coding. Our research involves two new techniques for
combining hierarchical modulation with either image or video to produce enhanced
performance. We consider a MIMO-based technique, in which MIMO space-time coding
is used to increase reliability for the most important information in the
scalable image or video data, whereas MIMO spatial multiplexing is used to
increase data rate for the less important information. This is combined and
optimized with existing techniques where unequal error protection is achieved by
transmitting different power levels on multiple antennas. The hierarchical
approaches for UEP, as well as the MIMO techniques for UEP, are considered in
conjunction with FEC and with leaky/partial prediction mechanisms for scalable
video. We also consider UEP for cooperative communications, where a virtual MIMO
array is formed out of cooperating nodes. Lastly, we investigate the effects of
delay considerations in UEP.&lt;br/&gt;