* 0915813
* NeTS: Small: xBeam: Cross-Layer Beamforming Against Denial of Service Attacks in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yu-Dong Yao, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is commonly understood that to
achieve a desired level of security in wireless networks is a bigger challenge
than in wired networks. The denial of service (DoS) attack is a prominent threat
in wired networks, and is a more potent threat in the wireless domain. This
project aims to explore enabling approaches for a novel beamforming framework
with cross-layer interactions, referred to as xBeam, as a defense against DoS
attacks in wireless networks. This project examines various DoS attacks,
develops xBeam algorithms, evaluates the effectiveness of xBeam in deterring DoS
attacks, and validates the algorithms using a wireless test
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project develops a novel
defense approach against DoS attacks in wireless networks, which is based on
adaptive beamforming with cross-layer interactions. The approach can deter DoS
attacks across different networking layers, multiple DoS attacks mounting from
different spatial directions, and attacks mounted by malicious attackers who are
mobile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This research contributes to a
substantial improvement in wireless network security and contributes to the
advance of a networked mobile wireless information society. The project supports
research oriented education, by providing opportunities for advanced study of
wireless network security through coursework and hands-on experimentation. This
research also provides quality research experiences for undergraduate students
in the summer, particularly students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;