* 0915268
* HCC-Small: DHH Cyber-Community - Supporting Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students in STEM Fields
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Caroline Solomon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2015
* USD 523,889.00

Succeeding in mainstream universities (at all levels) involves extra challenges
for deaf and hard of hearing students. Skilled sign language interpreters and
captioners with advanced domain knowledge are often difficult to find, multiple
visual channels of information in the classroom can be hard to juggle, and
collaboration both inside and outside the classroom is often strained due to
language barriers. Furthermore, translation of advanced STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) topics into American Sign Language
(ASL) is far from standardized, and often requires discussion between students
and interpreters to devise consistent signs. Better access to classroom
activities and a consistent, conceptually clear signing system for STEM topics
are both vitally needed in order for deaf and hard of hearing students to
advance in the sciences. Thus, in this project the PI will design, implement,
and evaluate two distinct yet interconnected technologies. The first of these is
ClassInFocus, a classroom platform to help students access remote interpreters
and captioners, avoid visual dispersion, and facilitate interaction in the
classroom. ClassInFocus will utilize the existing high bandwidth internet
connections at multiple universities to create more opportunity for finding the
best qualified interpreter or captioner for specific STEM topics. Designing,
implementing, and evaluating technological solutions that best meet the
educational needs of deaf and hard of hearing students is a challenging research
problem; this immersive technology that brings many different technical and
human resources into the classroom in an accessible and unobtrusive way is new
to the field. ASL-STEM Forum, the second thrust of this work, will be an on-line
video forum to facilitate discussion about signing for STEM topics. Visual
collaboration between members of the community, in this case the Deaf Community,
is important to ensure natural, conceptually correct, and community approved
language progression. Designing, implementing, and evaluating a
cyberinfrastructure solution to facilitate discussion about ASL vocabulary and
grammar for STEM content, that will eventually serve as a resource for students,
teachers, and interpreters involved in ASL for STEM fields, is another
challenging research problem. Using social networking techniques to engage the
deaf and hard of hearing community in discussions about ASL topics and
vocabulary in STEM fields is entirely new to the field. This research will
involve collaboration with the National Technical Institute for the Deaf at
Rochester Institute of Technology, Gallaudet University, and the Shodor
Education Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The new technologies
to be developed as outcomes of this research will enable deaf and hard of
hearing students to better access the STEM fields by improving the learning
environment and the linguistic access to STEM content. Not only does this
increase the likelihood that deaf people will attain college and graduate
degrees, it will increase the participation of deaf and hard of hearing people
in the development and research of new technology. Other students may also
benefit from this technology, as digital notes and captions provide alternative
access for students with learning disabilities and create opportunities for
searchable archives of class content.