* 0915249
* Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment 2009
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Frederick Jones, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 09/30/2013
* USD 575,000.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;17 July 2009&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0915249&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oregon State University&lt;br/&gt;PI: P.
Zerr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
requests numerous Shipboard Scientific Support (SSSE) items for the vessel
operated by Oregon State University (OSU); namely the R/V WECOMA. The requests
specifically include items that have been recommended from past NSF inspections,
or Post-Cruise Assessments (PCA's) and have been otherwise deferred by the
operators due to cost. All of the items requested will either improve safety,
enhance science support capability, or extend vessel service life. Due to the
nature and timing of these requests, the vendor quotation standards normally
required by the SSSE Program were waived out of necessity with many of the
figures provided as estimates for budgetary purposes and based mainly on past
experience of the vessel operators for similar work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The R/V WECOMA supports federally funded
scientific research in the Pacific in order to expand human knowledge of the
ocean environment. During operations, the vessel routinely exposes graduate and
undergraduate students to seagoing oceanography. Pubic outreach is also achieved
through real-time satellite connectivity from ship to shore, and open house
events. The WECOMA is scheduled to complete over 120 NSF sponsored days in 2009.