* 0915444
* CIF: Small: Efficient Signal Processing Algorithms for Inference of Gene Regulatory Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Erchin Serpedin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2013
* USD 313,175.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, one of the
most important research problems encountered in molecular biology,
bioinformatics, and systems biology consists in deciphering the mechanisms that
lie at the basis of gene regulatory networks. The importance of gene regulatory
networks is due to their fundamental role in the control and operation of the
processes taking place in the living cell. Learning the structure and operation
of gene regulatory networks facilitates the identification and understanding of
the functions of macromolecules in cells, finding out the biological mechanisms
of diseases and organ development, and developing efficient disease diagnosis
and therapeutics means. The aim of this project is to build a computationally
efficient signal processing framework for global understanding of the structure
and functionality of gene regulatory networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major
research thrusts are addressed in this project. The first research thrust
develops information theoretic tools for efficient inference of causal
regulations between gene expressions, and determination of global topologies for
gene regulatory networks. The second research thrust develops a Bayesian
information theoretic framework for inference of gene regulatory networks based
on the integration of a multitude of heterogeneous data sources. A variational
Bayes sampling formalism is also built to overcome the intractable computational
complexity and convergence issues associated with the family of Monte-Carlo
techniques. This project brings important scientific, technological and
educational contributions. By combining microarray data with prior biological
knowledge and other data sources, the proposed computational tools have the
potential of uncovering new aspects of the logic that governs the
transcriptional control and interactions between genes, proteins and other
macromolecules.