* 0915871
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Assessing Technology Requirements For Preventing Teamwork Errors in Safety-Critical Settings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Lesk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 348,091.00

The staff in trauma centers are faced with complex problems under time pressure.
Despite the introduction of standard protocols, the diversity of injuries that
can occur requires a coordinated approach to the evaluation and treatment for
each patient. Trauma care involves complex teamwork under time pressure, and
teamwork errors endanger patient care and increase costs. Our proposed
ethnographic study will use observation and detailed analysis of video
recordings of trauma resuscitations to determine the nature and extent of
teamwork errors in a trauma center. This detailed study of complex teamwork will
uncover the causes of teamwork errors in collaborative high-risk environments.
Methods will be developed to understand how teams work and where difficulties
arise. This work will yield detailed descriptions of errors and their causes, a
taxonomy of teamwork errors, information on how to improve team performance, and
guides to the use of technology for teamwork support. It extends the level of
detail of ethnographic research so that we can achieve precision in the
understanding of procedures which are difficult to monitor automatically but
where step-by-step records are essential to detect the causes of errors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and improving the effectiveness of trauma
teams has direct benefit to society. Further, complex collaborations are
ubiquitous in modern enterprises and these results could improve collaborations
both in terms of quality and productivity across organizations. In addition,
this work will serve to develop the skills needed by a new cadre of researchers
with knowledge of computer-supported collaborative work, video-content analysis
and cooperative research.&lt;br/&gt;