* 0915380
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ethnoarchaeology of Gender-Specific Foraging among Martu in Western Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Douglas Bird, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,810.00

In collaboration with Dr. Douglas W. Bird, Mr. Brian F. Codding will examine the
material (i.e., archaeologically visible) residues that result from variability
in gendered foraging activities among Martu, an indigenous group who live in
remote communities in Australia's Western Desert. Today, many Martu hunt and
gather on a daily basis. A typical foraging bout begins with a foraging party
travelling together to a temporary day-camp from which men and women usually
operate separately, engaging in mutually exclusive foraging activities that
occur in different habitats (e.g., men may target hill kangaroo while women
focus on sand monitor lizards). After several hours, the party regroups at the
day-camp to cook, process, share and consume most of the food acquired during
the day. The group then typically returns to the community, leaving behind the
material remains of the day's activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because gender
differences in labor are common in almost all human societies but are rare among
other primates, questions about why humans have such differences and why they
vary lie at the heart of many influential arguments about the evolutionary
origins of human family formation and cooperative social organization. Yet
despite its importance, there is little agreement among anthropologists and
archaeologists about when and why gendered occupations became prominent features
of human social arrangements. Addressing these issues requires an understanding
of how archaeological residues represent the gendered foraging decisions made by
individuals. However, since the archaeological record is an accumulation of
individual behaviors, materials do not read as a straightforward window to
individual subsistence practices. In order to work towards a solution to this
problem, this research will quantify observed foraging behavior and the linked
material remains deposited at each camp. The goal is to gain a better
understanding of the archaeological consequences of foraging behavior and how
these are related to gendered decisions about resource use. By combining
observational data with the analysis of its material residues, this work aims to
provide the tools necessary to examine gendered foraging decisions in the past
through the residues of foraging alone. Developing such clear archaeological
signatures of the gender division of foraging labor will contribute directly
toward understanding a wide range of issues in human prehistory, from the
emergence of the genus Homo to processes of economic and political
intensification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also has the potential to
provide a broader impact on the public's understanding of these issues.
Specifically, this work provides the funds to train one PhD student and Martu
research assistants who will help with the duration of the project in
archaeological survey and excavation techniques. This training will provide an
important background for Martu who are actively involved in the management and
preservation of their cultural heritage. Working directly with Parnngurr
Community School and the Parnngurr Community Council, the results of this
research will also be publicized through collaborative websites. In so doing,
this work aims to provide a deeper public understanding of the range of
variability in family dynamics and their material expressions.