* 0915788
* III: Small: Supporting Investigative Analysts and Researchers in Sense-making across Large Document Collections through Visual Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* John Stasko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2013
* USD 489,671.00

People routinely encounter and seek to make sense of large collections of data
that include both unstructured reports or stories and loosely-structured logs or
spreadsheets. In many cases, information of relevance is scattered about a large
number of documents and it is the task of an analyst to read the documents and
"put the pieces together." For instance, police investigators when sifting
through a multitude of observations, case reports, and witness testimonies must
develop a coherent view of the events that really occurred. Academic researchers
investigating a new domain pour over large numbers of paper abstracts,
citations, and articles to develop a better understanding of the state of work
in that area. The process of connecting individual pieces of information such as
those discussed above into a more coherent narrative is a component of
investigative analysis, the main focus of this project. One common element of
analytic sense-making activities is that they are cognitively very challenging,
frequently involving large collections of data that tax a person's memory,
deduction, reasoning, and general analytic capabilities. Investigative analysis
today is made even more challenging by the ever-increasing torrent of data
available in a world where one can access vast databases and conduct internet
searches that in seconds return a quantity of documents no human can read and
assimilate in a reasonable amount of time. But technological means of augmenting
human memory and analytic reasoning hold great potential as investigative aids.
This project explores the development of computational systems to make
investigative analysts more effective and more efficient. The PI's approach
centers on providing multiple visual representations of the individual pieces of
data gathered during the investigation, to help highlight connections or
potential connections among them and to help analysts determine the next pieces
of data to examine from a large collection of evidence. The PI will draw upon
his experience in information visualization and visual analytics to design and
create a system to help analysts, and upon his experience in human-computer
interaction to evaluate whether the system is effective. The work will include
fundamental research on challenges such as the representation of reliability and
uncertainty in a visualization display, the development of collaborative system
capabilities so that analysts can work together, and the integration of
sophisticated automated textual analysis capabilities with the human-directed
exploration approach that visual interfaces provide. Careful evaluation of all
the new analytic capabilities will accompany their design as well.

Broader Impacts: Investigative analysis is a fundamental activity in law
enforcement and in intelligence activities that are important to our national
security. This project will invent next-generation visual analytic techniques
and technologies that can be used to develop investigative analysis systems in
the future. Other domains such as news reporting, academic research, and
business intelligence also require investigative analysis, so this project has
the potential to impact those fields as well.