* 0915409
* Indirect effects of apex predators in a grassland ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* John Maron, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 578,295.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite interest and debate, the
importance of top predators in terrestrial ecosystems remains largely
unresolved. Although predators can strongly suppress the abundance of their
prey, it is unclear is how these direct effects ripple through food webs to
indirectly influence plant communities and ecosystems. It remains unclear
whether predators influence plant productivity and diversity by influencing the
abundance or behavior of their herbivorous prey. Research will examine how avian
and mammalian predators influence the survival, behavior and abundance of a
3-species assemblage of small mammals. In-turn, it will be determined how this
rodent assemblage influences plant abundance, grassland productivity, community
composition and exotic plant invasion in the presence and absence of predators.
&lt;br/&gt;This study will reveal processes structuring natural grassland
ecosystems, providing information essential for maintaining and restoring these
communities and the ecosystem services they provide in the face of exotic plant
invasions and anthropogenic disturbances. Additionally, this research will
advance educational goals by providing structured research experiences for
undergraduates, opportunities for Native American students, and teacher training
through the Blackfoot Challenge, a consortium of local ranchers, government
scientists, and NGOs whose goal is to preserve the rural lifestyle and protect
habitat in Montana. Finally, research will provide pertinent monitoring
information for State and Federal biologists who manage the lands where
experiments will be conducted.