* 0915928
* NeTS:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Supporting unstructured peer-to-peer social networking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Gustavo de Veciana, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,998.00

0915928 - NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Supporting unstructured peer-to-
peer social
networking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;09/01/09-08/31/12&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;G. de
Veciana, PI, U.T. Austin, and G. Kesidis, PI, Penn
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-to-peer
systems have seen continued growth, in terms of traffic volume, and as the
architecture of choice to build new applications and network services ? notable
benefits lie in their distributed design leading to higher reliability and
flexibility. However as users/peers increasingly become content providers, and
generally conduct more of their business on the network, privacy is a critical
concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging peers? trust relationships through
referral mechanisms based on underlying reputation systems, applications that
deliver a new standard of privacy are being devised. Peer-to-peer systems that
dynamically adapt, in a distributed and scalable manner, based on the outcomes
of peer transactions, are being modeled and analyzed. The focus is on
unstructured networks where peer-membership correlations among communities of
interest can be learned to improve the search performance of reputation-biased
random walks and limited-scope flooding. Content-sharing applications are being
designed based that leverage this framework to incentivize cooperative behavior
while enabling collaborative filtering and content
pushing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results include the development analysis
and testing of a new framework for privacy-preserving search for large-scale,
unstructured, on-line, peer-to-peer networks. Complementary incentive mechanisms
resulting in improve file sharing and promoting honest referrals will be
devised. The results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed venues and,
where possible, industry concerns, while data and simulation tools are made
available on the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts impact will lie in
contributing new ways to improve privacy and promote more honest and efficient
cooperation in large-scale on-line peer-to-peer systems, for content sharing, as
well as a broader set of social networking applications.&lt;br/&gt;