* 0915855
* CSR:Small: TEAMS -- Transplanting Artificial Life Behaviors to Mobile Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Philip McKinley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2013
* USD 494,364.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The TEAMS project applies digital evolution to the design of robust
communication services for cooperating groups of robots. Example applications
include teams of robots for disaster relief operations, assisting humans in
dangerous occupations, and monitoring of critical infrastructure and public
service facilities such as drinking water reservoirs. In digital evolution, a
population of self-replicating computer programs exists in a user-defined
computational environment and is subject to mutations and natural selection.
Evolved algorithms (sequences of instructions comprising the genomes of digital
organisms) can be recompiled to execute directly on hardware platforms. The
project explores three overlapping classes of behavior: distributed self-
organization of nodes; collective communication operations that tolerate adverse
conditions; and mobility-aided communication methods, where nodes change their
locations in order to improve communication performance. Evolved behaviors are
evaluated on an NSF-sponsored digital evolution testbed containing a
heterogeneous collection of microrobots. The ability to observe the evolutionary
process in digital organisms provides a powerful method to investigate the
driving forces in complex systems. The TEAMS project exploits this open-ended
method of exploration to find better ways to construct software for mobile
robotic systems that need to interact with the physical world, and each other,
in order to solve problems. On a broader scale, the project includes several
innovative educational and outreach components, such as an after-school program
to provide economically disadvantaged K-12 students with exciting hands-on
experiences involving evolutionary computation, adaptive software, and robotics.