* 0915985
* NeTS: Small: A Game-Theoretic Framework for Agile and Resilient Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Guevara Noubir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Broadcast media underlying wireless networks enable diverse devices to
communicate using shared channels, but also leave them severely exposed to
adversaries. Our increased reliance on wireless networks for connectivity to the
cyber-infrastructure, and for monitoring our physical infrastructure, has opened
the door for sophisticated denial-of-service attacks with potentially
devastating effects on our economy and homeland
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a new game-theoretic
framework for agile and resilient wireless systems. The framework models the
interaction between communicating nodes and adversaries as two-player games,
with strategies defined by various protocol choices and cross-layer attacks. A
central thesis of this game-theoretic paradigm is that resilient wireless
systems need to be highly agile, rapidly mixing strategies to thwart adaptive
attackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methodology underlying this project
is threefold. The first component formulates games capturing complex
interactions between communicating nodes and adversaries across basic building
blocks of wireless systems. The second component concerns optimization problems
and equilibria associated with these games. The final component realizes the
architecture and solutions in two&lt;br/&gt;real-world prototypes: a Linux-based
platform for 802.11 networks, and a Software-Defined Radio platform for studying
more sophisticated mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
critical need of protecting our wireless infrastructure from DoS attacks. The
research conducted will lead to (a) new game-theoretic analysis of wireless
systems quantifying vulnerabilities and worst-case scenarios, and identifying
promising methods to thwart such attacks; (b) highly agile cross-layer protocols
that are resilient to the most adaptive adversaries; (c) new tools for
implementing and evaluating these protocols in real-world systems.&lt;br/&gt;