* 0915775
* TC:Small: A Formal Inter-Disciplinary Study of the Impact of Security Awareness Efforts on User Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Charles Crowell, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 477,783.00

Given the diverse and complex nature of computer security, a natural response of
the academic and industrial community has been to study how one can create
technical solutions to the problem. Although the technical solutions to various
problems can be quite effective, the underlying premise of many of the solutions
is predicated upon an informed awareness of the user of the importance of
avoiding risky behavior. While there has been considerable rigor undertaken with
regards to the evaluation of the efficacy of the various technical approaches,
the human aspect of computer security has received relatively minor attention
with largely cursory / anecdotal evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;The unfortunate result
of this lack of rigorous scientific data is the use of under-funded and ad hoc
awareness security awareness initiatives that offer limited benefit to the
security of the enterprise. This work will leverage the unique aspects of the
university-environment to conduct a multi-scale (time, observation group, data
granularity) formal set of experiments regarding the efficacy of security
awareness techniques. Moreover, the inter-disciplinary effort will bring to bear
the application of formal experiments to explore the usage of negative,
positive, and targeted communication interventions drawn from theoretical
considerations of existing criminology, psychology, and information system
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stated in an alternative manner, organizations
dedicate significant financial and human resources to information security
awareness programs designed to raise user knowledge about safe computing
practices and information security risks. Unfortunately, despite the fact that
many organizations are expending significant resources on awareness,
organizations have little if any guidance or scientific evidence to construct
effective strategies. Should strategies focus on positive or negative
strategies? Are post cards or hallway posters or training classes more
effective? Are awareness campaign effects temporary or long term? The focus of
this work will be to provide that rigorous scientific basis by exploring how
effective awareness techniques are in the ?wild? &lt;br/&gt;of the university
environment, unimpeded by normal network security controls. A key broader impact
of the work will be the creation of basic guidelines for the construction of
security awareness programs. The net result will be dramatically improved cost
efficiency of security awareness techniques and hence, significant improvement
in the national cyber-security infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;