* 0915933
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Coordinated Visualization for Comparative Analysis of Cross-Subject, Multi-measure, Multi-dimensional Brain Imaging Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jing Hua, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The amount of medical imaging data has been growing at an unprecedented rate in
recent years due to the rapid advancement in medical imaging devices and
technologies. In many medical application areas, assessment of similarity and
disparity from multimodality, multi-dimensional data across subjects plays a
central role. Current software in exploration and visualization of a collection
of multimodality, multidimensional cross-subject data impedes the effective
utilization and better understanding of acquired, large-scale data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to design and
develop a unique coordinated visualization framework, based on advanced
geometric computing as well as data and visual abstraction, for integrating,
interpreting and comparative analysis of cross-subject, multidimensional, multi-
measure brain imaging data. This developed visualization framework extends the
state-of-the-art in both information visualization and medical visualization. It
employs novel geometric feature analysis for better supporting surface matching
and shape comparison, and generalizes data warehousing technology to spatially
varying information deep inside multi-dimensional medical images. The research
outcomes are disseminated through traditional publications as well as the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project provides a useful
multimodality imaging analytics framework which contributes to diverse
application domains, such as clinical diagnosis of neurological disorders, drug
efficacy analysis through quantitative image analysis, and basic neuroscience.
In addition, the sharing of data and software tools has both clinical and
educational values for students, physicians, researchers, and the general
public. The integration of the research and education components promotes
further interactions between computer science and neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;