* 0915657
* MOD:  Co-Evolution of Innovative Products by Purposive Agents and the Growth of Technological Complexity
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Axtell, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 08/31/2012
* USD 398,460.00

Innovation is a driving force in the economy, and is often accompanied by
technological complexity. Innovation can naturally be modeled as the co-
evolution of a variety of economic goods accomplished by purposive individuals.
This project draws on the research literature associated with biological
evolution together with more conventional economic models of technological
innovation in order to create an agent-based computational model in which
purposive actors (simulated as agents) invent new projects, new products diffuse
into the economy, the number and diversity of economic goods increases over
time, and the technological complexity of the economy grows alongside the
agents? welfare.

Intellectual Merit This class of models is capable of generating many of the
stylized features of actual innovation systems, such as perpetual change,
creative destruction, continuously increasing human living standards, and
complex chains of inter-related technologies. By creating a high-fidelity model
of the technological innovation process, a better understanding of how policy
catalyzes innovation is developed. This is a fertile time to make cross-
disciplinary approaches to models of innovation, by mixing state-of-the-art
computer science techniques with what is known today about innovation within the
social sciences. This project includes elements from evolutionary computation,
social network analysis, and behavioral economics, and promises to be a new way
to investigate the science of science policy.

Broader Impacts: Innovation affects all aspects of modern life, and broader
impacts are implicitly part of any improved understanding of scientific
discovery and industrial commercialization processes. Specifically, the project
exposes the kinds of models built by this research to a variety of audiences
outside the basic research community. The outstanding Thomas Jefferson High
School for Science and Technology, near George Mason University, is the location
of one such outreach activity. There, seniors in computer science classes may
elect to execute a year-long project on a topic of their choice. Increasingly,
they choose topics in the social sciences and build agent-based models to
realize them. The researchers on this project work with computer science
teachers there to engage some of their students to work on models related to
science and technology policy.