* 0915800
* CIF: Small: Non-Linear Processing and Coding for Compressive Sensing with Applications in Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2013
* USD 499,995.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the new field
of compressive sensing has emerged with the &lt;br/&gt;promise to revolutionize
digital processing broadly. The key idea is &lt;br/&gt;the use of nonadaptive
linear projections to acquire an efficient, &lt;br/&gt;dimensionally reduced
representation of a signal or image directly &lt;br/&gt;using just a few
measurements. Surprisingly, Nyquist-rate sampling, &lt;br/&gt;which has
dominated how signals are acquired and processed in science &lt;br/&gt;and
technology since the origin of digital processing, can be leaped &lt;br/&gt;over
through compressive sensing theory. Such results may have a &lt;br/&gt;profound
impact broadly, including applications in spectroscopy, &lt;br/&gt;imaging,
communications, as well as consumer electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, the compressive sensing framework is ``extended" to &lt;br/&gt;make it
an integral part of a discrete-time all-analog-processing
&lt;br/&gt;communications system that completely skips the digital domain and
&lt;br/&gt;shows an excellent robustness against noise. The key idea is the use
&lt;br/&gt;of non-linear mappings that act as analog channel encoders,
processing &lt;br/&gt;the samples or compressive sensing measurements proceeding
from an &lt;br/&gt;analog source and producing continuous amplitude samples that
are &lt;br/&gt;transmitted directly through the noisy channel. Thus, all the
&lt;br/&gt;processing in the communications system is made in the analog domain.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its theoretical interest, the potential of this
&lt;br/&gt;approach in practical systems is substantial. For instance, the
&lt;br/&gt;proposed framework is readily applicable in practical systems such as
&lt;br/&gt;imaging, where it presents a performance that is very close to the
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical limits and clearly outperforms systems based on standard
&lt;br/&gt;compressive sensing. Furthermore, the idea of completely avoiding the
&lt;br/&gt;digital domain can be applied not just in point-to-point
&lt;br/&gt;communications systems, but also in more complex communications
&lt;br/&gt;problems such as distributed coding in sensor networks.