* 0915782
* TC: Small: Analysis and Privacy Tools for Enterprise Database Audit Logs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kristen LeFevre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Audit logging is a fundamental component of a comprehensive data security and
privacy infrastructure. It is complementary to other access control and security
mechanisms, and is particularly useful for recording inappropriate data access
by insiders. Recent legislation and regulatory oversight require organizations
in a variety of domains to maintain audit logs tracking their use of data, and
commercial database systems are beginning to provide support for automatically
recording all data accesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first main goal of this
project is to develop tools to support easy and proactive analysis of logged
information. The system will leverage the strengths of both declarative queries
(e.g., SQL) and statistical anomaly detection. Using the new framework, for
example, rather than simply flagging incoming queries as anomalous based on a
pre-trained set of profiles or rules, an analyst will be able to craft custom
exploratory queries and visual representations. In support of such a tool, the
research team at RPI will design and build an independent subsystem, called
Splash, which extends the functionality of a relational DBMS to incorporate
support for managing statistical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though audit logs
are collected in the name of security and accountability, in certain situations
the logs themselves may pose a risk to the privacy of users who access an
underlying database. The second main goal of this project is to develop tools
for managing the privacy risks associated with collecting and storing audit
logs. Students will be engaged throughout the research program. The software
will be distributed through open source software.