* 0916890
* NeTS:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Holistic and Integrated Design of Layered Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 144,914.00

The dramatic increase in throughput demands on transport systems has propelled
the development of all-optical networks. These networks can provide tremendous
capacity when they are designed with their own limitations in mind, such as
coarse wavelength granularity and physical impairments. In this research we
consider the holistic design of optical networks that include the
interdependence of three network layers: the traffic grooming layer, the
lightpath management layer, and the physical fiber
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network is first viewed from the top-down, where
sub-wavelength circuit requests arrive with specific quality of service
requirements. Current traffic grooming approaches are altered to incorporate
their dependence on the lightpath management and physical layer
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;The system is then examined from the bottom-up, so that
the quality of transmission and efficiency of resource utilization can be
optimized as the higher layer protocols evolve. Total capacity is measured from
an information theoretic view point and system optimization uses ideas from game
theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research will be practical
algorithms for improved capacity and survivability of future optical networks as
well as providing a quantitative proof of their superiority. The enhancement of
network capability will help satisfy our society?s ever-increasing need for
information. It encourages the development of applications that require
significant bandwidth. It also stimulates cross-fertilization of ideas from the
two fields of networking and communications. The algorithms and software will be
made publicly available via a web-site. The research enhances the education of
the diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students participating in it.
&lt;br/&gt;