* 0916534
* NetSE: Small: Complex Adaptive Networks: Generative Models and Statistical Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 461,094.00

Our society is becoming increasingly dependent on various technological
networks, such as transportation systems, electrical power?distribution grids,
computer networks, and so on. As those networks evolve and grow in complexity,
their dynamical behavior is becoming difficult to understand and predict. This
project will develop a general framework for modeling growth and evolution of
such complex adaptive networks, based on the notion of interacting stochastic
processes. The intuition behind this approach is that the interactions that form
the network are informed by the collective state of the stochastic processes,
while those processes themselves are affected by the forming network structure.
The presence of such a feedback mechanism is vital for capturing realistic
behavior of many real-world networks. The research will develop rigorous
mathematical methods for analyzing structural and dynamical properties of
adaptive networks, and define novel information?theoretic measures for
quantifying their complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Our nation?s
technological infrastructure of future will depend on our ability to control
large?scale, dynamic networks of interconnected heterogeneous entities. This
work will help to better understand, characterize, and predict the collective
behavior of such networks. The project will train new professionals and
scientists in an important interdisciplinary area, and develop a graduate course
material on complex adaptive networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;