* 0916905
* CSR: Small: Feedback-Controlled Management  of Virtualized Resources for Predictable Escience
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Marty Humphrey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* M. Mimi McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 375,000.00

The use of virtual machines for Escience has been advocated both within the
enterprise to replace aging machines and as the underlying technology of cloud
computing whereby scientific researchers can ?rent? servers on demand. However,
both scenarios can lead to inadequate performance. Within the enterprise, with
incorrect planning or under unexpected heavy or even moderate load, there might
not be enough physical capacity for every virtual machine to achieve reasonable
performance. In cloud-computing-based scenarios, the ?renters? are largely
subject to the informal service promises of the cloud provider based on a
granularity that can be too coarse or at the wrong level of abstraction. This
project pursues a novel unified framework to ensure predictable Escience based
on these two dominant emerging uses of virtualized resources. The foundation of
the approach is to wrap an Escience application in a performance container
framework and dynamically regulate the application?s performance through the
application of formal feedback control theory. The application?s progress is
monitored and ensured such that the job meets its performance goals (e.g.,
deadline) without requiring exclusive access to physical resources even in the
presence of a wide class of unexpected disturbances. This project extends this
foundation and early results in three important dimensions: creating support for
non-specialists to use the framework; implementing these techniques in
Eucalyptus, one of the major open-source cloud computing frameworks; and
applying the techniques to ?Software-as-a-Service? (SaaS), in which applications
in the cloud are regulated to provide predictable performance.