* 0916452
* MSC: Sequential Classification and Detection via Markov Models in Point Clouds of Urban Scenes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Ioannis Stamos, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2014
* USD 403,998.00

One of the most important problems in 3D computer vision and graphics is the
automatic scene reconstruction from 2D and 3D images. Recently, the
reconstruction of complex urban scenes has attracted significant interest. This
is because accurate 3D city models are paramount in the further development of a
variety of fields such as urban planning, architecture, and archeology. They are
also very important for applications commonly used in everyday life such as
street map visualization and navigation, as well as in the film and construction
industries. Automatic 3D image reconstruction and classification of urban
scenes, though, is a problem whose complexity still challenges today?s research
community. 3D reconstruction of city models is achieved through data acquisition
using a variety of devices such as laser scanners and regular cameras. While
laser scanners provide dense, detailed and accurate 3D points, they suffer from
slow speed which dramatically increases the cost of
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is led by a multi-
disciplinary team, combines expertise from computer vision, mathematical
modeling and statistics to address this limitation. The goal of this work is to
develop and implement real-time detection and classification techniques applied
to streams of 3D point-cloud data. This allows focused acquisition of objects of
interest (e.g. facades, etc.) and thus increases speed and reduces power
consumption. It also aids high-level recognition processes in detecting and
classifying objects in urban scenes. Reduction of the high-dimensional nature of
the data is achieved by the clever innovative selection of a measurement model.
A new formulation using hidden Markov models is used to capture the complexity
of urban scenes. The real-time algorithms are tested on point-cloud data
acquired in a real urban setting by the latest generation of laser range
scanning technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the education front, this project
provides a stimulating research environment for both undergraduate and graduate
students on the interdisciplinary frontier of mathematics and computer science.
It also provides a framework for innovating the curriculum at both Brooklyn, a
minority-serving institution, and Hunter Colleges through the development of
interdisciplinary courses.&lt;br/&gt;