* 0916951
* RI: Small:  Simplifying Text for Individual Reading Needs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Mari Ostendorf, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2015
* USD 463,210.00

A surprisingly large number of Americans read below their grade level, either
because of limited education or because their native language is not English.
Low reading levels impact a child?s progress in school and an adult?s job
opportunities as well as limiting information access. This project aims to
improve access by developing new language processing technology for selecting
and transforming text to obtain material at lower reading levels, extending
current paraphrasing work that focuses on summarization as compression to
include explanatory expansions. In addition, the goal is to develop adaptive
models that can be tuned to a specific domain and an individual's needs. The
approach involves analyzing corpora of comparable text collected from the web,
developing models of paraphrasing aimed at generating simplified English,
developing a discourse-sensitive clause selection method for expanding or
omitting details, and exploring representations of language that facilitate
domain and user adaptation. The language processing contributions of this work
include development of text resources to support language technology in
education applications, new representations of reading difficulty, and advances
in automatic methods of paraphrasing. The broader impact of this project
includes making information more accessible to people with limited English
reading proficiency. In addition, students working on the project will have the
opportunity to interact with teachers from a local school so as to better
understand the impact of their work and guide their approach, and their work
will be showcased in University of Washington diversity-oriented outreach
programs.