* 0916307
* TC: Small: Towards Automating Privacy Controls for Online Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Miriam Metzger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2013
* USD 501,508.00

For millions of Internet users today, controlling information access on Online
Social Networks (OSNs) such as Facebook and LinkedIn is a difficult challenge.
Privacy controls in current systems do not provide the necessary level of
flexibility and usability to their users. Some systems like MySpace and LinkedIn
allow users to grant all-or-nothing access control to their profiles. While
simple to use, these controls are imprecise and can easily leak data to
unintended recipients or prevent the legitimate sharing of data. In contrast,
OSNs like Facebook provide extremely powerful controls that are unfortunately
too complex for most users to configure. This proposal addresses the need for
privacy control policies that are both powerful and simple to use. The proposed
work provides simple and powerful privacy policies by using machine learning
techniques to automatically infer user preferences from observed user behavior.
The work also proposes "privacy lenses," a generalized mechanism to debug
privacy policies by viewing user information through the access controls of any
specified user. These technical solutions will be implemented on the Facebook
social network as a third-party application. In addition, the data gathered from
the deployed application will provide evidence to either validate or refute the
perplexing phenomenon known as the "privacy paradox," where users take little
action to protect their privacy despite expressing strong concerns about online
privacy.

The proposed project addresses a significant problem fundamental to protecting
online information. By allowing the social network to "learn" what users want
based on their actions, the PIs remove the complexity of managing privacy
policies, thereby giving non-technical Internet users a simple and intuitive way
to customize their preferences. The work is novel in its use of machine learning
techniques to infer user preferences, and can change the way privacy policies
are constructed for a wide variety of Internet applications. By gathering user
data from a large-scale social network, the project will also provide
significant support to improve understanding of the motivations behind users
actions concerning online privacy. Finally, the proposed work will integrate
sophisticated experimental networking research techniques with detailed human
studies, adding an additional dimension to traditional experiments performed by
social scientists.