* 0916808
* SHF: Small: Specification, Verification, and Semantics of Higher-Order and Concurrent Software
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* John Reynolds, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 487,108.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend the scale and generality of
separation logic and grainless semantics&lt;br/&gt;to become applicable to the
specification and verification of more complex and&lt;br/&gt;varied software
systems, the following research initiatives are being pursued:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Higher-Order Design Patterns - Using higher-order
separation logic to&lt;br/&gt; specify design patterns in object-oriented
programing, and to verify their&lt;br/&gt; implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Extension to a Higher-Order Programming Language - extending
separation&lt;br/&gt; logic to an Algol-like language with a heap, including
procedures that&lt;br/&gt; permit global information
hiding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Grainless Semantics - devising a new form of
grainless semantics that gives&lt;br/&gt; a more abstract and concise
description of shared-variable concurrency by&lt;br/&gt; avoiding any commitment
to a default level of atomicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Implementation of Logics
and Semantics - Using the Isabelle/HOL system to&lt;br/&gt; implement the
machine-aided construction of proofs in separation logic in a&lt;br/&gt; way
that ensures both the validity of the proofs and the soundness of the&lt;br/&gt;
logic and its extensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to
substantially increase the variety of programs that can&lt;br/&gt;be verified by
separation logic, and to facilitate soundness arguments for this&lt;br/&gt;and
other logics for shared-variable concurrency.&lt;br/&gt;