* 0916691
* III: Small: Automatic Incremental Design for Next-Generation Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Stanley Zdonik, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,999.00

Data management systems are undergoing a sea change. Specialized engines with
specialized physical storage structures are emerging to address the extreme data
volume and performance requirements of modern applications. At the same time,
the complexity of these systems, the applications in which they are used and the
platforms on which they are built is increasing. Thus, there is a growing need
for automatic database design for these emerging database systems.
Unfortunately, previous work in automatic design cannot be used directly. While
the conceptual framework of previous research is useful, the specifics must be
reworked in order to adequately take advantage of the opportunities and address
the challenges that these new structures present. Furthermore, most design tools
only create complete designs. There is also a need for automatic designers that
can produce a new design that is sensitive to the cost of migrating an old
design to a new one. Such an incremental designer would often generate a sub-
optimal design if that design will produce 80% of the benefit with 20% of the
work.

The PIs propose to investigate this incremental automatic design paradigm for
newly emerging database systems. Specifically, the project addresses three data
management platforms: column stores for OLAP, main memory, cluster-based systems
for OLTP, and an extension to row stores for exploiting correlations in data
attributes.

The PIs expect to extend the work on current design tools by demonstrating
workable incremental designers as described above. There is a strong need for
such tools, and if this research is successful, it should enable successful
deployment of many new-style data managers. Moreover, incremental design ideas
based on sound cost-benefit analysis are applicable to other data-intensive
computing environments and constitute an important direction towards truly
autonomic computing. Further information on the project can be found on the
project web page: http://database.cs.brown.edu/projects/auto/

