* 0916407
* TC: Small: Understanding the Roots of the Spam Problem -- Email Address Trafficking
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Michael Rabinovich, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 146,252.00

Existing anti-spam techniques, such as spam filters and reputation systems, face
growing difficulties due to spammers' use of multimedia content (which is hard
to filter) and botnets (which mask true spammer identity and thus handicap
reputation systems). Te goal of this project is to complement these existing
efforts by targeting email address distribution channels, where lists of
addresses are bought and sold among unscrupulous parties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first necessary step, this project?s goal is to
better understand the email trafficking phenomenon. This is a unique opportunity
to study email spam in conjunction with email address trafficking. The team
recently built a system for Internet users that, as a side effect, is able to
collect the data that would contain information necessary for this analysis.
Second, they secured cooperation from the Case Western Reserve University IT
organization to test-deploy this system for up to 500 users and keep it in place
for at least a year, which would allow them to collect a trove of data for a
large-scale study and analysis. This proposal will study spam from a unique
perspective ? email address trafficking. While previous studies characterize
spam by considering email content and senders, address trafficking represents an
important aspect of the spam problem, and better understanding of address
trafficking can open new effective ways to combat spam. The broader impact
includes its potential for better mechanisms to combat spam, for fostering
collaboration with data mining faculty within the department, and for enhancing
graduate and undergraduate education by adding material on application-level
network security to, respectively ?Internet Applications? graduate course and to
the ?Computer Networks? core undergraduate course.&lt;br/&gt;