* 0916209
* NetSE: Small: Game Theoretic  Coverage and Connectivity Services
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 382,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic Sensor Networks (RSNs) are
finding increasing use in critical&lt;br/&gt;applications such as surveillance,
environmental monitoring, emergency&lt;br/&gt;response and search-and-rescue.
With recent advances in embedded&lt;br/&gt;technologies, devices that can be
used as RSN units are becoming available&lt;br/&gt;for everyday use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
pursuit-evasion games where one or more&lt;br/&gt;pursuers tries to "capture" an
evader who, in turn, tries to avoid&lt;br/&gt;capture. Robust, provably correct
solutions to many RSN &lt;br/&gt;tasks (such as coverage and connectivity) can
be obtained by modeling them as pursuit-evasion
games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing solutions to pursuit-evasion games usually
assume that&lt;br/&gt;(i) all players can observe each other at all times and
(ii) there is&lt;br/&gt;a centralized authority that coordinates all pursuers.
Hence, such&lt;br/&gt;solutions are not applicable for modeling RSN applications
where the&lt;br/&gt;network faces severe sensing and communication limitations.
The&lt;br/&gt;primary goals of the proposed work are to understand the effect of
these&lt;br/&gt;limitations on the outcome of the game, and to design strategies
to&lt;br/&gt;overcome them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Sensing and actuation are expected to play significant roles
in the&lt;br/&gt;evolution of information technology and the Internet.
This&lt;br/&gt;research will contribute to this evolution in two major ways.
First,&lt;br/&gt;it will deliver algorithms, tools and techniques to
address&lt;br/&gt;communication, sensing and actuation issues simultaneously.
Second,&lt;br/&gt;it will help scientists and engineers participating in this
development acquire a broad&lt;br/&gt;range of skills in areas such as
algorithms, perception, robotics and communications. This&lt;br/&gt;will be
achieved through outreach programs and by incorporating this research in PI's
courses.&lt;br/&gt;