* 0916807
* RI Small:  On Robot Motor Capability for Skill Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2017
* Chun-Sing Lee, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 07/31/2017
* USD 486,000.00

Endowing humanoid robots with the ability of skill learning will enable them to
be versatile and skillful in performing various tasks. The problem of
transferring human skills to humanoid robots raises tremendous research interest
in studying human and robot motor skills. Our research aims at developing a
quantitative measure of robot motor capability of a humanoid root motor system
for the application of transferring human skills to a humanoid robot. An in-
depth study of basic intrinsic properties of robot motor capability based on
information theory will be performed to derive a pseudo index of motor
performance. This pseudo index of motor performance is derived from robot
kinematics, dynamics, and control with the speed-accuracy constraint taken into
consideration. With the speed-accuracy constraint, the motor performance of a
robot is optimized to accomplish a task. The research results demonstrate an
increased understanding of robot motor capability that shows the capability and
limitation of a robot for learning skills from human demonstration. The project
plans to verify the result on an existing humanoid robot. The project results
will provide new insights in humanoid robot motor learning and control, and
launch a new research direction on human-robot interaction when both humans and
robots better know their respective motor capabilities. The broader impacts
include incorporation of research results into existing graduate and
undergraduate robotics courses, and outreach activities of a weeklong robotics
summer camp and a lab open house for high-school students. The research results
will be disseminated in professional conferences, workshops and archival journal
publications.