* 0916557
* RI: Small: A Simple but General Hand
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Matthew Mason, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 07/31/2013
* USD 515,079.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robot hands are usually simple, with
just two or three fingers, perhaps a single actuator, and most often no sensors
at all. These simple hands are also very specific in their function, such as
picking up a specific part. Research on more general robot hands usually focuses
on complex hands, often resembling human hands. This project is developing
simple hands with general capabilities. The approach is inspired by a variety of
simple hands, such as a prosthetic hook, which have proven generality when
controlled by a human, yet have never demonstrated great generality when
controlled by an autonomous robot. In particular the project is developing hands
that can blindly capture objects among clutter, and testing these hands both in
a factory automation application and in a home assistive robotics
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will be
broadly applicable. Every advance in hand design enables new applications, so
development of new principles broadly advancing the generality of hands will be
useful. Specific cases are advancing the nation's manufacturing workforce
productivity, and enabling the elderly to live independently. Results will be
disseminated by scholarly publication of new principles, analysis, and
experimental results, as well as distribution of analytical software, planning
and control software, and hand designs.