* 0916997
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Logical Localization for Mobile Devices through Ambience Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Romit Roy Choudhury, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2012
* USD 110,597.00

The notion of location is broad, ranging from physical coordinates
(latitude/longitude) to logical locations (like Starbucks, WalMart, museums).
Logical locations are gaining importance because they express the context of the
user, allowing applications to carry out context-specific interaction. For
instance, a person entering Starbucks may receive an advertisement for
purchasing coffee. Evidently, such applications expect to learn the existence of
the user within the confines of a logical place (like Starbucks). The rich body
of localization literature based on GPS/WiFi/GSM is dominantly physical in
nature, and translating them to logical locations is error prone. This is
because a dividing wall may separate two logical locations and an error margin
of few meters may place the mobile device on the incorrect side of this wall.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal proposes a unique system called
SurroundSense that breaks away from physical localization and investigates
direct methods of recognizing logical locations. The main idea in SurroundSense
exploits the observation that a logical place has a distinct ambience in terms
of its background sound, light, color, RF signals, and layout. The attributes of
the ambience can be sensed through mobile phone sensors and suitably combined to
form a fingerprint of that place. This fingerprint can then be used to identify
the logical location of the phone by comparing it against an existing database
of location-fingerprints. As an example, a Starbucks may include sound
signatures from coffee machines and microwaves that are different from the
clinking of forks and spoons in restaurants. Similarly, signature colors in the
decor may vary from store to store, lighting styles and store layouts may be
different, and so will the WiFi SSIDs audible at that location. The combination
of all these attributes, a fingerprint, is likely to exhibit reasonable
diversity for high quality, logical localization.&lt;br/&gt;