* 0916695
* REVSYS: Reconstructing Heroini (Teleostei:Cichlidae) - Of Heroes, Convicts, Angels and Red Devils
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Prosanta Chakrabarty, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2014
* USD 519,944.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The roughly 100 species of heroine
cichlid fishes are well known among biologists for their charismatic behaviors,
dramatic color patterns, and remarkable history of rapid diversification. Yet,
little is known about the patterns and process that resulted in this notable
diversity. This project will investigate the phylogenetic and biogeographic
history of these fishes using data from DNA sequences and morphological
analyses. Because these fishes are ancient and restricted to freshwater, they
can help resolve how the geological blocks that now make up the Central American
landbridge formed and moved over the last 65 million years. This research will
help us better understand the geological history of the northern Neotropics and
to protect the fragile freshwater habitats where these fishes are found.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will included training of students at the
high school, college, graduate, and postdoctoral levels in the U.S., and in
several Latin American countries. The project will also help establish local
conservation efforts related to the fragile freshwater ecosystems of the
Neotropics and to the effects of habitat loss and the introduction of non-native
fishes. &lt;br/&gt;