* 0916073
* CIF:Small:Physical Layer Optimization for Cognitive Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 305,948.00

Physical Layer Optimization for Cognitive Sensor
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cognitive radio concept has been a
revolutionary development in wireless communications systems. Cognitive,
software-defined radios are able to adjust link and network resources in order
to optimize communications performance. However, high rate, robust
communications is often just one of many possible network objectives. For
example, in sensing applications, the goal is to maximize coverage, detect
important events with high probability, and track objects of interest with high
accuracy. These goals are often at odds with those for optimum communications;
improved coverage requires more widely dispersed sensors, complicating network
connectivity. High resolution sensing requires more bits of information, which
in turn place a strain on network throughput. Power devoted to routing or packet
forwarding reduces a sensors lifetime. Clearly, a different paradigm is needed
when sensing performance is the critical factor, or perhaps most interestingly,
when both communications and sensing performance must be considered in tandem.
This research effort introduces Cognitive Sensing as a concept dual to that of
cognitive communications, and investigates the competing objectives of sensing
and communications networks. A cognitive sensor would adaptively adjust its
operating parameters in response to the environment it finds itself in so as to
optimize sensing performance, or perhaps a dual performance metric that includes
both sensing and communications functions. Parameters relevant to sensing
performance could include sensor position, speed and heading, antenna
beampattern and polarization, transmit waveform type and bandwidth, imaging
camera zoom, orientation, resolution, pointing angle, etc. The question of how
to allocate such sensor resources is central to this effort.&lt;br/&gt;