* 0916474
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Taxonomy for the Automated Tuning of Matrix Algebra Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2013
* Boyana Norris, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 02/28/2013
* USD 250,000.00

CCF - 0917324 &lt;br/&gt;SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Taxonomy for the
Automated Tuning of Matrix Algebra Software&lt;br/&gt;PI Jessup, Elizabeth R.
University of Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;CCF ? 0916474&lt;br/&gt;PI Norris,
Boyana University of Chicago&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In response to the
need for high-performance scienti&amp;#64257;c software, we propose to study
ways to ease the production of optimized matrix algebra software. Each step of
the code development process presently involves many choices, most requiring
expertise in numerical computation, mathematical software, compilers, or
computer architecture. &lt;br/&gt;The process of converting matrix algebra from
abstract algorithms to high-quality implementations is a complex one. When
leveraging existing high-performance numerical libraries, the application
developer must select the appropriate numerical routines and then devise ways to
make these routines run e&amp;#64259;ciently on the architecture at hand. Once
the numerical routine has been identi&amp;#64257;ed, the process of including it
into a larger application can often be tedious or di&amp;#64259;cult. The tuning
of the application itself then presents a myriad of options generally centered
around one or more of the following three approaches: manually optimizing code
fragments; using tuned libraries &lt;br/&gt;for key numerical algorithms; and,
less frequently, using compiler-based source transformation tools for loop-level
optimizations. The goals of the proposed research are three-fold. First, we will
construct a taxonomy of available software that can be used to build highly-
optimized matrix algebra computations. The taxonomy will provide an organized
anthology of software components and programming tools needed for that task. The
taxonomy will serve as a guide to practitioners seeking to learn what is
available for their programming tasks, how to use it, and how the various parts
&amp;#64257;t together. It will build upon and improve existing collections of
numerical software, adding tools for the tuning of matrix algebra computations.
Second, we will develop an initial set of tools that operate in conjunction with
this taxonomy. In particular, we will provide an interface that takes a high-
level description of a matrix algebra computation and produces a customizable
code template using the software in the taxonomy. The template will aid the
developer at all steps of the process from the initial construction of Basic
Linear Algebra Subprogram (BLAS)-based codes through the full optimization of
that code. Initially, the tools will accept a MATLAB prototype and produce
optimized Fortran or C. Finally, we will advance the state-of-the-art in tuning
tools by improving &lt;br/&gt;some of the tools included in the taxonomy,
broadening their ranges of functionality in terms of problem domains and
languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;