* 0916726
* DC: Small:Collaborative Research: Managing Extreme-Scale Data Intensive Computing: Fundamental Design and Control Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 184,999.00

With the continuous growth of data production and the ever expanding computing
infrastructure, future extreme-scale data intensive computing systems are facing
unprecedented design and control challenges to meet the continuous and
increasing demand for information processing. Scalability, robustness,
continuous availability, and service quality are the key attributes desired to
ensure that the system designed today is capable of operating with the same
efficiency on the extreme scale of the future. The goal of the research
described in this proposal is to develop theoretical foundations and practical
control algorithms that enable the scalable design and efficient management of
future extreme-scale data-intensive computing. Specifically, the researchers
will 1) identify fundamental design principles needed to achieve scalability
when developing network infrastructure and software systems in large scale. Here
the concerns are to understand the performance degradation limited by various
factors, including network structure, processor speeds, buffering/storage
capacities, etc. 2) develop distributed control strategies on operator
placement, data storage, load shedding, and resource allocation so as to enable
efficient in-network information processing. The project will produce a deeper
and quantitative understanding on the fundamental design principles and control
strategies needed to achieve scalability, robustness and quality of service for
future data-intensive information service systems. These advances will occur
through a collaborative effort spanning multiple disciplines ranging from
performance modeling, networking, queueing, to optimization.