* 0916351
* SHF: Small: Programming Abstractions for Algorithmic Software Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Rastislav Bodik, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In contrast to software verification, software synthesis "writes" programs
rather than merely checks them for errors. While verification has recently
reached the programmer, the success of synthesis remains in the hands of
formally trained experts. To ease the adoption of synthesis, this proposal
develops algorithmic synthesis, which is to deductive synthesis what model
checking is to deductive verification: Rather than deducing a program with a
theorem prover, algorithmic synthesis systematically finds the program in a
space of candidate implementations. A key remaining challenge is how to describe
this candidate space. Each synthesizer must be "programmed" with insights about
the domain and its implementation tricks. In deductive synthesis, the insight is
conveyed by a domain theory. In algorithmic synthesis, programmers typically
communicate their insight by writing a partial program that syntactically
defines the candidate space. The partial program is then completed by the
synthesizer. Since the program is specified partially, programmers can control
the candidate space size, making algorithmic synthesis feasible while leaving
tedious program details to the synthesizer. This project investigates linguistic
aspects of algorithmic synthesis, addressing three issues: (1) How to debug
partial programs? Angelically non-deterministic oracles will be used for gradual
development of partial programs. (2) What is domain insight and how to
communicate it? Programming abstractions will be developed for defining the
candidate space naturally. (3) How to refine the insight with the goal of aiding
the synthesizer scalability? An interactive dialogue between the programmer and
the synthesizer will help the programmer refine and formalize her insight.