* 0916047
* TC:  Small:  Characterizing and Mitigating Device-Based Attacks in Cellular Telecommunications Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Patrick Traynor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

TC: Small: Characterizing and Mitigating Device-Based Attacks in Cellular
Telecommunications Networks

PI: Patrick Traynor (Traynor@cc.gatech.edu) Co-PI: Jonathon Giffin
(giffin@cc.gatech.edu)

Mobile phones have traditionally provided a limited set of telephony
operations. However, the recent and rapid introduction of complex operating
systems, sophisticated user interfaces and connectivity with the Internet has
transformed these systems into highly capable general-purpose computing
platforms. Unfortunately, the software implementing these systems often lacks
even basic security protections. In this project, we will investigate the impact
of an immature and vulnerable software infrastructure on both mobile devices and
the cellular network core. Characterizing and responding to the threats is
critical, especially given that the security models of cellular networks are
designed around the assumption of highly limited user devices. We plan first to
create Caegis, an in situ set of tools for ARM code analysis and over-the-air
cellular phone fuzzing to help manufacturers improve the quality of their
software and reduce its susceptibility to malware. We will then focus on basic
mechanisms for Remote Repair, which will allow the network to help a device
reboot to a known safe state. The development of these two tools, in combination
with improved characterizations of the impact of malware, will significantly
improve the security provided to this piece of critical infrastructure.
Moreover, this project will help students in both independent research and a
related class to gain hands-on experience with security research on our Alcatel-
Lucent IMS network core.