* 0916085
* NetSE: Small: Incorporating Telecommunications Policy and Economics into Internet Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Scott Jordan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to incorporate key elements of telecommunication
policy and economics into Internet architecture. As a result of technical,
economic and public policy forces, the Internet's original design principles --
layering and end-to-end -- are increasingly violated. Internet Service Providers
are deploying quality of service mechanisms, but only allowing their use for
certain applications sold to their own subscribers. Some Internet Service
Providers have used deep packet inspection techniques to implement traffic
management practices that throttle or block peer-to-peer applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To counteract this deterioration, this project will
propose an interdisciplinary approach to update the Internet architectural
principles to account for telecommunications policy and economics. The project
will identify the flaws of the end-to-end and layering models that are not
withstanding the technical, economic, and legal forces upon networking; modify
these models so that they promote good technical design, respond appropriately
to economic pressures, and encourage beneficial outcomes that benefit society;
and validate these new models and illustrate their potential use by applying
them to three case studies -- net neutrality, traffic management, and Quality of
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broad impact. The P.I.
is developing an undergraduate course on ?The Internet and Public Policy?. This
research will help bridge the gulf that exists between communication lawmakers
and networking researchers by informing staff members in the United States
Congress about the technical aspects of telecommunication issues, and by
developing an architectural framework for the networking research community to
help them consider impacts of network economics and law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;