* 0916303
* SHF: Small: Global Manipulation in Solid-State Quantum Information Processing - Protocols and Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Lin Tian, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2013
* USD 300,967.00

Quantum physics has been applied to study problems in computing complexity in
recent years, which has become a new frontier in computer science. Computer
hardware that is operated according to the laws of quantum mechanics can realize
novel quantum protocols and bring enormous speed-up for certain computationally
hard problems. The key issue in implementing such hardware is in achieving
highly accurate and fast control on the quantum logic elements so that they can
beat the hazardous effects from the environmental noise. For solid-state quantum
processors, including superconducting systems and semiconductor systems, such
control is usually achieved via adjustable local parameters, where careful
designing of the circuit and the connections to external sources are required.
In this project, a quantum global mode will be exploited to achieve efficient
implementation of the quantum protocols. Here, the quantum global mode is the
microwave photon mode in a nanoscale quantum resonator that has millimeter
wavelength, can couple with multiple quantum logic elements simultaneously, and
has demonstrated microsecond quantum coherence times. Meanwhile, the global mode
will also be considered as a probe to measure quantum entanglement and quantum
coherence effects in the solid-state quantum processors. Two questions will be
studied in this project. First, solid-state quantum simulators that can emulate
quantum many-body systems involving arrays of solid-state elements will be
studied, where the global quantum mode will act as a control as well as a
detector of the quantum phase transitions in the simulators. Second, a universal
quantum computer of spurious two-level fluctuators in the superconducting system
will be studied where the global mode can provide individual control, effective
coupling, and readout of the fluctuator states. Both the hardware aspect and the
software aspect will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;