* 0916384
* SHF: Small: Leveraging the Interplay between Process Variation and NBTI in Nanoscale Reliable NoC Architecture Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2014
* USD 415,092.00

The trend towards multi-/many- core design has made network-on-chip (NoC) a
crucial hardware component of future microprocessors. With the continuous down-
scaling of CMOS processing technologies, reliability is becoming a primary
target in NoC design. Negative Bias Temperature Instability (NBTI) is a critical
reliability threat for deep sub-micrometer CMOS technologies. NBTI increases the
PMOS transistor threshold voltage and reduces the drive current, causing
failures in logic circuits and storage structures due to timing violations or
minimum voltage limitations. Meanwhile, process variation (PV) - the divergence
of transistor process parameters from their design specifications - caused by
the difficulty in controlling sub-wavelength lithography and channel doping as
CMOS manufacturing technology scales, results in variability in circuit
performance/power and has become a major challenge in the design and fabrication
of future microprocessors and NoCs. Since NBTI and PV affect both NoC delay and
power, it is imperative to address these challenges at the NoC architecture
design stage to ensure its efficiency as the underlying CMOS fabrication
technologies continue to scale.

The goal of this project is to develop techniques for designing novel, cost-
effective router microarchitectures and adaptive routing schemes that mitigate
NBTI and PV impact on NoCs by leveraging the interplay between the two. The
scalability and sustainability of future many-core processors crucially depend
on the dependability of NoCs. Mechanisms that can simultaneously tolerate PV and
NBTI will be investigated for enhancing the reliability of NoCs fabricated using
nanoscale transistor technologies. The educational and outearch activities
include recruiting graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented
groups for this project and integration of research and education.

