* 0916610
* RI: Small: Organizing recognition: the uses of perceptual organization
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2014
* John Oliensis, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 376,685.00

Recognizing objects in images is the central problem of computer vision. One
approach (``bag of words'') compiles simple statistics on the image brightness
patterns and recognizes by correlating these statistics, via learning, with the
imaged objects. It cannot exploit important information on the image's spatial
layout. Another approach, perceptual organization (PO), computes a distinctive,
structural description of the image contents and recognizes based on this.
Researchers agree that PO is a crucial early stage of recognition--and that its
results are unreliable. (Images compress the 3D world and are ambiguous; PO
cannot eliminate the ambiguity since it has no high-level knowledge of what the
image is ``about.'') This leads to a fundamental dilemma: How can a recognition
system use the result of PO if it cannot be trusted?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
exploit perceptual organizations without succumbing to their unreliability, this
project uses a strategy that averages over all possible organizations weighted
by their probability, instead of computing a single, ``most likely'' image
description. This strategy is applied to diverse tasks such as matching images
by the shapes of the objects within; recognizing articulated objects such as
people and animals; tracking objects through video; and computing stable
perceptual organizations. The project also studies the integration of this
approach with older ones into a flexible and capable recognition system. The
result will be new techniques for the analysis, manipulation, and search of
images. The methods developed will be integrated in the curriculum and
disseminated to researchers, and the software will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;