* 0916636
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Simulation, and Design for Performance and Reliability in Carbon-based Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Kartik Mohanram, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 01/31/2012
* USD 299,917.00

Carbon-based nano-materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and, more recently,
graphene layers and graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), have attracted strong interest
as alternative device technologies for future nanoelectronics applications. This
collaborative research project will potentially result in transformative
advances required to harness the early science of these nano-materials into
practical design technologies.

Specifically, PIs will develop a multi-scale simulation framework that
integrates quantum simulations with compact model development for CNT and GNR
field-effect transistors (CNTFETs and GNRFETs). They will develop ambipolar
logic circuits and ultra-steep sub-threshold logic circuits as two promising
candidate solutions with applications to both CNTFETs and GNRFETs. PIs will
identify, model, and explore the effect of different variability and defect
mechanisms in these devices to provide expedient means to systematically
understand and predict their effects on the performance and reliability of
practical carbon-based circuits.

Results will be disseminated through an integrated testbed for research and
education in beyond-silicon computing, with an emphasis on carbon-based
electronics. Through collaborations with a broad range of academic investigators
as well as government and industry affiliates, this collaborative effort will
strengthen ties between the device and CAD communities, help create links among
them, and accelerate convergence to key design parameters essential for large
scale integration of carbon-based electronics. Additionally, the development of
learning modules, inter-disciplinary courses, and outreach efforts such as the
Design Automation Summer School will bring the architectures, design tools and
methodologies -- alongside fabrication and basic physics -- that will most
likely define the first generation of nano-computing systems into the mainstream
academic curriculum.