* 0916493
* CIF:Small: General Linear Time-stepping Methods for Large-Scale Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Adrian Sandu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 09/30/2014
* USD 312,314.00

General Linear Time-stepping Methods for Large Scale Simulations
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Runge-Kutta(RK) and linear multistep (LM) methods have
been extensively used for the integration of ordinary and partial differential
equations (PDEs). Both families of methods have well known limitations.
Stability requirements limit the efficiency attainable by any LM method, whereas
RK methods suffer from accuracy reduction in the presence of stiffness and
nonhomogeneous boundary and source terms. General linear (GL) time-stepping
methods are generalizations of both RK and LM methods and therefore allow the
development of new integration schemes with superior properties. However, GL
methods have not been extensively studied in the context of time-dependent PDEs,
and very little has been done to make this class of methods available for
practical use. The proposed research seeks to fill this gap.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate theoretically order
conditions for a class of general linear methods of practical importance. This
theory will be used to develop new high order methods that circumvent the
efficiency and accuracy reduction due to boundaries, sources, and stiffness. A
rigorous analysis of the stiff behavior will be carried out in a singular
perturbation framework, and will be extended to index one differential algebraic
systems. The proposed research is the first to address strong stability
preserving GL schemes for hyperbolic systems. A framework for partitioned
general linear schemes will be developed to address multiphysics problems. The
new GL methods will be made available to the science and engineering community
at large through a general purpose software package. Their performance will be
illustrated on real life, multiscale, multiphysics simulations arising in the
prediction of atmospheric pollution.