* 0916289
* GV:Small: Lagrangian Visualization Methods for Very Large Time-Dependent Vector Fields
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Joy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2015
* USD 459,480.00

Lagrangian methods assume a central role in the analysis and visualization of
vector fields resulting from simulation and measurement across many application
domains. These methods provide key insight into vector field structures and
dynamics, but are based on the expensive computation of integral curves. Applied
to large-scale problems and data sets, they are burdened heavily by enormous
computational cost.

To improve this situation, the problem-specific computation of integral curves
employed in vector field visualization techniques is replaced by a two-stage
process consisting of an adaptive pre-computation of integral curve sets and
methods for interpolation within these sets, effectively transferring the vector
field representation to the Lagrangian domain. Hence, the computational burden
is isolated into a pre-computation stage. The obtained Lagrangian representation
is stored into efficient out-of-core data structures. Integration-based
visualization algorithms can leverage the resulting fast interpolation of
integral curves, whose approximative characteristics are examined in detail,
from this pre-computed data. This generic framework permits enhancement of
existing integration-based visualization methods to become interactive and
provides a basis for research into novel efficient and interactive vector field
visualization for very large vector fields. Taking advantage of these
properties, new visualization tools are developed to study transport processes
in vector fields using Lagrangian analysis.

To increase the impact of this research and distribute it to a large community
of scientists and engineers, the developed algorithms are integrated with an
open-source visualization package. These new techniques are integrated into
coursework and student projects that enable students to study new methods of
analysis of flow computations. Information concerning these new methods are
found on the project website (http://idav.ucdavis.edu/~joy/NSF-IIS-0916289).