* 0916453
* AF: Small: Effective Resource Allocation Mechanisms: Fairness and Incentives
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jayachandran Sethuraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 07/31/2013
* USD 354,901.00

This project will focus on the problem of allocating a limited number of shared
resources among competing agents, which is a fundamental problem in operations
research and economics. Such problems arise in many settings: scheduling in
computer and communication networks, deciding where to locate public facilities,
matching colleges to prospective students, assigning housing to graduate
students, allocating organs to patients on a waiting-list, dividing an estate
between siblings, sharing the cost of a public good, etc. The central aim of
this project is to design effective resource allocation mechanisms that (i) have
a strong theoretical justification; (ii) are easy to compute; and (iii) are
simple to implement in practice. The project can be broadly classified in two
parts: the first part deals with a notion of equilibrium based on minimizing
maximum regret, and will explore its implications for mechanism design. Initial
results of this approach to bargaining problems with incomplete information
appear promising. The second part of the project deals with matching and
allocation problems. Here, nonstandard criteria such as fairness and incentives
are incorporated into some well-studied optimization models. The project will
seek to characterize conditions under which it is possible to design mechanisms
that are both fair and incentive-compatible for a number of natural models. One
of the aims will be to promote a greater interaction between economists and
optimization researchers by illustrating how the research questions, ideas, and
tools in one discipline can inform and enrich the other. If successful, the
results of the project will lead to a better understanding of important
phenomena such as collusion and coalition formation in matching and allocation
problems.

The methods developed in this project, and the algorithms derived from them have
the potential to improve the performance of several real-life systems. For
example, the work on matching and allocation problems is inspired by
applications to "school choice" problems. The results of this research will
provide insight into how resource allocation decisions interact with the (often
conflicting) goals of incentive-compatibility and fairness. The educational
goals of the proposed project include the introduction of the exciting recent
developments in the area of mechanism design in the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum. These courses will serve to expose the undergraduate and graduate
students to the large variety of public-decision making problems for which
optimization methods and tools are applicable.



