* 0916947
* CNS:NeTS: SMALL: Collaborative research: Collision: Friend or Foe
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Athina Petropulu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2012
* USD 249,861.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Traditionally collisions of transmitted packets in wireless networks have been
treated as a hindrance. If however the information contained in the packets is
recovered even after the packets collide, significantly higher transmission
rates can be attained in wireless systems. The project is developing a novel
network-friendly approach for resolving collisions.

The relevant information is being extracted from collided packets through
sophisticated signal processing and higher layer resource allocation schemes
that function in conjunction with the physical layer techniques. The signal
processing techniques recover the relevant information by exploiting source of
diversity that are present in a collision, such as small user delays and carrier
frequency offsets. The higher layer resource allocation techniques maximize the
throughput and minimize the delay in end-to-end delivery of information through
the exploitation of collision resolution capabilities at the physical layer.

This research will lead to a quantum leap in performance of wireless systems
which will in turn facilitate a plethora of advanced applications such as high
quality multimedia transmission over wireless networks, rescue and recovery
operations, etc. Results will be disseminated through (i) publications of
scholarly papers in premier journals and conferences and available through the
world-wide-web, and (ii) direct interactions with wireless industry and non-
profit organizations which will facilitate the design of wireless systems that
can be effectively used in daily lives.