* 0916866
* RI-Small:  Exploiting Comparable Corpora for Machine Translation (CC4MT)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Stephan Vogel, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Parallel corpora, i.e. texts that are translations of each other, are
an important resource for many natural language processing tasks, and especially
for building data-driven machine translation systems. Unfortunately, for the
majority of languages, parallel corpora are virtually non-existent. To be able
to develop machine translation systems for those languages, we need to be able
to learn from non-parallel corpora. Comparable corpora ? i.e. documents covering
at least partially the same content ? are available in far larger quantities and
can be easily collected on the Web. Examples include news published in many
languages by Voice of America or BBC, and the multi-lingual
Wikipedia.&lt;br/&gt;To make best use of comparable corpora it is not sufficient
to extract sentence pairs, which are sufficiently parallel, thereby building a
parallel corpus and then using proven training procedures. Rather, new
techniques are required to find sub-sentential translation equivalences in non-
parallel sentences. To extract phrase pairs from comparable corpora requires a
cascaded approach:&lt;br/&gt;- find comparable documents using, for example,
cross-lingual information retrieval techniques;&lt;br/&gt;- detect promising
sentence pairs, i.e. those, which may contain translational equivalences;
&lt;br/&gt;- apply robust phrase alignment techniques to detect phrase
translation pairs within non-parallel sentence pairs;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus
of the project lies on this third step: developing novel alignment algorithms,
which do not rely on aligning all words within the sentences, as traditional
word alignment algorithms do, but can separate parallel from non-parallel
regions.&lt;br/&gt;The long term benefit of this work will be that machine
translation technology can be applied to those languages, for which so far no
translation systems are available, due to the lack of the language resources
required by current technology. This will enable communication across language
barriers, esp. in critical situations like medical assistance or disaster
relieve.&lt;br/&gt;