* 0916802
* NeTS: Small: Toward High-Performance WLANs: Bridging the Physical Layer Divide
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kihong Park, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 07/31/2013
* USD 335,448.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project architects high-performance wireless local area networks (WLANs) by
understanding the impact of physical layer attributes on performance and
incorporating them in the design and control of next generation WLANs. The
research is comprised of three parts. The first part develops models of spatial
diversity, the dominant physical layer feature, that help understand and predict
the performance of infrastructure mode WLANs. The second part integrates spatial
diversity with cross-layer protocol analysis that allows evaluation of the
influence of physical layer attributes on both lower- and higher-layer
protocols. The third part investigates new network controls that harness
opportunities provided by spatial diversity that help mitigate, and in some
cases, transcend their detrimental performance effect including unfairness and
throughput degradation. The control dimension extends to large-scale WLANs
covering city blocks and campuses that inject complex spatial coupling. The
project employs a combination of simulation, experimentation, and analysis to
achieve its goals. The broader impact of this project lies in narrowing the
performance gap between wireless and wired networks, which facilitates
ubiquitous high-speed Internet access. The project also helps educate students
in the fundamentals and intricacies of wireless communication. The results from
the project will be disseminated at conferences, seminars, and through the
project web site where data and tools are made publicly available.

