* 0916480
* NeTS:  Small:  Cognitive Antennas for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Moshe Kam, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 479,962.00

Cognitive radios, which have the ability to adjust bandwidth, modulation scheme,
transmit power, error coding, and other parameters, provide tremendous
flexibility for adaptation to network conditions. While cognitive radios
predominantly change spectral allocation or modulation characteristics, this
project considers networks of cognitive radios in which the antennas at each
node can be electronically reconfigured. Coupling cognitive radios with
reconfigurable antennas gives network nodes an additional degree of freedom to
increase link robustness, enhance interference suppression, and increase
spectral capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project demonstrates how the
flexibility in radiation patterns provided by electrically reconfigurable
antennas, or ?cognitive antennas?, can enable a greater density of co-channel
communication links and thus increase network capacity. Multi-sensor data fusion
is being used to incorporate antenna and radio configuration with cognitive
radio scene assessment and adaptation techniques, using multiple data sources.
Distributed control techniques are being developed to adapt cognitive radio
settings with minimum interaction between nodes, and and the stability and
convergence of these algorithms (including convergence rate) are analyzed. We
are also creating practical networking protocols to include cognitive antenna
capabilities in QoS routing, congestion control, path failure mitigation, and
resource management. Research results are being demonstrated on a hardware
testbed. The main result of this project is a framework for controlling
cognitive radios equipped with reconfigurable antennas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal fosters technical innovation and design among
undergraduate students, and outreach activities to attract students, especially
from under-represented groups, to engineering.&lt;br/&gt;