* 0916451
* SHF: Small: Reliability Enhancement via Adaptive Checkpoingint in Wireless Grids
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Nian-Feng Tzeng, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2014
* USD 420,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to turn existing wireless mesh networks (WMNs)
into productive and reliable computing platforms, made possible innovatively by
reliability enhancement via adaptive checkpointing (REACT) to yield wireless
Grids (WiGs). WiGs can expand immensely the wired Grid in support of rapidly
growing cloud applications, besides serving as their original role of ubiquitous
communications. It is extremely challenging and yet interesting to realize
effective checkpointing in WiGs, due to their unique characteristics. This REACT
project deals with three technical challenges, which together constitute the
basis of our Checkpoint Manager, able to render WMNs into productive WiGs for
enhancing and complementing wired Grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project holds
great promise to advance technical understanding and scientific frontiers of
effective checkpointing in WiGs. It will also improve the research and
educational activities on Grid computing and wireless systems strongly in the
University of Louisiana, with the testbed established under this project deemed
a valuable asset. New research findings and technologies for effective
checkpointing and wireless communication performance enhancement will be
incorporated into relevant courses, helping to integrate research and education
for enriched teaching, training, and learning experience and to educate quality
future scientists critical to the NSF mission. Underrepresented students will be
recruited aggressively to participate in this project, taking advantage of the
established REACT testbed and working collaboratively with funded graduate
research assistants to stimulate their research interest.&lt;br/&gt;