* 0916131
* HCC:Small:FlowBase: A Realtime Simulation System of Turbulent Fluids Driven by Flow Pattern Database
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Ye Zhao, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 398,939.00

This project develops an innovative real-time simulation system of turbulent
fluids, FlowBase, by employing a novel flow pattern database. A collection of
pre-generated small flow patterns are managed by a database system with
efficient storage and searching strategy, query and transaction handling, to
enable fast and effective retrieval. The patterns are integrated with real-time
ongoing simulation according to physical and topological parameters of the
ongoing global flow. The FlowBase system is implemented with GPU (graphics
hardware) acceleration on single PC or clusters. Furthermore, the system
provides focus+context flow pattern integration that only appends turbulent flow
details in focus areas, and also offers flexibility by adding patterns according
to the computational resource budget. In this way, the system overcomes the
resource limit for large-scale simulations and provides turbulent flow details
for modeling visually-satisfying and physically-correct fluid phenomena.

The FlowBase system can rapidly provide vivid and spirited fluid behavior to
create realistic experiences which are a decisive factor in many educational and
entertainment applications, including virtual reality based education,
advertisement and entertainment industry. It also benefits prediction and
training applications, where fast computation and visual interaction of
turbulent fluids are highly critical, such as contaminant dispersion prediction,
emergency responder training, flight simulators, and urban and environmental
design. The research outcome of the pattern database, novel algorithm, modeling
techniques, computational and visualization tools are made publicly available
through publications and software packages.