* 0916129
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research:  Asynchrony and Persistence for Complex Contact Simulations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Eitan Grinspun, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 249,206.00

IIS - 0916129 &lt;br/&gt;HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Asynchrony and
Persistence for Complex Contact Simulations&lt;br/&gt;Grinspun, Eitan
&lt;br/&gt;Columbia University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Proposals&lt;br/&gt;IIS - 0914833 &lt;br/&gt;Guibas, Leonidas J
&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal addresses the challenge of complex contact simulations by working
entirely in an asynchronous setting. The project operates along three lines,
combining tools from Asynchronous Variational Integrators (AVIs) and Kinetic
Data Structures (KDSs) with a novel effort to perform and exploit qualitative
analysis of contact simulation data. The first investigation will show that
AVIs, meant to handle the continuous aspects of the physics, can be integrated
well with KDSs, meant to handle discrete geometric events. The second research
component addresses the fundamental problem of event scheduling when future
trajectories are uncertain. Methods will be explored that improve event
detection times, reduce the number of auxiliary events that have to be
processed, and allow events to be processed in parallel. The third research task
will be to initiate a study of the qualitative behavior of contact simulation by
building a hierarchy of coarser models which can then be used for better
resource allocation, for the validation of various approximations, and in
improved simulation design to attain desired effects.