* 0916971
* SHF: Small: SISA: A System-Level ISA for Power-Performance Management in CMPs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Over recent decades, power and complexity challenges have limited the ability to
derive continued growth in computing performance through clock frequency
scaling. Future growth will come through implementing systems with many
independent processors on the same chip. Challenges lie, however, in writing
software for these systems, and in creating software that is portable across
several hardware generations. For parallel software to smoothly exploit a chip's
computation and communication capabilities, hardware needs better information
regarding software's structure and resource requirements. Analogous to the
traditional, fine-grained instruction set architecture (ISA), this research
proposes a higher-level, coarse-grained System-level ISA or SISA. SISA provides
information on computational chunks and the data or synchronization dependencies
between them. Expressing software as a coarse-grained directed graph, SISA
enables efficient, adaptive scheduling of parallel computation and
communication. It also offers other benefits for reliability, energy-efficiency
and portability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program will have
broad impact in several ways. First, the PI has a solid track record of
knowledge dissemination and technology transfer. This includes extensive
collaborative relationships with industry, and several patents. In addition, the
PI has a track record of releasing high-impact software tools for external use.
The Wattch power modeling tool is one of five major tools distributions from her
group, in use by thousands of computing researchers worldwide. The PI also has a
strong track record of support for undergraduate research and underrepresented
groups, and has also advised summers of undergraduate research with women and
under-represented minorities through CRA-W and Princeton programs. She has been
involved in teaching non-STEM students and multidisciplinary efforts, and will
continue and broaden such activities through this research.