* 0916719
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Hybrid Opportunistic Computing for Green Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Wuchun Feng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,156.00

CSR:Small:Collaborative Research: Hybrid Opportunistic Computing for Green
Clouds&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xiaosong Ma (PI) and Xiaohui Helen Gu (co-PI), NCSU
(lead institute)&lt;br/&gt;Wuchun Feng (PI), Virginia
Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-demand, service-
oriented cloud computing infrastructures continue to increase in popularity with
organizations. Three observations motivate us to investigate running high-
throughput, data-intensive tasks as background workloads on these cloud
infrastructures. First, the rapid growth in hardware parallelism leaves more
residue resources to be exploited. Second, the ``incremental power usage'' of
piggybacking a secondary background workload onto the foreground workload to
utilize those residue resources is relatively low. Third, the advances in GPGPU
(General-Purpose GPU) processing enable a novel coupling of concurrent
workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore a new computing model
of offering cloud services on active nodes that are serving on-demand utility
computing users. We plan to (1) assess the efficacy of resource sharing between
foreground and background workloads and investigate the relationship between
their resource usage patterns and the benefit and cost of their mixed execution;
(2) develop scheduling and load management middleware that performs dynamic
background workload distribution considering the energy-performance tradeoff;
and (3) exploit the use of GPGPUs for cloud services on active nodes that are
running foreground workloads mainly on the CPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
research will explore a revolutionary change in the use of cloud computing and
may influence their hosting organizations' future resource configuration and
planning to create greener clouds. The research will be closely integrated with
education-oriented cloud platforms at NCSU. The PIs will also leverage their
established services and connections to increase the participation of women and
minority students and to promote students' interactions with industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;