* 0916953
* CIF: Small:Sparse and Geometric Representations of Images and Multidimensional Signals
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Minh Do, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 335,635.00

Project: &lt;br/&gt;Sparse and Geometric Representations of Images and
Multidimensional
Signals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most fundamental characteristics of natural images and multidimensional
signals is the presence of geometric regularities due to smooth boundaries
between smooth regions. Current representations for this class of signals such
as curvelets, contourlets, shearlets, and surfacelets, are constructed in the
frequency domain, which lead to basis functions with large spatial support and
Gibbs oscillations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new
sparse representations for multidimensional signals with geometric regularities.
These representations allow successive approximation from coarse to fine and
will be digital friendly.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus on spatial domain
constructions based on true multidimensional and geometric lifting schemes that
would lead to a new generation of geometric wavelets. In addition, geometric
tiling dictionaries with low coherence are explored. The research aims for a
precise connection between the continuous domain, where geometric regularity is
characterized, and the discrete domain, where input signals and transforms are
defined on sampling grids. Finally, the research develops new processing
algorithms that exploit the gained knowledge of geometrically regular signals
and developed sparse representations.&lt;br/&gt;