* 0916948
* III: Small:  Collaborative Research:  Reconstruction of Haplotype Spectra from High-Throughput Sequencing Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ion Mandoiu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,257.00

Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies provide
opportunities to study genome structure, function, and evolution at an
unprecedented scale, and are profoundly transforming genomic research.
&lt;br/&gt;However, fully realizing the potential of HTS technologies requires
sophisticated data analysis methods. This research project is aimed at
developing efficient computational methods for reconstructing the full spectrum
of haplotype sequences from HTS data. Working in collaboration with molecular
biologists from the University of Connecticut Health Center and the Centers for
Disease Control, the investigators will develop methods enabling three novel
applications of HTS, namely (a) reconstruction of diploid genome sequences,
including complete haplotype sequences of each CNV copy, (b) reconstruction of
alternative splicing isoform sequences and their frequencies, and (c)
reconstruction of viral quasispecies sequences and their frequencies. Major
outcomes of the project will include the development of a comprehensive
analytical toolkit for these problems, and high-quality open source software
implementations that will be made available free of charge to the research
community. The project will provide opportunities for participation of
undergraduate and graduate students in bioinformatics research at UCONN and
Georgia State University, and will especially encourage participation of women
and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;