* 0916204
* NeTS:Small:Content Retrieval Networks: Network Access for Disadvantaged Regions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Vivek Pai, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,998.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even in the US, many
regions suffer poor Internet connectivity, due to&lt;br/&gt;high prices,
capacity limitations, poor infrastructure, or low&lt;br/&gt;population density.
Rural communities may be underserved because of&lt;br/&gt;DSL distance limits
and the high cost of bringing fiber optic cable to&lt;br/&gt;low-density
regions. Even when businesses or schools can be connected&lt;br/&gt;by DSL, its
capacity limits may still provide poor end-user experience&lt;br/&gt;when many
people share the connection. This research is addressing
these&lt;br/&gt;problems by using intelligent software to enhance
network&lt;br/&gt;connectivity. By aggressive data caching and off-peak
prefetching,&lt;br/&gt;data can be stored on disk and retrieved locally instead
of always&lt;br/&gt;being fetched from the Internet. For environments with many
users,&lt;br/&gt;this system can reduce bandwidth consumption by an order of
magnitude,&lt;br/&gt;providing higher effective end-user bandwidth, or allow
cost&lt;br/&gt;reductions by purchasing less wide-area bandwidth. The
expected&lt;br/&gt;outcome of this research is an open-source system that can be
deployed&lt;br/&gt;at Internet gateways, which will transparently improve
network&lt;br/&gt;performance. Possible locations include schools, small
businesses, and&lt;br/&gt;Internet Service Providers (ISPs). In schools, when a
classroom full&lt;br/&gt;of students accesses a topic, only one copy is
downloaded, and&lt;br/&gt;the rest get it from the cache. For news sites that
update during the&lt;br/&gt;day, only the changed portions get downloaded,
instead of whole&lt;br/&gt;articles. Prefetching will also reduce latency, by
determining user&lt;br/&gt;patterns and preloading content before it is needed.
&lt;br/&gt;