* 0916941
* NetSE: Small: Collaborative Proposal: A Geometric Computational Approach to Efficiently Deploy and Manage Self-Organizing Wireless Communication Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Katia Obraczka, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project will develop efficient mechanisms for deploying and managing
wireless self-organizing networks (WSONs). These networks are able to manage
themselves with little or no human intervention and consequently can be deployed
in remote, difficult-to-access areas, under adverse conditions, and/or when
users have little or no network administration skills. As such, WSONs can have
significant societal and scientific impact as key enablers of numerous
applications, including emergency response, disaster relief, community
networking, environmental monitoring, and surveillance.

Intellectual Merit: This work will develop theoretical foundations for efficient
WSON node placement and trajectory control based on geometric computation and
optimization. The technical approach explores the synergy among a variety of
disciplines, including wireless communications, facility location, geometric and
distributed optimization, and systems and control theory. The project will (i)
explore, develop, and evaluate novel geometric computing strategies for WSON
placement, management, and control in order to optimize system performance for a
range of applications, and (ii) deploy the proposed strategies in real-world
environments motivated by our ongoing collaborations with biologists and
oceanographers.

Broader Impact: The WSON deployment and management strategies developed in this
work will be key enabling technology for a variety of applications with
considerable societal and scientific significance. The project also includes an
important educational component. It will produce exciting MSc and PhD theses,
incorporate results into graduate classes, and engage undergraduate students via
field experiments, senior design projects and summer REUs.