* 0916464
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Beyond Secure Processors - Securing Systems Against Hardware Attacks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Milos Prvulovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 259,071.00

Computer systems are increasingly located in places, where they can be
physically accessed by people who are not authorized to have unrestricted
control of and access to these systems. Examples of this include company laptops
carried by employees, robotic vehicles, gaming consoles with copyright
protection mechanisms, and remote users of servers in data-centers. An emerging
threat in such scenarios are hardware attacks, where snooping devices are
attached to the system to directly read and/or modify data within the system.
These attacks can circumvent all traditional security protections in the system,
such as password checks, access permissions for data files, etc.&lt;br/&gt;To
address these threats, researchers and processor makers have proposed or
developed various types of secure processor architectures, which encrypt and
continuously verify data in the system?s memory. However, these secure
processors are far from being ready for widespread use, primarily because they
focus on a single-processor, non-mobile system that is already up and running
and executing a single application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will investigate how to overcome these limitations, focusing on mechanisms for
secure boot-up and system configuration, secure communication between and
migration of applications, secure access to peripheral devices (including the
network). In essence, this project will build the intellectual framework that
will be needed to make computers secure regardless of their physical location,
preventing unauthorized access even if the system is captured, stolen, or
actually owned by a potentially malicious entity. Other broader impacts of this
project include improvements in education and workforce, by making computer
hardware designers more aware of physical security and by making computer
security experts more aware of implications of physical (hardware) attacks.