* 0916486
* NeTS:Small:Fundamental Methods and Heuristics for Advanced, Network-Centric Content Distribution
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ye Xia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 374,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly, the Internet is used to
distribute content on massive scale. Massive content distribution causes
shortage of network capacity, increases costs of service providers, and impairs
quality of user experience. This project develops advanced content-distribution
techniques for achieving complex cost-performance objectives. An interesting
class of existing content-distribution techniques, known as ?swarming?, use ad-
hoc methods designed to help file receivers exchange pieces of the file they
have already received. However, little is known about how to develop suitable
swarming techniques for infrastructure networks under complex
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is unleashing the potential of
swarming as the most advanced content-distribution technique. Unlike existing
ad-hoc approaches, the new approach uses general optimization theory in
developing swarming algorithms. The novelty is to conceptualize swarming as a
technique for distributing content over multiple multicast trees (MMT). Under
the new approach, content distribution is formulated as a problem of optimal
swarming over MMT. The solution algorithms become the best way of conducting
swarming under each performance objective. Even heuristic solutions have
performance guarantees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute a
family of optimized and robust swarming techniques, suitable for future networks
and applications. These techniques can mitigate network congestion or increase
distribution speed, leading to eventual outcomes in increasing economic value,
accelerating the rate of innovation, and improving productivity. The algorithms
can be applied generally to other content-intensive applications, including
IPTV, or to scientific networks that routinely transfer massive data.
&lt;br/&gt;