* 0916772
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Trustworthy Hardware from Certified Behavioral Synthesis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Sandip Ray, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,989.00

Electronic System Level (ESL) designs, specified behaviorally
using&lt;br/&gt;high-level languages such as SystemC, raise the level of
hardware&lt;br/&gt;design abstraction. This approach crucially depends on
behavioral&lt;br/&gt;synthesis, which compiles ESL designs to Register Transfer
Level (RTL)&lt;br/&gt;designs. However, optimizations performed by synthesis
tools make&lt;br/&gt;their implementation error-prone, undermining the
trustworthiness of&lt;br/&gt;synthesized hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops a mechanized infrastructure for certifying&lt;br/&gt;hardware
designs generated by behavioral synthesis. It entails&lt;br/&gt;developing a
certified "reference flow" of synthesis transformations. &lt;br/&gt;The
reference flow is disentangled from the workings of a
production&lt;br/&gt;synthesis tool through new formal structure called "clocked
control&lt;br/&gt;data flow graph" (CCDFG) formalizing internal design
representation. &lt;br/&gt;Given an ESL design and its synthesized RTL,
certification entails the&lt;br/&gt;following automatic steps: (1) extracting
initial CCDFG; (2) applying&lt;br/&gt;certified "primitive transformations" from
the reference flow,&lt;br/&gt;following the application sequence by the
synthesis tool, and (3)&lt;br/&gt;checking equivalence between the transformed
CCDFG and RTL. Theorem&lt;br/&gt;proving is used to certify primitive
transformations off-line;&lt;br/&gt;equivalence checking accounts for low-level
transformations and&lt;br/&gt;manual tweaks. The correspondence between the
transformed CCDFG and&lt;br/&gt;the synthesized hardware makes equivalence
checking efficient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project facilitates development of
scalable and trustworthy&lt;br/&gt;hardware: adoption of ESL approach expedites
design cycle while formal&lt;br/&gt;analysis guarantees trust in the synthesized
hardware. The reference&lt;br/&gt;flow makes explicit key design invariants
implicitly assumed by&lt;br/&gt;synthesis tools, facilitating development of
more aggressive synthesis&lt;br/&gt;tools. Finally, the tight integration of two
complementary techniques&lt;br/&gt;--- model checking and theorem proving --- in
the certification is&lt;br/&gt;applicable to other domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;