* 0916734
* NeTS:Small:View-Upload Decoupling: A Redesign of Multi-Channel P2P Video Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Yong Liu, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there are several
large-scale industrial deployments of peer-to-peer (P2P) live video systems,
these existing systems have several fundamental performance problems, including
huge channel switching delays, large playback lags, poor performance for less-
popular channels, ISP unfriendliness. In these traditional systems, a peer only
redistributes the video it is currently watching. In this research, the PIs are
exploring a radically different approach to P2P live video streaming, View-
Upload Decoupling (VUD). The main idea of VUD is to have each peer distribute
one or more channels, with the assignments being made independently of what the
peer is viewing. This novel approach has three major advantages over the
traditional isolated-channel designs: channel-churn immunity; cross-channel
multiplexing; and the enabling of structured streaming. The PIs are developing
tractable analytical performance models for multi-channel P2P video streaming
systems, for both VUD and traditional design approaches. The analytical results
not only highlight the advantages of the VUD approach, but also provide
important ``rules-of-thumb'' for the design of VUD systems. The PIs are
developing dynamic VUD provisioning algorithms that are both robust with respect
to channel churn and also adapt to dynamic channel popularity and flash crowds.
The PIs are developing VUD provisioning, management and streaming schemes that
take into account ISP locality and largely reduce the video streaming traffic
imposed on ISP networks. The PIs and their PhD students are also developing an
open-source VUD prototype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;