* 0916217
* HCC: Small: Energy Signature of Interaction Techniques for Low Power Bi-Stable Displays Information Appliances
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Rajit Manohar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 505,519.00

Looking back at Weiser's 1991 vision of ubiquitous computing, many of his
predictions have been surpassed, often by several orders of magnitude:
information appliances sport ever more powerful processors, store in excess of
64 GB of data onto solid state chips, and have constant high-bandwidth access to
the network. Yet one prediction that has not been realized, as anybody who uses
mobile computers today can attest, is the ability to use information appliances
for several days before recharging them. While battery life is the cornerstone
(without sufficient battery life the burden of maintaining multiple mobile
devices outweighs the advantages), three emerging technologies may significantly
alter the energy footprint of information appliances: bi-stable displays which
only consume energy when they are refreshed; Magnetic RAM (MRAM) which combines
the speed of SRAM, the density of DRAM, and the non-volatility of FLASH memory;
and a new generation of powerful embedded processors that support aggressive
power saving strategies, and which offer a preview of the potential of energy
efficient asynchronous processors. Combined, these technologies will make it
possible to create systems where power consumption is near zero while quiescent,
a significant departure from the behavior of current devices. The PI's goal in
this project is to investigate how the various interaction techniques we know of
today might benefit a low energy architecture enabled by the aforementioned
emerging technologies. The team has extensive experience with hardware design,
hardware simulation, and empirical evaluation. Project outcomes will contribute
to a better understanding of the parameters influencing the design of very low
power interfaces, and will include: an openly available hardware test bed for
evaluating interaction technique energy signatures; the first systematic
evaluation of the energy footprint of command selection and navigation
techniques to complement the extensive performance data already gathered; an
evaluation of the potential of sensor-assisted techniques to reduce the energy
consumption of information appliances; and the first evaluations of the
potential of asynchronous design to enable very low power information
appliances. Evaluations will be performed in the lab and through longitudinal
deployments, considering a variety of tasks, to further increase the external
validity of the results.

Broader Impacts: Project outcomes will establish the empirical foundations for
very low energy interface designs that will help researchers and designers
better understand the energy implications of various interaction techniques.
They will offer researchers and practitioners the tools and toolkits they need
to quickly implement and evaluate the overall energy footprint of a design, and
thus will significantly lower the barrier to entry into this research area.
Furthermore, they will support new curricula that focus on energy consumption.
Given that information appliance use is accelerating, and since the distinction
between information appliances and personal computers is blurring, this work
will have a great impact on reducing the overall energy consumed for our
everyday information needs.