* 0916968
* CSR: SHF: Small: Automata-Theorectic Approach to Hardware/Software Co-Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fei Xie, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 402,069.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer systems such as personal
computers and embedded systems are increasingly pervasive. People's everyday
lives depend on these systems. Therefore, they must be high-confidence. To boost
system performance, hardware and software are often closely coupled for
optimizations. As a result, separate verification of software and hardware
cannot guarantee the correctness of the entire system; thus hardware/software
(HW/SW) co-verification, verifying the hardware and software together, is highly
desired. There are four major benefits from co-verification: (1) advocating
design-level HW/SW interface specifications, (2) facilitating early hardware and
software verification in the system context, (3) reducing verification
complexity by properly leveraging HW/SW couplings, and (4) broadening property
coverage to the entire system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an
automata-theoretic approach to HW/SW co-verification. Major research tasks
include: (1) developing a co-specification scheme for hardware and software, (2)
developing an automata-theoretic model for co-verification and its model
checking algorithms, (3) developing abstraction/refinement algorithms for co-
verification, (4) developing a co-verification toolkit supporting this approach,
and (5) evaluating this approach and the toolkit on device-driver co-
verification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach efforts include (1)
collaborating with industrial partners on device-driver co-verification, (2)
creating video demonstration of this research and make it available online for
education and research purposes, (3) integrating research activities and results
of this project into a three course software engineering sequence, (4) advising
and mentor undergraduate and graduate students to conduct research in this
project, and (5) broadening participation through outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;