* 0916708
* Theoretical Foundations of Evolving Knowledge Bases
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Gyorgy Turan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2014
* USD 514,589.00

This project studies evolving knowledge bases, using tools from theoretical
computer science. As opposed to a database containing facts that can be queried,
a knowledge base contains general statements that can be used to derive further
implications. Developing a knowledge base, in particular, a knowledge base
containing commonsense knowledge that can be used for commonsense reasoning, is
a fundamental task of artificial intelligence (AI). This task is taking on a
somewhat different focus nowadays, as even partial solutions would have
important applications in intelligent agent technology. One common feature of
current approaches to the development of commonsense knowledge bases is the
interactive acquisition of web-based user input of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms for developing commonsense knowledge
bases have to perform several different tasks, such as reasoning, revising
(i.e., updating the current knowledge in the presence of new, potentially
conflicting information), and learning (i.e., improving the quality of the
knowledge base over the long run). This research addresses all three of these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of the research uses Horn formulas as the
formalism for knowledge representation. Horn formulas are an important class of
logical expressions that have been studied for decades in complexity theory,
logic programming, databases, and AI, with efficient algorithms for basic
reasoning tasks. Evolving knowledge bases present many new problems for Horn
knowledge bases. Particular problems addressed by this research, based on the
challenges referred to above, include: Horn-to-Horn belief revision, learning
Horn formulas in the model of learning from entailment, approximate minimization
of Horn formulas, probabilistic analysis of the set of consequences of random
Horn formulas and related combinatorial problems, Horn approximation of
knowledge bases and complexity problems for non-classical generalizations of
Horn formulas. The latter point towards extending the knowledge representation
formalism to handle different aspects of commonsense
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more general terms, the objective of the
research is to develop algorithms for building knowledge bases that can evolve
over time. This task is relevant for both short and long term applications. The
research contains a comprehensive approach to several important areas which so
far have been mostly been studied separately. In the long term, research in this
area will contribute to the development of tools for building better intelligent
agents possessing commonsense knowledge and capable of commonsense reasoning.
Such agents will expand the scope of and improve the quality of automated
services.&lt;br/&gt;