* 0916462
* US Government Support for IAI Core Budget 2009-2011
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2013
* USD 2,347,709.00

This grant provides US$ 2,073,000 as the U.S. Government contribution to the
2008 to 2011 core budget of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change
Research (IAI). The IAI is an intergovernmental institution whose core budget is
funded through contributions from its 19 member countries, including the USA.
The funding represents the US voluntary contribution to the IAI as set by agreed
to by the USG, and will be used to cover 59% of the IAI Directorate
international staff salaries and travel costs, travel costs for the 10-member
Scientific Advisory Committee of the IAI, and part of the IAI's publication
budget. The present proposal covers the US contribution for three
years.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the essential
role of the IAI and its core funding in realizing the IAI's objectives to
implement regional cooperations for interdisciplinary research on global change;
to conduct or select for sponsorship (based on peer review) scientific projects
and training of regional relevance which cannot be conducted by any single
country or institution; to link research institutions of the region to global
programs; to improve the scientific and technical capabilities and research
infrastructure of the countries of the region; to foster standardization,
collection, analysis and exchange of scientific data; and to provide scientific
information to government towards public policy on global change.&lt;br/&gt;The
IAI implements its science programs using calls for proposals, peer reviews and
post-award monitoring. In addition it has become active in developing durable
networks of institutions and researchers across disciplines and countries, and
is engaging in analysis and synthesis of the IAI's varied science output. The
IAI develops science and policy strategies in consultation with member
countries, and collects and processes science output to contribute to informed
decision making. During the three year period of support requested here, the IAI
will complete two science programs, provide final analysis, reporting and an in-
depth synthesis of the science and policy implications. The synthesis of
science-policy links will be published in a variety of publications for
different audiences, and will be edited by IAI staff and other experts. A
strategic planning process has been initiated and a new cooperative science
program will be developed. Five training programs have been scheduled and others
will be developed. The broader implications that go beyond the science content
of the networks lie in the building of institutional capacities in the region to
manage large collaborative science projects. Over the next 3 years, the IAI will
continue its task of linking research and education activities across
disciplines, and explore opportunities generated by the international networking
to insert science into the decision process of its member countries. An
important effort will therefore be to engage member countries in the science and
its translation into policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background &lt;br/&gt;The IAI
has been listed by the State Department as an international organization within
the meaning of the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act,
covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and 5 U.S.C. 3581. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget
support, for which this proposal is submitted, allows the operation of the
Directorate of the IAI. Currently, the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in
Sao Jose dos Campos, Sao Paulo state, on the campus of the Brazilian National
Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI Directorate functions as an
internationally recognized juridical personality, with the corresponding
privileges and immunities granted by the Government of Brazil.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core Budget commitment pledges are made by the all Parties
to the Agreement Establishing the IAI: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, the USA, and Venezuela. Amounts are
arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
the IAI Agreement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IAI is a U.S. initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S.
Government agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI.