* 0916845
* HCC: Small: Dynamic Skeletal Part Hierarchies for Sketching 3D Shapes and Their Animations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2013
* Andrew Nealen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2013
* USD 499,272.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0916845 &lt;br/&gt;Nealen, Andrew &lt;br/&gt;HCC:
Small: Dynamic Skeletal Part Hierarchies for Sketching 3D Shapes and Their
Animations&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software for creating, modifying and animating
digital 3D shapes is a key component in many computer applications: computer
aided design, engineering, computer animation and digital games to name a few.
This proposal addresses research into dynamic hierarchical part hierarchies,
which combine the interrelated topics of modeling and animating digital shapes
into a coherent whole, as well as simple and effective sketch-based computer
tools, with the ultimate goal of making these tasks more accessible to amateurs
and professionals alike. Advances in consumer computer graphics, as well as the
current in√æux of user generated digital content, both in virtual 3D worlds as
well as on the Internet, illustrate the demand for easy-to-use 3D content
creation software. Recent research in shape modeling and animation, as well as
sketch-based interfaces, has led to the development of experimental techniques,
which clearly demonstrate their viability. Yet, most of these are highly
specialized and domain specific, and they do not deal with these problems as a
whole. The proposed research will build upon this previous work, but put an
emphasis on developing new sketch-based interfaces, algorithms and shape
representations that allow combining previously disjoint, yet intrinsically
connected tasks of shape modeling and animation.&lt;br/&gt;