* 0916577
* CSR: Small: System and Network Support for Harvesting-aware Solar Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many sensor network deployments are in
harsh terrain that lack infrastructure but also need to use solar energy
harvesting for self-sustained operation. The design of harvesting-aware solar
sensor networks raises numerous systems and networking challenges. From a
systems perspective, a design should be able to operate under a wide dynamic
range of energy harvesting scenarios, from plentiful sunlight to very limited
light (e.g., thickly forested areas). From a network perspective, a protocol
stack should be able to adapt to spatio-temporal variability in harvesting rates
due to foliage and day-to-day vagaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we
will design systems and network support for harvesting-aware solar sensor
networks. Our systems contributions include novel sensor platforms that use
thin-film batteries for harvesting under low-light conditions, predictive duty-
cycling under highly variable harvesting conditions, and lightweight
checkpointing and restart to handle intermittent loss of power. Our networking
contributions include a link layer that is optimized for duty-cycle variability,
a network layer that uses harvesting-aware path metrics, and a transport layer
can offer high throughput under diverse harvesting
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our educational plans consist of K-12 teaching
through a summer high school outreach program, and inter-disciplinary REU
programs in collaboration with Harvard Forest for deploying solar-powered sensor
networks for ecological monitoring.