* 0916400
* AF: Small: Graph Isomorphism and Quantum Random Walks by Anyons
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Paul Beame, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 05/31/2013
* USD 507,922.00

Quantum computers offer the potential to exponentially speed up the solution of
certain classically hard computational problems. It is already known, for
example, that quantum computers can efficiently factor numbers (something modern
computers cannot do), and this fact implies that quantum computers can break the
majority of cryptographic systems which protect our nation's cyber-
infrastructure. The quantum factoring algorithm is the main motivation behind
current research into actually building a quantum computer. In this grant, the
investigator proposes a new approach to efficiently solving a computational
problem--the graph isomorphism problem--which might also admit an exponential
speedup over the best classical algorithm for the problem. The graph isomorphism
problem is to tell whether two given graphs (a collection of vertices with edges
connecting them) can be made to look identical to each other by permuting the
different vertices. The approach taken here is different from that taken by the
majority of the quantum algorithms community and centers on a novel class of
quantum random walks, those in which the walkers carry topological quantum
numbers. This approach follows from a series of failed proposals to graph
isomorphism based on random walks by hard-core bosons or fermions and is
motivated by the form in which these proposals fail. Finding an efficient
quantum algorithm for the graph isomorphism problem would be potentially
transformative and would provide a major new justification for building a large
quantum computer. The approach chosen by the PI also introduces a novel quantum
algorithm technique--quantum random walks by anyons--which has the potential to
be useful a primitive outside of the graph isomorphism problem. Finally, the
award will be used to support the training of graduate students who work on the
boundary between computer science and physics, and thus strengthen connections
across this interdisciplinary divide.