* 0916868
* RI: Small: Learning-Based Systems for Single-Image Photometric Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2015
* Hassan Foroosh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2015
* USD 393,005.00

This project focuses on developing algorithms and datasets that can transform
photometric reconstruction systems from hand-designed systems into learning-
based systems that are optimized on real-world data. &lt;br/&gt;Photometric
reconstruction systems derive cues from the perceived intensity of different
locations on a surface. Shape-from-shading, where the surface is assumed to have
a diffuse reflectance, is a well-known example of photometric reconstruction.
This project produces the datasets and methods necessary to use machine learning
techniques to build models for photometric
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This learning-based approach enables
systems to be optimized on real-world data so that they produce the most
accurate results possible. In addition, this learning-based approach enables the
development of more sophisticated methods with more parameters than typically
used in hand-designed systems. The ability to find optimal parameters in an
automated fashion can not only improve existing approaches, such as by
incorporating image data more effectively, but can also enable the development
of algorithms that push the boundaries of current systems. In particular,
algorithms are developed for estimating the shape of objects without knowing the
illumination or even trying to explicitly model it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
power of the learning approach cannot be realized without data for training and
testing. A major task in this work is the construction of a database of images
and ground-truth 3D reconstructions of the objects in the images. The 3D models
can be found using an example-based photometric stereo
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;