* 0916309
* NetSE: Small: Multi-Resolution Analysis of Network Matrices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lili Qiu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network matrices, such as traffic
matrices, delay matrices, adjacency matrices, and social proximity matrices, are
essential inputs to a wide range of network applications. Network matrices and
the underlying network often exhibit a multi-faceted scaling behavior. To
capture such multi-scale behavior, a particularly promising approach is Multi-
Resolution Analysis (MRA), which creates multiple approximate representations of
network matrix at different resolutions. This project will (i) develop a novel
framework to enable network-centric MRA of network matrices, and (ii) use the
framework to develop novel solutions to several network management tasks:
missing value inference, design of experiments, traffic synthesis, and anomaly
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is multi-
disciplinary by nature and will foster effective synergy between networking,
statistics, data mining, and scientific computing. The MRA framework and its
applications will deepen the understanding of the spatial and temporal
characteristics of network matrices at different scales, and advance the state
of art in several significant network management
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The MRA framework is valuable to
multiple scientific fields. The project is expected to produce publications in
leading conferences and journals, and software that will be publicly available
online. Through technology transfer, the network management solutions can
potentially improve the operations of real ISP networks. The project will
provide several graduate students' thesis research and honors undergraduate
research projects. The research results will also be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate curricula as well as outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;