* 0916864
* CSR: Small: Infrastructure-free Human Context Awareness with a Wearable Sensing and Computing System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Weihua Sheng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 294,031.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this project is
to develop the fundamental theoretical framework and algorithms that realize
human context awareness in an infrastructure-free fashion and validate them
through physical experiments using a body sensor network. This new human
context-awareness approach will open up many new research opportunities in
pervasive computing, as well as human-computer interaction and human-robot
interaction. This project will have many societal impacts. First, the research
results can be applied to track and monitor emergency responders, therefore
significantly improving the operation efficiency and personnel safety. Second,
this project will benefit health research and health care practices. Being able
to monitor human's activity and location in a daily setting will enable
researchers to study many health problems related to human behaviors. When used
by physicians to monitor their patients or elderly people, it can greatly
improve the accuracy of disease diagnosis and human health assessment. The
proposed research and education integration activities will help boost the
enrollment and retention rate in the ECEN program at Oklahoma State University.
The proposed outreach activities will stimulate prospective and current college
students, especially Native American, female students, to pursue degrees or
careers in science and engineering.