* 0916019
* HCC: Small: The role of social network sites in facilitating collaborative processes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Clifford Lampe, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 05/31/2014
* USD 498,358.00

Collaboration, when it works, optimizes the contributions of individuals, often
resulting in better decisions, outcomes, and experiences than individuals
working alone. Social network sites (SNSs) offer new opportunities for
collaboration due to their social and technical affordances. SNS profiles enable
the display of identity information, which can act as a social lubricant and
help individuals initiate conversations and find common ground. Within SNSs,
contact lists lower the transaction costs associated with interaction. Finally,
SNSs enable access to a larger pool of individuals (and their wider and more
diverse knowledge base) while also providing a context in which social capital
processes serve as a mechanism for encouraging collaboration, advice-giving and
information-sharing. This project will develop and test a model of SNS-enabled
collaboration motivated by the following research questions: What forms of
collaboration are enabled by SNSs? How do the features of SNSs affect these
processes? Who uses these sites to collaborate and why?

This study will examine SNS-facilitated collaborative instances using
quantitative and qualitative data to provide insight into users motivations,
perceptions, and conceptual frameworks. First, we will examine examples of ad-
hoc collaboration among college undergraduates to explore how relationship
initiation and collaboration occur, both in SNS and face-to-face contexts.
Second, aggregate behavioral patterns on Facebook will be analyzed to discover
and investigate modes of collaboration on the site.