* 0916098
* HCC: III: Small: MyDome - Defining the Computational and Cognitive Potential of Interactive Simulations in an Immersive Dome Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Annette Schloss, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,841.00

The MyDome project will bring 3D virtual worlds for group interaction into
planetaria and portable domes. Advances in computing have evolved the
planetarium dome experience from a star field and pointer presentation to a
high-resolution movie covering the entire hemispherical screen. The project will
further transform the dome theater experience into an interactive immersive
adventure. MyDome will develop scenarios in which the audience can explore along
three lines of inquiry: (1) the past with archeological reconstructions, (2) the
present in a living forest, and (3) the future in a space station or colony on
Mars. These scenarios will push the limits of technology in rendering believable
environments of differing complexity and will also provide research data on
human-centered computing as it applies to inquiry and group interactions while
exploring virtual environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to
engage a large portion of the population, with a special emphasis on the
underserved and under-engaged but very tech-savvy teenage learner. Research
questions addressed are: 1. What are the most engaging and educational
environments to explore in full-dome? 2. What on-screen tools and presentation
techniques will facilitate interactions? 3. What are the limitations for this
experience using a single computer, single projector mirror projection system as
found in the portable Discovery Dome? 4. Which audiences are best served by
exploration of virtual hemispherical environments? 5. How large can the audience
be and still be effective for the individual learner? What techniques can be
used to provide more people with a level of control of the experience and does
the group interaction enhance or diminish the engagement of different
individuals? 6. What kind of engagement can be developed in producing scientific
and climate awareness? Does experiencing past civilizations lead to more
interest in other cultures? Does supported learning in the virtual forest lead
to greater connection to and understanding of the real forest? Does the virtual
model space experience excite students and citizens about space exploration or
increase the understanding of the Earth's biosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project are (1) benefits to society from increasing
public awareness and understanding of human relationships with the environment
in past civilizations, today?s forests and climate change, and potential future
civilizations in space and on Mars; (2) increasing the appeal of informal
science museums to the tech-savvy teenage audience, and (3) significant gains in
awareness of young people in school courses and careers in science and
engineering. The partners represent a geographically diverse audience and
underserved populations that include rural (University of New Hampshire),
minority students (Houston Museum of Natural Science) and economically-
distressed neighborhoods (Carnegie Museum of Natural History). Robust evaluation
will inform each program as it is produced and refined, and will provide the
needed data on the potential for learning in the interactive dome environment
and on the optimal audience size for each different type of inquiry.