* 0916053
* DC: Small: Collaborative Research: Shape Representation of Large Geometries via Convex Approximation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2015
* USD 231,961.00

Geometric models composed of millions (or more) of facets are common today due
to improved technologies for generating high-resolution complex models. The
large size makes it infeasible to perform some fundamental geometric operations
on these models. For instance, more than 1.4 billion geometric union operations
are required to compute the Minkowski sum of the David model. Re-designing
existing algorithms for large models would require significant time and effort,
and may not always be possible. This project is investigating approximate convex
decomposition (ACD), an alternative representation for large geometries that
approximately represents the original model using a set of convex objects. By
using the much smaller convex approximation in place of the original model, ACD
allows existing (inefficient) methods and software to perform efficiently for
large geometries without designing and implementing new algorithms. An important
goal of this project is to develop simple algorithms that not only allow
efficient reconstruction but also allow practical
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
make significant contributions to fundamental problems in geometric computing,
such as Minkowski sum, continuous motion collision detection, general
penetration depth estimation, and swept volume. Beyond these fundamental
geometric operations, this project will provide new ways to handle geometric
problems in several areas of robotics (e.g., environment/map representation,
motion planning and grasp planning), in pattern recognition (e.g., structural
salient feature recognition, visual-based part decomposition and motif
identification in protein structures), and in computer graphics (e.g., data
compression, physically-based simulation and skeletonization).&lt;br/&gt;The
software developed by this project will be provided to the public domain.