* 0916803
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Correlation Mining and its Applications in Test Cost Reduction, Yield Enhancement, and Performance Calibration in Analog/RF Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Yiorgos Makris, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2011
* USD 256,000.00

This project seeks to improve the quality and reliability of Analog/Radio-
Frequency (RF) integrated electronic circuits (ICs) by developing an intelligent
system for systematically exploring the wealth of information generated
throughout their production lifetime and applying it towards improving the
effectiveness of their design, manufacturing, and testing. While a large amount
of data is made available through extensive design simulations and measurements
on actual fabricated circuits, there currently exists a striking lack of formal
methods to efficiently extract meaningful information from this data. The
research activities that will be carried out through this project aim to fill
this void by developing correlation mining methods based on the most recent
developments in the fields of machine learning and data mining. Ultimately,
using data from actual IC productions provided by industrial partners (i.e. IBM
and Texas Instruments), the objective of this project is to demonstrate the
impact that such correlations can have on reducing the cost of testing,
enhancing the yield of the production and enabling post-manufacturing
calibration of analog/RF circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate the cost-effective realization of robust electronic circuits and
systems, thus enabling more reliable computing and promoting technology
trustworthiness. The proposed research is complemented by educational and
outreach activities, including the development of a new graduate-level course on
applications of Machine-Learning in Computer Aided Design and Test and the
involvement of graduate, undergraduate and high-school students in research with
the groups of the Principal Investigators, the industrial partners, and the
research laboratory of the international collaborator.