* 0916746
* SHF: Small: Thermal-Aware High-Performance DRAM Architectures in Multicore Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Seda Memik, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2014
* USD 450,000.00

Environment Protection Agency estimates that by 2011 data centers nationwide
would consume electricity amounting to the equivalent output of about 30 power
plants. Clearly, improving the power and thermal behavior of these systems has a
direct impact on their energy efficiency and reliable operation. DRAM memories
constitute a significant fraction of the power consumed in computers. In
addition, in the dawning era of multi-/many-core processors, the performance of
a system is largely dependant on its main memory efficiency. This project
investigates ways to operate DRAMs at full bandwidth utilization while spending
the minimum power per unit of data communicated and maintaining lower operating
temperatures. Specifically, this work aims at answering three fundamental
questions: a) how can we enhance processor architectures to balance the activity
on different DRAM chips to protect chips under thermal stress, b) how can we
enhance the DRAM systems to reduce their power consumption and peak operating
temperatures, and c) how can we enhance the operating systems to improve the
thermal behavior of DRAM systems? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques
developed in this project will improve the thermal behavior of DRAM systems and
hence will reduce the cost of thermal management and decrease the system energy
consumption. Furthermore, these improvements will enable new generations of
high-performance processors. This, in turn, will enhance the computational
capabilities of future computing systems and enable progress in various fields.
Finally, projects derived from this work will be integrated into courses
contributing to the training of an engineering workforce for an energy-efficient
and sustainable society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;