* 0916413
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Tng, a Next Generation Transport Services Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Bryan Ford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2012
* USD 328,260.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment &lt;br/&gt;Act
of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet has traditionally
combined many orthogonal functions into transport protocols, creating
significant technical and administrative hurdles to transport service evolution.
New or specialized transport protocols are now nearly undeployable because they
cannot traverse middleboxes such as NATs, firewalls, performance enhancing
proxies, which have mushroomed in the past two decades; new congestion control
schemes are restricted by the requirement to compete ?fairly? against
traditional TCP flows; and deploying new features such as multi-homing is
difficult because applications must be adapted to new naming and communication
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tng ("Transport next generation") is a new but
incrementally deployable transport architecture that breaks the above
evolutionary impasse by modularizing the transport layer. Tng breaks transports
into four explicit layers - Endpoint Naming, Flow Regulation, Identity/Security,
and Semantics - plus a cross-layer Negotiation service. By separating the
network-oriented functions of endpoint naming and flow regulation from
application-oriented transport semantics, Tng enables middleboxes in the network
to enforce network policies and optimize flow performance cleanly across diverse
network technologies and administrative domains, without interfering with end-
to-end semantics. Tng's identity/security layer in turn enforces this
separation&lt;br/&gt;between network- and appliation-oriented functions,
avoiding past conflicts between middleboxes and IPsec.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
developing a working prototype and analyzing its performance and adaptability
across a variety of real and simulated network environments, we expect that Tng
will prove an important step towards breaking long-standing deadlocks between
operators, new network technologies, and end-users.