* 0916439
* III: Small: Generalization of the Association Analysis Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Michael Steinbach, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2012
* USD 547,996.00

Association analysis finds patterns that describe the relationships among the
binary attributes (variables) used to characterize a set of objects. A key
strength of association pattern mining is that the potentially exponential
nature of the search space can often be made tractable by using support based
pruning of patterns i.e., eliminating patterns supported by too few
transactions. Despite the well-developed theoretical foundation of association
mining, this group of techniques is not widely used as a data analysis tool in
many scientific domains. For example, in the domain of bioinformatics and
computational biology, while the use of clustering and classification techniques
is common, techniques from association analysis are rarely employed. This is
because many of the patterns required in bioinformatics and other domains are
not effectively captured by the traditional association analysis framework and
its current extensions. Although such patterns can be found by techniques such
as bi-clustering and co-clustering, these approaches suffer from a number of
serious limitations, most notably, an inability to efficiently explore the
search space without resorting to heuristic approaches that compromise the
completeness of the search. To address the challenges mentioned above, the team
will extend the traditional association analysis framework. They propose two
novel frameworks for directly mining patterns from real-valued data that, unlike
biclustering and co-clustering, are able to discover all patterns satisfying the
given constraints and do not suffer from the loss of information caused by
discretization and other data transformation approaches. They will also extend
association analysis based approaches to work with data that has class labels by
effectively using the available class label information for pruning the
exponential search space and finding low-support patterns that discriminate
between the two data classes. To evaluate the results of the work, they will
develop robust evaluation methodologies for evaluating the patterns obtained
from the proposed frameworks. The proposed work promises to extend the power of
association analysis to a wide range of new applications in health and life
sciences, such as the discovery of biomarkers and functional modules from single
nucleotide polymorphism and gene expression data, with potential applications in
personalized medicine and the development of drugs and bio-
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;