* 0916199
* Youth Debt:  Credit as Investment or Overconsumption
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Randy Hodson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2011
* USD 71,167.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Young people today are coming of age in a time of unprecedented access to credit
but limited job opportunities, resulting in a dramatic increase in indebtedness
for young adults. Prior studies offer divergent views of debt: some see credit
as an investment in the future, while others worry about overconsumption
promoted by easy credit. The researchers evaluate these alternative views by
studying the consequences of indebtedness for young adults? successful
transition to adulthood. The PIs ask, does debt finance an orderly move into
adult status, or does debt impede or delay educational and career attainment?
The investigators consider education debt and credit card debt separately under
the hypothesis that education loans are more likely to underwrite future
successes while credit card debt may be a downward pull on successful
transitions to adulthood. They also look separately at upper-class, middle-class
and lower-class youth with the expectation that fewer alternative resources for
lower-class origin youth will accentuate negative effects of debt, while greater
alternative resources for upper-class origin youth will blunt many of the
effects of debt. The investigators focus on young adults because young people in
the contemporary period are the first generation to carry significant debt early
in their careers. The study will use data from the National Longitudinal Study -
Young Adult Sample (N=3,079). These data are collected every other year allowing
the researchers to track youth through the years of transition to adulthood.

In terms of the broader impacts, developing a better understanding of the
consequences of debt for young people is essential at this time for both
scholarly and practical reasons. Increasing debt may well represent an important
sea change in American society with significant implications for the nature and
meaning of social inequality. Important questions are in need of answers. In
particular, is taking on debt early in life indeed a sage investment or a
disaster in the making? The consequences for both academic theories of
stratification and for public policy are enormous.