* 0916345
* III: Small: Fast Subset Scan for Anomalous Pattern Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Neill, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,991.00

This work will develop new methods for fast and scalable detection of anomalous
patterns (subsets of the data that are interesting or unexpected) in massive,
multivariate datasets. There will be a focus on real-world applications such as
an emerging disease outbreak or a pattern of smuggling activity with complex,
subtle, and probabilistic patterns that are difficult to spot with existing
techniques. The research is based on two key insights. First, the pattern
detection problem can be framed as a search over all subsets of the data, in
which can be defined a measure of the "anomalousness" of a subset and then
maximize this measure over all potentially relevant subsets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, it has been discovered that, for many spatial
detection methods (including Kulldor's spatial scan statistic and many recently
proposed variants), one can perform an exact search which efficiently maximizes
the measure of anomalousness over all subsets of the data. The research team
will explore this new combinatorial optimization method, investigate how it can
be extended to constrained subset scans and to more general multivariate pattern
detection problems, and examine how it can be incorporated into a subset scan
framework, enabling the creation a variety of fast, scalable, and useful methods
for anomalous pattern detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop, implement, and evaluate a
general probabilistic framework for efficient detection of anomalous patterns in
both spatial and non-spatial datasets. The proposed work will address these
challenging and important research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1)How can one define a
useful measure of the "anomalousness" of a subset of the data, and efficiently
optimize this measure over all subsets to find the most anomalous
patterns?&lt;br/&gt;2) What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for a
set function F (S ) to satisfy the "linear- time subset scanning" (LTSS)
property, enabling exact unconstrained optimization of F (S ) over all 2 N
subsets of N records while only requiring O(N ) subsets to be
evaluated?&lt;br/&gt;3) How can one extend fast subset scanning methods to
general multivariate datasets, and incorporate search constraints such as
proximity, connectivity, and self-similarity?&lt;br/&gt;4) How can one deal with
uncertainty about the effects of an anomalous pattern by searching over subsets
of "input" and "output" attributes as well as subsets of records?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Development and testing will be
prioritized in three areas: 1) early detection of disease outbreaks, 2)
detecting illicit container shipments, and 3) identifying anomalous trends in
social networks. These applications will allow the demonstration the value of
these methods across a wide spectrum of domains. Through existing
collaborations, the algorithms will be incorporated into deployed systems for
health and crime surveillance that contribute directly to the public good. The
Principle Investigator's lab has over 5 years of history offering free machine
learning software, and the software implementations of all algorithms developed
through this grant will be made publicly available. The bulk of the funding will
go to training graduate students who will become the next generation of
researchers to explore new methods for anomalous pattern detection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Words: anomalous patterns; pattern detection; fast
subset scan; scan statistics; optimization.