* 0916027
* III:   Small:  RIOT:   Statistical Computing with Efficient, Transparent I/O
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2014
* USD 516,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological advances enable collection of massive amounts
of&lt;br/&gt;data in science, commerce, and society. These datasets bring
us&lt;br/&gt;closer than ever before to solving important problems such as
decoding&lt;br/&gt;human genomes and coping with climate changes. Meanwhile,
the&lt;br/&gt;exponential growth in data volume creates an urgent challenge.
Many&lt;br/&gt;existing analysis tools assume datasets fit in memory; when
applied to&lt;br/&gt;massive datasets, they become unacceptably slow because of
excessive&lt;br/&gt;disk input/output (I/O)
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across application domains, much of advanced
data analysis is done&lt;br/&gt;with custom programming by statisticians.
Progress has been hindered&lt;br/&gt;by the lack of easy-to-use statistical
computing environments that&lt;br/&gt;support I/O-efficient processing of large
datasets. There have been&lt;br/&gt;many approaches toward I/O-efficiency, but
none has gained traction&lt;br/&gt;with statisticians because of issues ranging
from efficiency to&lt;br/&gt;usability. Disk-based storage engines and
I/O-efficient function&lt;br/&gt;libraries are only a partial solution, because
many sources of&lt;br/&gt;I/O-inefficiency in programs remain at a higher,
inter-operation&lt;br/&gt;level. Database systems seem to be a natural solution,
with efficient&lt;br/&gt;I/O and a declarative language (SQL) enabling high-
level&lt;br/&gt;optimizations. However, much work in integrating databases
and&lt;br/&gt;statistical computing remains database-centric, forcing
statisticians&lt;br/&gt;to learn unfamiliar languages and deal with their
impedance mismatch&lt;br/&gt;with host languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make a
practical impact on statistical computing, this project&lt;br/&gt;postulates
that a better approach is to make it transparent to users&lt;br/&gt;how
I/O-efficiency is achieved. Transparency means no SQL, or any
new&lt;br/&gt;language to learn. Transparency means that existing code should
run&lt;br/&gt;without modification, and automatically gain I/O-efficiency.
The&lt;br/&gt;project, nicknamed RIOT, aims at extending R---a widely
popular&lt;br/&gt;open-source statistical computing environment---to
transparently&lt;br/&gt;provide efficient I/O. Achieving transparency is
challenging; RIOT&lt;br/&gt;does so with an end-to-end solution addressing
issues on all fronts:&lt;br/&gt;I/O-efficient algorithms, pipelined execution,
deferred evaluation,&lt;br/&gt;I/O-cost-driven expression optimization, smart
storage and&lt;br/&gt;materialization, and seamless integration with an
interpreted host&lt;br/&gt;language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RIOT integrates
research and education, and continues the tradition of&lt;br/&gt;involving
undergraduates through REU and independent studies. As a&lt;br/&gt;database
researcher, the PI is committed to learning and drawing from&lt;br/&gt;work from
programming languages and high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;Findings from
RIOT help create synergy and seed further collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with these
communities. To ensure practical impact on statistical&lt;br/&gt;computing, RIOT
has enlisted collaboration from statisticians and the&lt;br/&gt;R core
development team on developing, evaluating, and
disseminating&lt;br/&gt;RIOT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information can be
found at: &lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.duke.edu/dbgroup/Main/RIOT