* 0916926
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Imperfection-Resilient Scalable Digital Signal Processing Algorithms and Architectures Using Significance Driven Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 250,000.00

Present-day integrated circuits are expected to deliver high-quality/high-
performance levels under ever-diminishing power budgets. Due to quadratic
dependence of power on voltage, supply voltage scaling has been investigated as
an effective method to reduce power. However, supply scaling increases the
delays in all computation paths and can result in incorrect or incomplete
computation of certain paths. Besides power dissipation, process variations also
pose a major design concern with technology scaling. Supply voltage can be
scaled-up or logic gates can be up-sized to prevent delay failures and to
achieve higher parametric yield. However, such techniques come at the cost of
increased power and/or die area. Meeting the contradictory requirements of high
yield, low power and high quality are becoming exceedingly challenging in
nanometer designs. Hence, there is a need for a scalable design methodology in
which minimal output quality degradation is achieved under changing power
constraints and process conditions. In addition, for a prescribed power
consumption level and process, design methodology must take into account the
effects of input signal noise and distortion on the fidelity of the Digital
Signal Processing (DSP) computation and ensure that graceful output quality
degradation is achieved under varying degrees of noise and distortion through
proper algorithm and hardware design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research involves development of a systematic
methodology for reorganizing (transforming) algorithmic level computations, data
and underlying hardware in such a way that minimum performance degradation in
DSP systems is achieved under reduced power supply, increased process variations
and reduced input signal quality. It has been observed that for DSP
applications/systems, all computations are not equally important in shaping the
output response. This information is exploited by the investigators to develop
suitable algorithms/architectures that provide the ?right? trade-offs between
output quality vs. energy consumption (supply scaling) vs. parametric yield due
to process variations vs. input signal noise. To address resilience to process
variations, the investigators identify the significant/not-so-significant
components of such systems based on output sensitivities. Under such a scenario,
with scaled supply voltage and/or parameter variations, if there are potential
delay failures in some paths, only the less-significant computations are
affected. In other words, using carefully designed algorithms and architectures,
the investigators provide unequal error protection (under voltage over-scaling)
to significant/not-so-significant computation elements, thereby achieving large
improvements in power dissipation with graceful degradation in output signal
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;