* 0916877
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Large Scale Networks and Information Flow: From Emergent Behavior to Algorithm Design
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2012
* Edmund Yeh, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 04/30/2012
* USD 225,000.00

This project studies the performance of complex large-scale spatial networks
that use distributed communication algorithms by applying different random
network models. While much of the previous work on random spatial networks has
focused on topological aspects and on centralized algorithm design, the emphasis
of this project is on developing distributed algorithms and on characterizing
desired invariant network properties that such networks must satisfy to allow
for the efficient implementation of distributed algorithms. Expected results
from the project include (1) decentralized algorithms for ef&amp;#64257;cient
path navigation, (2) decentralized algorithms for information &amp;#64258;ow in
random networks, (3) decentralized algorithms for information dissemination, (4)
distributed energy management in random networks, and (5) distributed topology
control for maintaining percolation-based connectivity. This project will (1)
increase the understanding of complex information systems upon which society
increasingly depends, (2) lead to design guidelines for practical network
architectures and protocols, (3) disseminate the scientific and technological
findings through publications, (4) further the development of related
disciplines such as mathematics (probability) and statistical physics, (5)
impact undergraduate and graduate education through a planned joint course on
random networks, and a summer lecture series, (6) enhance research experiences
for undergraduates through summer research projects, and (7) encourage the
participation of women and minorities in networking research.