* 0916797
* AF:Small:Collaborative Research:Studies in nonuniformity, completeness, and reachability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Pavan Aduri, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2014
* USD 198,601.00

Computational complexity theory classifies computational problems into various
complexity classes based on the amount of resources needed to solve them. This
classification is done by measuring various resources such as time, space,
nonuniformity, nondeterminism, and randomness. A better understanding of the
relationships among these various resources shed light on the computational
difficulty of the problems that are encountered in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores several central questions
regarding nonuniformity, complete problems, and space bounded computations. This
project attempts to discover improved upper bounds for problems with high
circuit complexity. Regarding complete sets, non-relativizing properties of
complete sets will be explored. Space bounded computations will be investigated
in the context of planar graph reachability problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses several basic questions in computational complexity theory.
The results from this project will further our understanding of computational
resources such as nonuniformity, nondeterminism, and space. Research results
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and will be presented at national
and international conferences, thus enabling broad dissemination of the the
results to enhance scientific understanding. New courses will be created and
taught along the themes of this project, thus integrating teaching and research.
The project supports various human resource development activities such as
supporting and mentoring graduate students and inviting visitors.&lt;br/&gt;