* 0916867
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Wireless Networks: Fundamental Limits via Extremal Entropy Properties
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tie Liu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 198,745.00

CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Wireless Networks: Fundamental Limits via
Extremal Entropy Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using extremal entropy
properties to characterize the fundamental performance limits of network
communication is a tradition of information theory. Most historical successes,
however, relied on one particular extremal entropy inequality: the entropy-power
inequality of Shannon and Stam, which, though powerful, applies mainly to
networks with certain degradedness structure. Moreover, wireless features such
as multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communications, channel uncertainty
incurred by fading, and secrecy constraints due to the broadcast nature of radio
communication bring new challenges that cannot be overcome by the entropy-power
inequality of Shannon and Stam alone. This situation calls for in-depth
investigations of the interaction between converse problems in network
information theory and extremal entropy properties in statistics, resorting to
powerful statistical tools to solve important communication engineering
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research are: 1) to
examine systematic ways of establishing extremal entropy properties through
links between information theory and statistics; 2) to establish channel-
enhancement as a general framework for solving the converse problems for MIMO
downlink communication; and 3) to identify general frameworks for solving the
converse problems for collaborative communication in cognitive wireless
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have seen substantial efforts in
designing new coding schemes to achieve better performance for wireless
networks. Fundamental understanding of the limits of these coding schemes is
thus extremely important from the engineering viewpoint to direct future
research and to prevent over-engineering and bolster confidence for simple and
structured coding schemes. Intellectual results obtained from this research will
also be disseminated via course developments on network information theory and
wireless communications at Texas A&amp;M and the University of
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;