* 0916028
* CSR:  Small:  Green Farms: Towards a Stable Energy Optimization Architecture for Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). This project develops techniques for increasing energy-
efficiency of modern data centers with performance constraints. Both computing
and cooling energy are considered. According to the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, data centers in the United States incur an annual energy cost
of approximately $4.5 billion, which is comparable to the total consumption of
5.8 million average US households. In the absence of intervention, data center
consumption is expected to double in five years. Up to 80% of this projected
energy expenditure is avoidable, which constitutes a prospective reduction in
nationwide carbon dioxide emissions by up to 47 million metric tons (MMT) per
year; an amount comparable to the annual carbon emissions footprint of all fuel
combustion in a small nation. The observation motivating the energy-efficiency
solutions developed in this project is that the proliferation of individual
energy-saving mechanisms in server installations can lead to increasingly
suboptimal overall energy management. The problem lies in performance
composability or lack thereof; a challenge that arises because individual
optimizations generally do not compose well when combined, leading to
opportunities for improvement. A theory is developed to define preconditions of
composability and a holistic distributed approach is investigated for
coordinating energy-saving decisions across multiple components that span both
the computing and cooling subsystems. A graduate course on cyber-physical
systems is designed to cover the addressed challenges and solutions. Women and
minority students are encouraged to benefit from these opportunities.