* 0916471
* CIF:Small:Visual Information Measures for Task-Based Imaging Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Sheila Hemami, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 268,261.00

Many digital images are not acquired for documentary evidence or for archival
use, but instead are intermediate pieces of information to be ultimately used by
a human to assess a situation, make a decision, or reach a conclusion. Often,
the image need not provide "picture-perfect quality" in order for a human to
successfully perform a task - consider security screening of carry-on baggage,
for example. Many tasks can be easily performed with images that would be
considered to be severely degraded in a purely aesthetic sense. To date,
however, image assessment algorithms have been primarily focused on evaluating
aesthetic quality. These algorithms are typically designed for relatively high-
quality images, and they do not perform well on highly degraded images which
exhibit low aesthetic quality but remain useful for human-performed tasks.

This research characterizes the suitability of an image for recognition and the
perceived utility in terms of conveying information about content. The
characterization is performed in terms of properties of the image, rather than
in terms of the response of higher-level vision to the image, and is based upon
extensive subjective experiments quantifing the perceived utility of highly
degraded images and identifing recognition thresholds for images - maximally
degraded images that still allow recognition. A utility measure is developed
which takes as input the original image and the distorted image and outputs a
distance quantifying the amount of degradation in the image relative to both the
recognition threshold (at the low end) and to the original or a visually
lossless representation of the original (at the high end). Use of this measure
is demonstrated by integration this measure into imaging applications including
compression and enhancement.