* 0916770
* SHF: Small: Interleaving Constrained Parallel Runtime System for Tolerating Concurrency Bugs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Satish Narayanasamy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,946.00

Future processor chips are expected to have hundreds or even thousands of
processor cores. To take advantage of this massive computing power, programmers
need to parallelize their applications. Parallel programming, however, is
notoriously difficult. Almost all the production concurrent software systems
used today contain bugs costing billions of dollars. To address this challenge,
this research is developing parallel runtime mechanisms that could make it
possible for even buggy software to run correctly in a production
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental problem with the current parallel
programming models is that they expose an unbounded number of thread
interleavings to the parallel runtime system, and a majority of the
interleavings in a production system remain untested. This research is exploring
two directions to avoid incorrect interleavings from manifesting in a production
run. The first approach uses a sampling-based low overhead data race detector
for detecting incorrect interleavings, which are then avoided. The second
approach constrains production run thread interleavings to a set of tested
interleavings, which could provide comprehensive immunity against most types of
concurrency bugs. Software tools developed as part of this research will help
software developers and researchers. Students will also use these productivity
tools in their course projects.