* 0916889
* Complete Genome Sequencing of Four Nitrogen-fixing, Plant-associated Burkholderias
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,09/30/2010
* George Weinstock, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 304,444.00



This project will produce genome sequences for four plant-associated
Burkholderia species: B. sp. PVA5, B. tuberum STM-678T, B. unamae MtI-641T, and
B. sp. SRMrh-20. New DNA sequencing methodology (pyrosequencing) will be used to
sequence the 7 million base pairs of each of these genomes. These data will be
used to compile a complete description of the genes contained in each bacterium,
then analyzed for important physiological mechanisms for nitrogen fixation and
compared to other nitrogen-fixing bacteria, particularly the phylogenetically
distinct rhizobia. For over a hundred years, members of the rhizobia were known
as the sole group of bacteria that could nodulate (intimately associate with a
plant host) and fix nitrogen (providing nutrients for their plant host), a
process of critical importance. Thus it is of intense interest to discover the
genetic basis for the nitrogen fixing capacity of the Burkholderia. One strain
to be sequenced, the novel species B. tuberum STM-678T, isolated in South
Africa, acquired nodulation and nitrogen fixation mechanisms independently from
other organisms. B. unamae MtI-641T and B. sp. SRMrh-20 represent different
clades of plant associated nodulating nitrogen fixers (from Brazil and Mexico),
and taken together these organisms will richly sample the genetic diversity of
these organisms. The fourth strain to be sequenced, PVA5 (from Brazil), does not
nodulate but enters the root by infection and may represent a new form of
symbiosis, giving insight into the evolution of this important plant-microbe
interaction. These plant-associated Burkholderia will also be examined for genes
encoding enzymes in pathways for biocontrol and for soil remediation via the
breakdown of xenobiotics. Lastly, the genomes will be compared to other
sequenced Burkholderia genomes, particularly from pathogenic species, in order
to shed light on the evolution of virulent microorganisms. The sequencing of
these Burkholderia fulfills the goals of the Microbial Genome Sequencing Project
because of the community of physiologists and plant biologists who will benefit
from the sequence data, and participate in its analysis, the public release of
the sequence and gene predictions, and the impact this work will have on many
areas of interest to the NSF.

An international group of scientists (U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Brazil,
Mexico,Taiwan) has been researching the plant-associated Burkholderia strains
with regard to their phylogeny, their responses to the environment, and their
interactions with plants. The selected organisms are the exact strains that are
used in the experimental studies, and hence the genome will be of immense and
immediate benefit to these pursuits. An important aspect of the project will be
the thorough annotation of the DNA sequence, performed by a consortium of the
relevant scientific community. The annotation process will be multi-phasic with
(1) an early release of automated functional assessments based on preliminary
sequence followed by (2) a community annotation project encouraging other
researchers to be involved and contribute their expertise. The project will
include participation by undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs for
hands-on training in microbial genomics and bioinformatics. In addition, UCLA is
one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the U.S., and has established
many programs to introduce students from under-represented groups, male and
female, to science, technology, and mathematics. A number of undergraduate
students work on research projects starting as early as their second year in
college, under the sponsorship of UCLA C.A.R.E. (Center for Academic and
Research Excellence), which oversees the MARC (Minority Access to Research
Careers) program, and UC-LEADS (Leadership through Advanced Degrees) programs,
all of which have been established to help people from under-represented groups
pursue careers in science.