* 0916283
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: The Flexible Internetwork Stack (FINS) Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Thompson, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,540.00

Modern networks invalidate many of the assumptions of traditional networking.
For example, mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) invalidate the assumption that
there will be stable routes in the network, throwing traditional routing
techniques into disarray. Handheld computing devices further challenge
assumptions about platform mobility. While the need for cross-layer design to
meet these new challenges has become well known, no replacement for the
traditional network stack has emerged yet. Implementing experimental cross-layer
approaches on commodity hardware and software remains challenging.

In this project we are building a framework for modular, extensible,
experimental, network stack implementation, called the FINS (Flexible
Internetwork Stack) Framework. The framework allows users to leverage existing
protocols (such as TCP and IP) where needed, providing implementations that
provide more real-time control and transparency than is available in existing
implementations, while allowing users to replace or modify components as
desired. Thus, the FINS Framework allows researchers ready access to the network
stack in a manner previously possible only in simulation or by making
painstaking operating system modifications.

The FINS Framework facilitates ready implementation of new network technologies
and context-aware applications thereby lowering the bar for participation in
experimental networking research. The initial implementation of the framework is
on handheld devices. The framework is being released via open source license,
making it broadly available to the research community. A set of hands-on
networking course modules utilizing the FINS Framework and handheld devices is
being developed, and utilized for undergraduate research at a predominantly
undergraduate institution.