* 0916829
* RI: Small: Modeling and Recognition of Landmarks and Urban Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Svetlana Lazebnik, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 776,979.00

The goal of this project is to design a scalable and robust system for modeling
and representing the spatiotemporal and semantic structure of large collections
of partially geo-referenced imagery. Specifically, the project is aimed at
Internet photo collections of images of famous landmarks and cities. The
functionalities of the system include 3D reconstruction, browsing,
summarization, location recognition, and scene segmentation. In addition, the
system incorporates human-created annotations such as text and geo-tags, models
scene illumination conditions, and supports incremental model updating using an
incoming stream of images. This system is designed to take advantage of the
redundancy inherent in community photo collections to achieve levels of
robustness and scalability not attainable by existing geometric modeling
approaches. The key technical innovation of the project is a novel data
structure, the iconic scene graph that efficiently and compactly captures the
perceptual, geometric, and semantic relationships between images in the
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key methodological insight of this project
is that successful representation and recognition of landmarks requires the
integration of statistical recognition and geometric reconstruction approaches.
The project incorporates statistical inference into all components of the
landmark modeling system, and includes a significant layer of high-level
semantic functionality that is implemented using recognition
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential applications with societal impact
include virtual tourism and navigation, security and surveillance, cultural
heritage preservation, immersive environments and computer games, and movie
special effects. Datasets and code produced in the course of the project will be
made publicly available. The project includes a significant education component
through undergraduate and graduate course development.&lt;br/&gt;