* 0916880
* CIF: Small: Multichannel Signal Processing for Dense Optical Communication Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Maite Brandt-Pearce, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2012
* USD 239,566.00

Abstract:

The dramatic increase in throughput demands from backbone transport data
networks has propelled the development of all-optical wavelength-division-
multiplexed (WDM) networks. As the capacity demands on these systems increase,
the physical layer degradation becomes so severe that sophisticated signal
processing techniques are necessary to maintain the quality of service. Channel
nonlinearity differentiates multichannel fiber-optic systems from conventional
wireline and wireless systems. Consequently, novel signal processing and
communication theoretic approaches are required to design and analyze the
channel; this research project addresses this need. As a consequence, WDM system
designs are improved and the data throughput available to society though these
networks is substantially increased.

This research develops a discrete time-wavelength nonlinear model for the WDM
system and uses this model to design powerful signal processing techniques. Up
to now, the WDM channel has been considered as a set of parallel channels,
ignoring the cross-channel effects or modeling them simply as noise. Motivated
by techniques that have been so successful in wireless communications, such as
multiuser detection, MIMO processing, multichannel precoding, etc., this
research develops algorithms to apply to the WDM fiber channel that can produce
substantial capacity gains. A two-dimensional discrete-time polynomial model for
a WDM system is formulated to account for intra-channel and inter-channel linear
and nonlinear effects. Multichannel processing algorithms across time and
wavelength for interference mitigation are designed and evaluated. Since
nonlinear interference limits the performance of networks, constrained coding to
diminish this interference is used to trade capacity for performance. In all-
optical networks, crosstalk emanating from other lightpaths can limit
performance. Employing idle lightpaths judiciously provides multiuser coding and
path diversity (redundancy and memory) to the entire network.

Level of effort statement:

At the recommended level of support, the PI will make every attempt to meet the
original scope and level of effort of the project.