* 0916854
* TC: Small: Minimalist Hardware Trojans through Malicious Side-Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Wayne Burleson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 350,657.00

In order to provide system security, hardware modules which function as trust
anchors are used in an ever increasing number of devices. The majority of
laptops and PCs are now equipped with Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs), and a
large number of pervasive computing systems such as smart cards, electronic
passports or high-speed routers make use of hardware for cryptographic
algorithms and key storage. In almost all such applications the security of the
entire system hinges on the assumption that the hardware modules are
trustworthy. Recently, due to the increasing use of potentially untrusted
semiconductor foundries, the threat of maliciously manipulated hardware has been
raised, Since hardware manipulations, including hardware Trojans, are difficult
to detect and, perhaps more importantly, even harder to repair, they form a very
serious threat to system security for today's and future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard approach to Trojan hardware
consists in adding extra logic to a given IC design which weakens the system.
The main drawback of this approach, from an attacker's perspective, is that
extra function blocks can potentially be detected through a host of techniques,
including, e.g., optical inspections at different layers of the design, or power
and EM fingerprinting. Our malicious circuit manipulations are orders of
magnitude more subtle than previously known Trojans, but can nevertheless
totally compromise secure hardware blocks by leaking cryptographic keys. The
core idea is to create malicious side-channels, in particular power supply
channels, through small modifications of circuit elements, e.g., at the
transistor level. We will refer to these covert channels as Trojan side channels
(TSC). The core parts of the research are modeling of the assumptions,
development of channels and modulations schemes, their realization on the
circuit level, and proof-of-concept implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to posing a threat to system security, Trojan side-channels can also be
used constructively. For instance, they have applications in anti-
counterfeiting: illegal copies of ICs with the same functional behavior will not
leak the same side-channel ID and can thus easily be detected. Also, TSC could
be used for conveying internal status information about a circuit, increasing
the testability of a circuits. Moreover, because TSC can be viewed as a form of
physically encryption one can imagine other cryptographic protocols and
applications using TSC as primitives.&lt;br/&gt;