* 0916715
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Specification Language Foundations for Modular Reasoning Methodologies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Gary Leavens, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2015
* USD 249,981.00

This project extends the semantical foundations of object-oriented (OO)
languages to cover methodologies for modular reasoning. Modular reasoning means
verifying software components assuming the specification of each used component.
Modularity is important for productivity and scalability, but is difficult to
achieve for OO software. To support modular reasoning, researchers have proposed
several methodologies that restrict programs and their specifications. The goal
of this project is to provide a theoretical basis that supports practical
techniques for justifying and using methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides guidance for the designers of programming and specification
languages, verification logics, and associated tools. The results will improve
the utility and extensibility of verification tools --- a key goal of the
Verified Software grand challenge. Software developers may benefit from the
integration and harmonious interoperation of best-practice methodologies. This
project is potentially transformative: it aims to enable combinations and
customizations of methodologies by tool users, scalable to real
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved OO programming methodologies may
greatly improve programming practice, especially in applications needing high
assurance, reliability, and security. This will benefit society, which
increasingly depends on computing systems built using OO components. Unification
of methodologies and streamlining of tools also facilitates the education of
software developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;