* 0916152
* III: RI: Small: RUI: Tracking Predators and Bullies Via Chat Log Transcripts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* April Edwards, Ursinus College
* Continuing Grant
* Clifton Bingham
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,428.00

Cyber-violence is increasing exponentially as social networking applications
such as Instant Messaging, Facebook, and MySpace are developed, deployed, and
reach increasingly younger users. These young users frequently fall victim to
cyber-predators and cyber-bullies. To address this ongoing concern, this
research project will study of the communicative strategies employed by both
aggressors and victims in cases of online predation and cyber-bullying. The
primary outcome of this project is the development of theoretical communicative
models and technology for the detection of online predation and cyber-bullying.
In addition to flagging aggressive communication and notifying parents, the
open-source software developed with these funds will suggest appropriate
responses so a teen or tween can immediately defend him or herself against an
aggressor. The response software will also subtly teach effective defense
communication strategies that children can take into other situations (in the
real or online world). Existing data resources for research in this area are
scant and problematic. The data to be collected and disseminated as part of this
project can be used to for future research in the development of theoretical
communicative models of online predation and response, and of cyber-bullying
communication and response. A data set for research in resolving multiple
Internet identities will also be created and distributed. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research project will bring together two fields, Computer
Science and Media and Communication Studies, which have been dramatically
impacted by the explosive growth of Internet social networking sites. The study
will build upon existing web-centered technologies and tools, as well as
theories of communication that were developed by close analysis of other media
forms, such as television and print media. Existing machine learning algorithms
will be enhanced by the development and integration of communicative theories
that have been updated for online interactions. The focus on cyber-violence,
especially cyber-violence directed at children, supplies a socially relevant
test-bed that has suffered from neglect by researchers in Computer Science,
primarily due to the lack of standard data sets. This project will provide
collections of annotated data that will be used by other researchers in both
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;