* 0916664
* CIF: Small: Cost and Value of Information for Resource Allocation in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Can Koksal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 458,515.00

Resource allocation in wireless networks concerns the decisions of what rate
each node injects data into the network, where and when it sends out data
packets with potentially different destinations, and what level of transmit
power it uses at every point in time, based on the information available at the
node on the system state. It is well-known that feedback of relevant ``network
state information'' is of paramount importance to the efficient utilization of
the scarce network resources. Therefore, in a realistic system, the cost and
value of obtaining the necessary network state information is of crucial
importance and demands a comprehensive study, which constitutes the broad
objective of this research. The inclusion of these factors causes drastic
changes to the widely-used design paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;To that end, the main
objectives of this project are: to develop a well-founded theoretical framework
for (1) establishing the value and cost of information obtained by distributed
network state estimators; (2) building a joint estimation and resource
allocation component for new generation wireless networks; and (3) designing
distributed network controllers with asymmetric partial information. This study
requires fundamental developments in wireless communications, estimation theory,
information theory and optimization theory.