* 0916492
* CIF: Small: List Decoding for Algebraic Geometry Codes: Theoretical Analysis, Efficient Algorithms, Practical Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Michael O'Sullivan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2014
* USD 223,974.00

CIF:Small:Decoding of Algebraic Geometry Codes:&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical Analysis,
Efficient Algorithms, Practical Implementation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Error
control coding ensures the reliability of data transmitted in a noisy
environment and is therefore a critical component of communications systems. By
adding a bit of redundancy to data, and using sophisticated mathematical
algorithms to encode and decode, errors in the system can be reduced to an
arbitrarily low threshold. This project concerns algebraic geometry (AG) codes,
a large and powerful family of codes that includes Reed-Solomon (RS) codes,
which are the standard code used in commercial products today. The standard
decoding algorithm for Reed-Solomon codes is the Berlekamp-Massey algorithm,
which decodes up to the sphere-packing bound. In the 1980's and 1990's, AG codes
were discovered that yielded better error correction performance than RS codes,
and efficient algorithms generalizing Berlekamp-Massey were developed. A method
for efficiently decoding beyond the sphere-packing bound, called list decoding,
was discovered in the 1990's by Sudan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the theoretical, algorithmic and applied understanding of list decoding
for AG codes. There is strong evidence that Sudan's method, when used on high-
rate AG codes, can perform much better than current analysis predicts, so a
primary focus is improving the theoretical underpinnings of list decoding to
discover its maxim capabilities for AG codes. The investigators also improve the
efficiency of current algorithms and tailor them to hardware implementation by
combining classical Berlekamp-Massey type methods and recent innovations due to
several researchers. The investigators work with hardware and communication
engineers in industry and in academia to identify applications where the special
properties of AG codes will be particularly advantageous.