* 0916752
* SHF: Small: The Chip Is the Network: Rethinking the Theoretical Foundations of Multicore Architecture Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Radu Marculescu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 466,000.00

Project ID: 0916752 &lt;br/&gt;Title: The Chip Is the Network: Rethinking the
Theoretical Foundations of Multicore Architecture Design&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Radu
Marculescu&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in CMOS
technology allow the integration of tens or hundreds of individually
programmable processing elements, together with large amounts of dedicated
memory, on the same system-on-chip (SoC). In such multiprocessor systems,
individual processing nodes can communicate and coordinate via networks-on-chip
(NoCs). Therefore, a major challenge is to determine the mathematical techniques
for designing and optimizing such on-chip networks in a rigorous manner.
Traditional queuing and Markov chain approaches to buffer allocation are helpful
to a certain extent, but capturing the traffic variability represents a major
problem. Starting from these overarching ideas, this project introduces a new
statistical-physics approach for performance analysis in multiprocessor SoCs.
More precisely, we develop a completely new mathematical description of network
traffic using an analogy between a Bose gas and the information flow in the
communication network. This new modeling paradigm where networks are seen as
gases can be further used to develop efficient on-chip buffer assignment
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new design methodology enables the
development of more efficient multiprocessor SoCs which have a dramatic impact
on society via applications ranging from entertainment to gaming to security and
to bio- and gene engineering. More broadly, the results of this project impact
significantly other research communities by improving the level of understanding
of networking concepts needed to design and control complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;