* 0916391
* NeTS:Small: How to Exploit Social Network Theory in Designing Secure Wireless Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yuguang Fang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 422,200.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Securing cyberspace is one of the top priorities in protecting our national
infrastructure. As wireless ad hoc networks (WANETs) have been built to access
or been parts of the Internet, they become the weakest links which should be
secured and protected. This project investigates security issues in WANETs, such
as trust establishment and management, secure connectivity, efficient secure
routing and their performance, by utilizing the social network theory (including
tools such as graph theory, percolation theory and hyperbolic geometry). First,
the results in empirical social network studies are utilized to improve our
understanding of the properties of the trust and physical network graphs, the
existence and distribution of secure paths, and secure connectivity in WANETs.
Second, by mimicking the social behavior of individuals, new methodologies are
established to design efficient and scalable multi-hop communication schemes in
WANETs. Finally, the project investigates the secure efficiency of a WANET as
the end-to-end secure throughput and delay and conduct formal analysis of secure
network performance and trade-off between security and throughput/delay. This
project opens a new research direction in wireless networks and invents novel
network design methodologies.

The proposed research has broad impacts in many aspects including securing
national cyberspace, creating multidisciplinary research themes mixing
sociology, mathematics and wireless networks, disseminating the research
findings to multiple communities of interest through publications in journals
and conferences, and training the future multidisciplinary work force for
telecommunications and information industries.

