* 0916972
* CSR: Small: High Assurance at Low Cost in Data Centers Using Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 424,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;As our reliance on online services continues to
grow, the need for maintaining high availability of these services has become a
pressing need as well as a challenge. The challenges include hardware failures,
software bugs, operator error, malicious break-ins, and wide-area disasters such
as power blackouts and natural catastrophes. This project is developing
techniques to build data center services that remain highly available under such
challenging conditions using virtualization.&lt;br/&gt;The project makes two
contributions. First, is a novel approach for Byzantine fault-tolerance (BFT)
with a replication cost factor close to F+1 in order to tolerate up to F
failures, thereby halving the cost of state-of-the-art BFT approaches. The
savings in replication cost as well as commensurate gains in service throughput
are realized using virtualization and are applicable to data centers hosting
multiplexed services. Second, is a novel approach to seamlessly recover from
wide-area disasters with negligible service replication cost during typical
conditions. These gains are realized using virtual machine checkpointing,
asynchronous replication, and semantics-aware storage techniques. The project
demonstrates the feasibility of these approaches using theoretical analysis as
well as prototype-driven experiments. The prototype implementations will be made
available to other researchers and practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;