* 0916112
* TC: Small:Automata Based String Analysis for Detecting Vulnerabilities in Web Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tevfik Bultan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 349,999.00

Web applications contain numerous vulnerabilities that can be
exploited&lt;br/&gt;by attackers to gain unauthorized access to confidential
information and&lt;br/&gt;to manipulate sensitive data. Many of these
vulnerabilities are due to&lt;br/&gt;inadequate manipulation of string
variables. String analysis, a technique&lt;br/&gt;that captures the string
values that a certain variable might hold at a&lt;br/&gt;particular program
point, can be used to identify such flaws. In this&lt;br/&gt;project, novel and
precise string analysis techniques will be developed&lt;br/&gt;using an
automata-based approach that represents possible values of a&lt;br/&gt;string
variable at a program point as an automaton. Techniques that&lt;br/&gt;support
path-sensitivity and that enable precise analysis of loops
using&lt;br/&gt;automata-based widening operations will be developed. Basic
string analysis&lt;br/&gt;techniques will be extended to a composite analysis
where relationships among&lt;br/&gt;string variables and other types of
variables can be automatically discovered&lt;br/&gt;and analyzed. The precision
of string analysis plays a central role for&lt;br/&gt;obtaining good results
with static vulnerability detection tools. The&lt;br/&gt;precise string analysis
techniques developed in this project will enable&lt;br/&gt;analysis of programs
that cannot be analyzed with existing techniques. The&lt;br/&gt;results of these
improved string analysis techniques will lead to novel&lt;br/&gt;software
security solutions and detection of novel types of
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;