* 0916858
* HCC: Small: Learning-by-Explaining to a Virtual Human
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jonathan Gratch, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 495,913.00

The primary goal of this project is to better understand the cognitive and
social factors in a learning paradigm called learning-by-explaining and to build
a virtual training partner to promote better learning in this paradigm.
Learning-by-explaining is an effective learning technique used by human tutors
that has yet to be exploited by the intelligent tutoring system community. In
this technique, students are encouraged to explain a concept either to another
or themselves. Decades of research shows that generating such explanations can
lead to deep understanding of the learning material, and that these learning
effects are particularly strong when the explanations are delivered in a social
context (i.e., explaining to a peer or tutor), as opposed to explaining to
oneself. These effects have even been observed when the "other" is a computer
generated character. There are competing views on why learning-by-explaining
works. Cognitive theories emphasize how the act of generating an explanation
helps student recognize gaps and conflicts in their mental models and creates
opportunities for mental model revision and that learning partners facilitate
this process by identify missing knowledge and prompting for further
clarification. In contrast, social theories argue that the presence and behavior
of the explainee motivates learners to invest more effort into the learning
tasks, resulting in learning gains. This project aims to gain better
understanding of the interplay between the cognitive and socio-relational
feedback, how they impact the learning-by-explaining process and how to build an
explainee agent that facilitates learning-by-explaining. The project seeks to
answer two research questions: 1) Will cognitive feedback or socio-relational
feedback facilitate learning-by-explaining? 2) How to build an effective virtual
training partner "a virtual explainee" in the learning-by-explaining context?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will inform the development of next
generation intelligent tutoring systems and has the potential to significantly
enhance basic understanding of the design of human centered computing. It
explores factors related to effective multi-modal interfaces and helps to
identify crucial factors that impact social impressions and effective
interaction which may facilitate a new generation of more human-centric
approaches to human learning. The project will also support the research
activities of underrepresented groups (the senior researcher is a woman and the
work will support the training of an intern from a HCBU-MI). It will enhance
infrastructure for research and education by making advanced research tools and
corpora freely available to the research community. These tools provide a novel
method to study and enhance the effectiveness of computer-mediated and human-
computer interaction, allowing the experimental manipulation of key mediating
factors in such interactions. The work will advance discovery and understanding
while promoting teaching and learning as it will be performed within the context
of USC's Centers for Creative Technologies, a university-affiliated federal
laboratory with a core mission to develop and disseminate advanced virtual
reality training technology with an extensive track record in transitioning
technology into the classroom.