* 0916891
* SHF:Small:Exploring the Synergy between Software Design and Organizational Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 520,579.00

Many successful large-scale software systems share a fundamental characteristic:
their modular structures enable system-wide advances though distributed and
parallelized improvement of modules. However, merely breaking software into
modules, without assessing the interplay between a design and the organization
that must instantiate it, does not always ensure that parallelized, module-wise
evolution is effective. In particular, mismatches between design and
organizational structures can result in expensive inter-team communication
costs, exacerbated by barriers such as differing time zones, languages and
cultures. This research aims to formally express and quantitatively assess the
key characteristics of software structures that allow for system-wide evolution
through distributed module-wise contributions, and to account for the
relationship between design structure and organizational structure, as it
impacts software quality, productivity, and survival. The work will explore a
computable socio-technical model, associated metrics and automated analysis
techniques to improve the conduct of software development. The approach will
allow designers to assess and manipulate software designs at early development
stages so that modules can be defined and implemented by independent teams,
shortening development time, facilitating changes, and minimizing coordination
costs. The results will be demonstrated on large software systems, working with
industrial partners who wish to understand the impact of these techniques.