* 0916743
* NeTS: Small: Secure and Efficient Multipath Based Network Utilization: A Game Theoretic and Optimization Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Sanjiv Kapoor, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 399,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the design and
utilization of high-capacity data networks, with the goal of increasing
throughput, network security, and reliability. These are issue of paramount
importance in the current development of high-speed networks as a computation
and communication infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is using
routing methods that employ multi-paths to enhance throughput and security.
Techniques from optimization and approximation algorithms are being applied for
designing efficient algorithms that optimize throughput with latency, jitter,
reliability, and costs constraints. Multi-paths also allow protection against
attackers attempting to either eavesdrop or disrupt communications. Efficient
algorithms for the computation of the Nash and Stackelberg equilibria in the
resulting two-player designer-attacker games are being designed to provide
strategies (selection of routes) for the network administrator and insight for
the design of a network of low set-up cost and high
throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to more secure and
better utilized high-speed networks, which find applications in collaborative
computations for astronomy, bioinformatics, and high-energy physics. The results
of the project will lead to the design of provably efficient algorithms for
routings which achieve desired throughput and security, and for computing exact
or approximate equilibria in designer-attacker games. Simulations will
illustrate the benefits on both synthetic and real-life backbone networks. This
will open the way for implementation of multi-path routing. The results will be
published in technical conferences and journals. A significant part involves
training of undergraduate and graduate students in computer networks.&lt;br/&gt;