* 0916119
* The role of sensory information for performance in virtual environments across the lifespan
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Andrea Mason, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 497,668.00

The practical application of 3D virtual environment technology has made
significant progress over the last decade, as advances in the computer industry
allow for faster, more complex operations to be accomplished with much less
hardware and at decreased cost. As a consequence, applications once limited to
experimental laboratories are reaching the design phase for mainstream
deployment. However, successful integration of 3D virtual environments into the
daily activities of the full spectrum of society is hindered by the fact that
such systems do not yet provide an environment in which human performance
matches performance in the natural world. One of the limiting factors is the
failure to properly take into account the human psychological and sensorimotor
systems, and how these systems change with age. It is well known, for example,
that vision is the dominant source of sensory information, and that changes in
sensorimotor processing and perception result in alterations in the use of
vision for motor control at various stages of the lifespan. That human-computer
interaction is significantly affected by such changes where standard computer
interfaces are concerned is well documented, but there is a paucity of
information on human-computer interaction across the lifespan in 3D virtual
environments. The PI argues that to succeed in the creation of valid 3D virtual
environments for the full array of potential users, age-specific sensorimotor
requirements must be systematically determined. To this end, the PI will in this
project seek to establish sensory feedback parameters for motor control in a
desktop 3D virtual environment. A multi-disciplinary approach based on
methodologies from human motor control, biomechanics and neuroscience will be
used. Specifically, the PI will investigate the quantity, quality, and timing of
visual feedback employed in simple tasks. Further inquiry into the interaction
of task difficulty and sensory feedback will be undertaken. Finally, for each of
the basic experimental investigations, the between subjects factor of age group
and the within subjects factors of manipulated sensory feedback will be
analyzed. Basic motor control measurement and predictive modeling techniques
will be employed to understand how sensory feedback is used, to quantify the
negative effects of lag, and to develop methods for improving the presentation
of sensory information to users of various age groups. These developments will
then be incorporated into the system, and experiments will be extended to more
complex and functional tasks.

Broader Impacts: By gaining a comprehensive understanding of the role of graphic
information for interaction in computer-generated environments across the
lifespan, this research will establish evidence-based recommendations to
designers of virtual environments regarding how to provide the most effective
sensory feedback to users of all ages.