* 0916676
* III: Small: Inference of Causal Regulatory Relationships from Genetic Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eleazar Eskin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,444.00

III:Small: Inference of Causal Regulatory Relationships from Genetic Studies

Inference of biological networks from high-throughput genomic data is a central
problem in bioinformatics where many different types of methods have been
proposed and applied to a wide diversity of datasets. Several recent studies
have collected data which contain both genetic variation information as well as
gene expression information from a set of genetically distinct strains of an
organism which have several advantageous properties for inferring causal
regulatory relationships between genes. A principled way of representing causal
relationships is using graphical causal models and a rich theory of inference of
such models from observational data and interventions has been developed.
However, this theory assumes full knowledge of the joint distribution which is
equivalent to having very large samples and so is only guaranteed to work
asymptotically. In this proposal, the team will extend causal inference methods
in several directions motivated by applications to genetic views of genomics
datasets where there are relatively small samples. In particular they will apply
their new methods to detecting the presence and absence of causal relationships
between yeast genes. While the focus of this proposal is on applying the
developed techniques to a specific problem in bioinformatics, the causal
inference issues addressed in this proposal are the general issues faced when
applying causal inference to finite samples. Many of the approaches developed in
this proposal will be applicable to a wide range of problems. The resulting
methods developed in this proposal will be made available to the scientific
community through publicly available software.

The project involves the training of a graduate and undergraduate students. The
collaborative nature of the project will expose the students to the medical and
genetics worlds, and at the same time, it will improve their abilities to design
and implement solutions to complex algorithmic and statistical problems. The
research will be converted into course materials for the interdisciplinary
course, Computational Genetics, which is taken by both undergrad and graduate
students as well as students from the medical school.