* 0916323
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research: Combining Static Analysis and Dynamic Run-time Optimization for Parallel Discrete Event Simulation in Many-Core Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nael Abu-Ghazaleh, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 358,031.00

This project investigates how a new processor paradigm (multi-core
architectures) changes the way Parallel Discrete Event Simulation (PDES) is
done. This topic is important given the wide use of simulation and the emergence
of multi-core architectures. PDES is likely to play an increasingly important
role in discrete event simulation as Moore?s Law is sharply curtailed and
explicit parallelism becomes the major avenue for improving performance of
sequential applications. Improving PDES performance translates to improved.

Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is widely used for performance evaluation in
many application domains. The fine grained nature of PDES causes its performance
and scalability to be limited by communication latency. The emergence of multi-
core architectures and their expected evolution into manycore systems offers
potential relief to PDES and other fine grained parallel applications because
the cost of communication within a chip is dramatically lower than conventional
networked communication. Absent this dominant effect, PDES performance will be
determined by issues such as load balancing, synchronization and optimism
control, and the choice and configuration of various other algorithms and data
structures of the simulator. Operation in a manycore environment introduces new
system tradeoffs that must be effectively balanced by the system software.
Primarily, the pressure on the memory system and resilience to load fluctuations
will emerge as critical issues that we address in the proposed research.
Finally, the more predictable nature of communication cost in this environment
(due in part to the more frequent synchronization possible between nearby cores)
can be exploited, especially by static analysis, for effective simulation.

As multi-cores become the default microprocessor architecture, applications that
are performance constrained must evolve to use parallelism to take advantage of
the resources available on the cores. This project?s new PDES can have a
significant impact on a number of applications that rely on discrete event
simulations. The PIs plan to incorporate the research results into a graduate
level course on parallel simulation techniques and to involve undergraduate
students in the project.

