* 0916280
* RI: Small: RUI: Resource-light Morphosyntactic Tagging of Morphologically Complex Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anna Feldman, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 169,174.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to develop a tagging method which neither relies on target-language
training data nor requires bilingual dictionaries and parallel corpora. The main
assumption is that a model for the target language can be approximated by
language models from one or more related source
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploiting cross-lingual correspondence leads to
a better understanding of 1) what linguistic properties are crucial for
morphosyntactic transfer; 2) how to measure language similarity at different
levels: syntax, lexicon, morphology; 3) how this method applies to pairs that do
not belong to the same family; 4) what determines the success of the model, and
5) how to quantify its potential for a given language pair. By exploiting cross-
language relationships, the size, and hence cost, of the training data are
significantly reduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a new cross-
fertilization between theoretical linguistics (especially typology and
diachronic linguistics) and natural language processing. The practical
contribution is a robust and portable system for tagging resource-poor
languages. With this new approach, it is be possible to rapidly deploy tools to
analyze a suddenly critical language. This approach can also enhance NSF's
initiatives in documenting endangered low density languages as it leverages
exactly the type of knowledge that a field linguist and a native speaker could
provide. Additional benefits include high quality annotated data, automatically
derived multilingual lexicons, annotation schemes for new languages, new
typological generalizations, and graduate and undergraduate researchers with
significant experience of highly practical work on difficult and
underrepresented languages.