* 0916409
* RI: Small: The Dynamics of Information Flow in Embodied Cognitive Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Randall Beer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 443,211.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing realization within
the behavioral and brain sciences that the embodiment and situatedness of
intelligent agents plays an essential role in their behavior. However, it is
still a significant open challenge to understand the complex interactions
between an agent's nervous system, its body and its environment. This project
focuses on mathematical methods for analyzing the flow of information in models
of situated and embodied cognitive agents. Specifically, the investigator will
(1) develop new information-theoretic tools that characterize the flow of
information over time throughout the system, (2) test and refine these methods
on evolved model brain-body-environment systems, and (3) use these techniques
and models to explore the unique advantages of embodiment and situatedness for a
cognitive agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new analysis techniques build on the
notion of conditional mutual information between random variables at specific
points in time. For example, conditioning the mutual information between a
stimulus feature and a state variable at time t on the information that state
variable contains about the stimulus feature at time t-1 allows one to compute a
measure of information gain. Similar measures can be used to compute the
information loss or retention. This basic approach will be extended in several
different directions. Information factoring, which builds on the notion of
transfer entropy, will allow the interactions between system components to be
characterized in terms of directional information flow. Information backtracking
will offer a refined portrait of the structure of these interactions by tracing
backwards in time from particular informational configurations of the system to
determine the flows that produce them. Specific information spectra will be used
to explore the informational relationships between particular values taken on by
components of the system, allowing the structure of their interactions to be
probed at a finer level of detail. These methods will be applied to evolved
models of relational categorization, referential communication, and visually
guided behavior, allowing the following questions to be explored: How do
embodied agents extract, store, and suppress information? How do embodied agents
integrate information about multiple features? What is the relationship between
informational and dynamical properties? Finally, these techniques will be used
to characterize the capabilities of embodied and situated agents, including
information self-structuring, information offloading, and embodied information
transfer. These analysis methods are expected to have applications not only to
brain-body-environment systems, but also to other complex biological and social
networks.&lt;br/&gt;