* 0916944
* HCC: Small: Interface Interactivity and User Engagement: A Communications Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* S. Shyam Sundar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2012
* USD 445,813.00

Interactivity has become ubiquitous in the digital media landscape. From
scrollbars in mobile texting devices to customization options in Web portals to
chat functions on social-networking sites, there has been a proliferation of
interactive tools affording enhanced user interaction with the system. While
studies in the past have assessed the efficacy of individual tools, we have
precious little generalizable knowledge about the larger concept of
interactivity. How does interactivity affect user experience? Does it always
ensure richer user engagement with the medium? The research will experimentally
investigate three species of interactivity corresponding to the three central
elements of communication -- source, medium, and message. Data will be used to
articulate three ordinal levels of each type of interactivity, which will then
be operationalized and used in further experiments to detect the combined
effects of the three types of interactivity on user engagement as well as other
outcomes of interest for both power users and regular users of Web interfaces.
The research will assess the validity of conceptualizing interactivity in terms
of multiple loci and more importantly, explore theoretical mechanisms by which
interactivity is believed to affect user engagement.

A scientific understanding of the psychological effects of interactivity is
quite critical for a society that is becoming saturated with interactive digital
media. Dissemination of the proposed work will likely spawn a new wave of
theoretically driven interactivity research. Research results will feed directly
into design of interfaces for a variety of purposes, from learning systems to
serious games. The proposed comparison between power users and regular users
will shed light on interactivity's potential to bridge the digital divide.
Equipment budgeted for lab studies will enhance infrastructure for research and
education at Penn State's Media Effects Lab.