* 0916425
* DC: Small: One Thousand Points of Light: Accelerating Data-Intensive Applications By Proxy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 482,000.00

A large class of distributed data-rich applications, including distributed data
mining, distributed workflows, and Web 2.0 Mashups, are increasingly relying on
cloud services to meet their data storage and computing demands. However, today,
these applications are responsible for combining data and results from different
specialized cloud services individually, which can lead to significant
performance and reliability bottlenecks, due to the lack of appropriate
resources connecting the applications to multiple clouds, resulting in a
significant impediment to their successful deployment. This project proposes a
cloud proxy network that allows optimized and reliable data-centric operations
to be performed at strategic network locations. In this model, proxies may take
on several data-centric roles: interacting with cloud services, routing data to
each other, caching data for later use, and invoking compute-intensive data
operators for intermediate processing. The proposed solution will enable an
efficient coupling of cloud services to yield improved end-to-end performance
and reliability for newly emerging data-intensive applications. This project
will explore the potential of the proxy network architecture by evaluating its
merits using a volunteer approach, focusing on four main research challenges:
Proxy Performance, Proxy Reliability, Proxy Information Sparsity, and Proxy
Selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is to amplify
the effectiveness and productivity of diverse scientific, social, and
engineering communities for enabling data-driven scientific inquiry in a
performance-efficient and reliable manner. Proxy middleware will be released to
the wider community towards this end. Educating a new generation of students in
data-centric computing through major curriculum innovation is also proposed.