* 0916568
* CIF:Small: Recursive Estimation of Randomly Modulated Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Yariv Ephraim, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 473,235.00

Project Abstract: CCF 0916568

?CIF: Small: Recursive Estimation of Randomly Modulated Processes?

Many phenomena observed in science and engineering exhibit random variations
over time. Internet traffic, speech signals, and biological signals, are a few
such examples. Choosing a random process to model such phenomena involves a
tradeoff between accuracy versus complexity. This project investigates fast
computational methods for modeling random phenomena using a class of versatile
random processes called randomly modulated processes. A randomly modulated
process consists of two simpler random processes, one which is observable and
another which modulates the observable process. By exploiting the structural
properties of randomly modulated processes, the investigators are devising
efficient and accurate methods to model a wide class of random phenomena.
Specifically, the project develops recursive estimators to characterize Internet
traffic accurately in real-time. Other important applications of the estimators
can be found in speech processing, nuclear medicine, biology, genetics, and
finance.

The project focuses on the intertwined problems of signal and parameter
estimation of randomly modulated processes. Using a transformation of measure
approach, the investigators are developing recursive estimators for such
processes and investigating feasible approaches for solving the associated
stochastic differential equations. The research involves in-depth investigation
and comparison of the transformation of measure approach with respect to
traditional likelihood-based approaches that lead invariably to batch algorithms
that can only be executed offline. The project also involves the derivation of
asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimators for randomly modulated
processes. Implementations of the recursive estimators are being applied to
Internet traffic traces, with the objective of leveraging the estimators for
network admission control and anomaly detection.