* 0916576
* NeTS:Small:Collaborative Research:Holistic Transparent Performance Assurance within the Crowded Spectrum
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Guoliang Xing, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Cheap commercial off-the-shelf wireless devices are being increasingly deployed
for performance-sensitive applications such as patient monitoring with body
sensors and home networking for multimedia and gaming. However, wireless
communications may interfere with each other when they use the same or adjacent
radio frequencies. This becomes a growing issue as the public 2.4GHz spectrum is
being populated by a variety of devices, including 802.11b/g routers, ZigBee
sensors, Bluetooth headsets, and cordless phones. Existing interference
mitigation schemes are tightly tied with the physical/MAC layers of particular
platforms, and hence often cannot co-exist in the same network without
sacrificing the system performance.

This project develops a Holistic Transparent Performance Assurance (HTPA)
framework to support performance-sensitive applications in the crowded spectrum.
HTPA consists of 1) a spectrum profiler that models the spectrum usage and
dynamic external, intra- and inter-platform interferences in heterogeneous
wireless environments; 2) a virtualized medium access control layer that
provides unified interfaces for transparently representing, monitoring, and
scheduling the underlying radio resources; and 3) a stream and system
performance assurance component that schedules radio resources for each
individual data stream, and harnesses network interference based on the system
knowledge, MAC abstractions, and dynamic spectrum models.

HTPA enables network designers to systematically understand and mitigate the
impact of complex interference that exist between heterogeneous wireless
devices, and provides reference models for the standardization of future
commercial wireless platforms operating in unlicensed spectrums.

