* 0916736
* III: Small: Managing Large-scale Uncertain Data Repositories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lise Getoor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,538.00

Increasing numbers of real-world application domains are generating data that
is&lt;br/&gt;inherently noisy, incomplete, and probabilistic in nature. Examples
of such&lt;br/&gt;data include measurement data collected by sensor networks,
observation data in&lt;br/&gt;the context of social networks, scientific and
biomedical data, and data&lt;br/&gt;collected by various online cyber-sources.
The data uncertainties may be a&lt;br/&gt;result of the fundamental limitations
of the underlying measurement&lt;br/&gt;infrastructures, the inherent ambiguity
in the domain, or they may be a&lt;br/&gt;side-effect of the rich probabilistic
modeling typically performed to extract&lt;br/&gt;high-level events from sensor
and cyber data. Similarly, when attempting to&lt;br/&gt;integrate heterogeneous
data sources ("data integration") or extracting&lt;br/&gt;structured information
from text ("information extraction"), the results are&lt;br/&gt;approximate and
uncertain at best. However, there is currently a lack of
data&lt;br/&gt;management tools that can reason about large volumes of uncertain
data, and&lt;br/&gt;hence the information about the uncertainty is often either
discarded or&lt;br/&gt;reasoned about only
superficially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we are building a complete
probabilistic data management&lt;br/&gt;system, called PrDB, that can manage,
store, and process large-scale&lt;br/&gt;repositories of uncertain data. PrDB
unifies ideas from "large-scale structured&lt;br/&gt;graphical models" like
probabilistic relational models (PRMs), developed in the&lt;br/&gt;machine
learning literature, and "probabilistic query processing", studied
in&lt;br/&gt;the database literature. PrDB framework is based on the notion of
"shared&lt;br/&gt;factors", which not only allows us to express and manipulate
uncertainties at&lt;br/&gt;various levels of abstractions, but also supports
capturing rich correlations&lt;br/&gt;among the uncertain data. PrDB supports a
declarative SQL-like language for&lt;br/&gt;specifying uncertain data and the
correlations among them. PrDB also supports&lt;br/&gt;exact and approximate
evaluation of a wide range of queries including inference&lt;br/&gt;queries, SQL
queries, and decision-support queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cross-
disciplinary research undertaken during this project will enable us
to&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously address the challenges in the areas of probabilistic
databases&lt;br/&gt;and machine learning, and allow us to transfer the key
technologies developed&lt;br/&gt;between those areas, thus advancing the
research in both areas. It will enable&lt;br/&gt;the development of a
significant and high-impact new class of real-world&lt;br/&gt;applications, in a
variety of domains including health informatics, social
media&lt;br/&gt;management, World Wide Web, and scientific databases. The PrDB
system source&lt;br/&gt;code, and the datasets generated during the project,
will be released using an&lt;br/&gt;appropriate open source license, at the
project web site:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.umd.edu/db/PrDB.html