* 0916553
* DC: Small: An Integrated Architecture for Federated Search
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,671.00

This project is developing a general solution to two new federated search
problems. Massive web datasets are made more manageable by dividing them into
topic-oriented "shards," and then searching only a few shards per query, thus
reducing computational costs dramatically. Integration of focused "vertical
search services" into general-purpose search portals is made more manageable by
a framework that uses multiple techniques to characterize the contents of each
resource and track how its content and query traffic change over time.
Introducing resource definition policies and diverse information into federated
search requires solving a variety of new resource representation, resource
selection, and result merging problems. This research is also addressing the
requirements of dynamic resources, and looks beyond average case analysis to
characterize the range of accuracy that a federated search service experiences.
Reducing the computational costs of searching massive web corpora enables
greater academic study of large web datasets, and lowers costs for web search
companies. A comprehensive framework for integrating specialized information
services in web portals makes it easier for commercial web search portals to
deploy new search services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New algorithms are being
disseminated in the open-source Lemur Toolkit, thus making it very accessible.
Datasets are being published in a form that enables them to be recreated
precisely or closely by other researchers. Queries and relevance judgments are
being published so that they may be used by other researchers. This project is
an extension of research done in IIS-0841275, SGER: Multi-Tier Indexing for Web
Search Engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project URL:
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~callan/Projects/IIS-0916553/