* 0916607
* RI: Small:  Computational Models of Context-awareness and Selective Attention for Persistent Visual Target Tracking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Ying Wu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 391,986.00

Although persistent and long-duration tracking of general targets is a basic
function in the human vision system, this task is quite challenging for computer
vision algorithms, because the visual appearances of real world targets vary
greatly and the environments are heavily cluttered and distractive. This large
gap has been a bottleneck in many video analysis applications. This project aims
to bridge this gap and to overcome the challenges that confront the design of
long-duration tracking systems, by developing new computational models to
integrate and represent some important aspects in the human visual perception of
dynamics, including selective attention and context-awareness that have been
largely ignored in existing computer vision algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project performs in-depth investigations of a new
computational paradigm, called the synergetic selective attention model that
integrates four processes: the early selection process that extracts informative
attentional regions (ARs), the synergetic tracking process that estimates the
target motion based on these ARs, the robust integration process that resolves
the inconsistency among the motion estimates of these ARs for robust information
fusion, and the context-aware learning process that performs late selection and
learning on-the-fly to discover contextual associations and to learn
discriminative-ARs for adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research enriches
the study of visual motion analysis by accommodating aspects from the human
visual perception and leads to significant improvements for video analysis. It
benefits many important areas including intelligent video surveillance, human-
computer interaction and video information management. The project is linked to
educational activities to promote learning and innovation through curriculum
development, research opportunities, knowledge dissemination through conferences
and the internet as well as other outreach activities, and the involvements of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;