* 0916714
* SHF: Small: Energy-Recycling VLSI Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Marios Papaefthymiou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ID: 0916714
&lt;br/&gt;Papaefthymiou Marios &lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan Ann Arbor
&lt;br/&gt;SHF:Small: Energy-Recycling VLSI Systems &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will investigate novel technologies for the design of very-
large scale integrated (VLSI) computer systems that achieve unprecedented levels
of energy-efficient operation through energy recycling. In contrast to
conventional computer systems that consume all the energy supplied to them while
computing, energy-recycling computers reclaim and reuse any energy that remains
undissipated during their operation. Therefore, they have the potential to
operate with substantially lower energy consumption than conventional computers.
This project will encompass a broad spectrum of design technologies for energy-
recycling computers, including circuitry, computing architectures, and design
methodologies. The effectiveness of these technologies will be assessed through
the design, fabrication, and experimental evaluation of proof-of-concept
hardware prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With power consumption in high-
performance microprocessors exceeding 100Watts, the design of energy-efficient
computers has become a top priority in electronic design due to reliability
concerns caused by excessive heat generation. Furthermore, energy-efficient
computers play a key role in the development of new mobile applications due to
battery-life considerations. And last, but not least, the power requirements of
computing devices, including high-performance servers, desktops, and laptops, is
placing an increasing burden on the power grid, with emissions from all these
sources growing at a reported annual compound rate of 6% and thus posing a
serious environmental concern. The outcomes of this research project can
therefore be transformative, resulting in innovative design technologies for
realizing next-generation computer systems that achieve unprecedented levels of
reliable and energy-efficient operation, enable new mobile applications, and
promote sustainability.