* 0916873
* NeTs: An open architecture for the evolutionary design of routing protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Michael Hsiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 09/30/2011
* USD 150,001.00

Traditional routing systems have been designed by network engineers based on
complex collections of objectives, policies, principles and past experiences.
Due to limited human experience and capability, this manual design process
severely impedes the design process of routing. The objective of this project is
to bring a revolutionary change to this design process by building a highly
flexible architecture, called Orchestra, for the automatic assembling and
testing of a great variety of routing designs. Orchestra stores a large set of
reusable "genes". Each gene is a small piece of computer code that implements a
particular design for a small component of a routing system. The correctness of
the "genes" and their mutual compatibility are automatically verified. Orchestra
assembles various routing systems from verified "genes" and then tests them in
both simulation and real environment. Based on the performance of the assembled
protocols, Orchestra uses evolutionary algorithms to switch and tune designs of
routing components to eventually identify the best design for a network
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Orchestra will greatly ease a network engineer's
burden of implementing and evaluating an entire routing system. It can
efficiently explore a much larger design space for routing systems than any
single network engineer can. New areas for routing designs that are not explored
by humans can be automatically discovered by Orchestra. The large collection of
component designs in Orchestra will also provide a common platform for comparing
and evaluating different design choices as well as serving education purposes.