* 0916606
* AF: Small: Algorithmic Problems in Applied Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Danny Chen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 06/30/2013
* USD 439,999.00

Computer technologies play an important role in modern medicine and life
sciences, especially in diagnostic imaging, human genome study, treatment
optimization, and medical data management. Many computational problems arising
in the field of biomedicine call for efficient and good quality algorithmic
solutions. This project aims to develop new geometric computing and algorithmic
techniques for solving computational problems in biomedical and engineering
applications.

This research investigates a number of geometric optimization problems that are
theoretically challenging and practically relevant. The target problems belong
to fundamental topics of computational geometry, such as geometric partition,
covering, shaping, approximation, motion planning, and clustering; they also
arise in important applied areas such as radiation cancer treatment, medical
imaging, biology, computer-aided manufacturing, and data mining. Some of the
algorithms and software developed during the preliminary studies of this
research have produced significantly better solutions for real application
problems (for example, much improved radiation cancer therapy plans over those
computed by the current commercial radiation treatment planning systems). The
research will draw diverse techniques from other theoretical areas such as graph
algorithms, combinatorial optimization, discrete mathematics, and operations
research. It will also provide a rich source of interesting new
problems/questions and new ideas to prod further development of algorithmic
techniques in computational geometry and other theoretical areas. This project
is expected to generate broader impacts beyond computational geometry and even
computer science. It will produce efficient and effective algorithms and
software for solving key problems in radiation cancer therapy and surgery,
medical imaging, biology, and other applied areas. Furthermore, the newly
developed algorithms and software will be incorporated into practical
applications such as clinical radiation cancer treatment systems. Hence, this
research will help unite and integrate the power of computational geometry,
computer algorithms, and modern biomedicine for diagnostic imaging, radiation
cancer treatment, and other applications, and improve the quality of life for
the patients.