* 0916459
* HCC: Small: Helping People Negoiate Uncertain Information Online
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jennifer Mankoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 532,079.00

This proposal explores how individuals decide what online information to trust
given the uncertain information they often encounter. In today's society, life
experiences are often processed in an online world. Online resources provide
information and support for parenting, health, hobbies, news, and more. However,
online resources are often incomplete, may include a diversity of opinions, and
may be inaccurate. In a connected series of research studies exploring general
theoretical questions, this project focuses on a compelling and common example
of uncertainty online - the uncertainty about treatments for a chronic health
condition. Chronic disease is a leading cause of ill health world wide, and one
in ten Americans lives with a life-altering chronic condition. Unlike acute
conditions (such as a high fever), chronic conditions, such as HIV, diabetes,
arthritis, and Lyme disease, are prolonged and rarely cured completely. For this
reason, management of chronic conditions lies much more in the hands of the
patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study online health resources
and individuals' use of these online resources using interview data, survey
data, and text analysis of thousands of pages and posts available in online
content. First, it will characterize the uncertainty of different types of
online resources. Second, it will focus on how uncertainty impacts a specific
community characterized by highly uncertain and even controversial information
about the disease process and treatment (the Lyme disease community). And third,
the research will test the generalizability of results in a complementary
setting (such as individuals with chronic arthritis). The empirical work will
answer the following questions: 1) How does the existence of incomplete,
divergent and/or conflicting information affect the health choices made by
individuals with chronic illness? 2) What factors (community, time, exposure to
information) are critical to an individual with chronic illness deciding whether
to believe in a specific viewpoint?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will drive
the design of two technological interventions that can improve people's ability
to understand and decide among online resources: (1) A tool to extract and
highlight key parameters of decision making derived from the research, that will
crawl relevant sources and extract information such as patient consensus,
medical research timeline, and risks. (2) A tool to classify online resources in
terms of viewpoint, leveraging machine-learning techniques such as co-training
to learn classifications on the fly. The second tool will inform the first, but
also provide an interface for sorting and filtering online information and
compare the information cloud associated with different viewpoints. The results
of this research will add to existing knowledge about how the Internet can
support individuals with chronic conditions, and contribute to the development
of curriculum for courses on human-computer interaction in the medical
area.&lt;br/&gt;