* 0916046
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Word Sense and Multilingual Subjectivity Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Janyce Wiebe, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 225,000.00

Approaches to subjectivity and sentiment analysis often rely
on&lt;br/&gt;manually or automatically constructed lexicons. Most such lexicons
are&lt;br/&gt;compiled as lists of words, rather than word meanings
("senses").&lt;br/&gt;However, many words have both subjective and objective
senses as well&lt;br/&gt;as senses of different polarities, which is a major
source of&lt;br/&gt;ambiguity in subjectivity and sentiment analysis. The
proposed work&lt;br/&gt;addresses this gap, by investigating novel methods for
subjectivity&lt;br/&gt;sense labeling, and exploiting the results in sense-aware
subjectivity&lt;br/&gt;and sentiment analysis. To achieve these goals, three
research&lt;br/&gt;objectives are targeted. The first is developing methods for
assigning&lt;br/&gt;subjectivity labels to word senses in a taxonomy. The second
is&lt;br/&gt;developing contextual subjectivity disambiguation techniques
to&lt;br/&gt;effectively make use of the word sense subjectivity annotations.
The&lt;br/&gt;third is applying these techniques to multiple languages,
including&lt;br/&gt;languages with fewer resources than English. The project
will have&lt;br/&gt;broader impacts in both research and education. First, it
will make&lt;br/&gt;subjectivity and sentiment resources and tools more widely
available,&lt;br/&gt;in multiple languages, to the research community, which
will help&lt;br/&gt;advance the state of the art in automatic subjectivity
analysis, which&lt;br/&gt;in turn will benefit end applications. Second, several
educational&lt;br/&gt;goals will be pursued: training graduate and undergraduate
students in&lt;br/&gt;computational linguistics; augmenting artificial
intelligence courses&lt;br/&gt;with projects based on the proposed research,
which will offer&lt;br/&gt;students hands-on experience with natural language
processing&lt;br/&gt;research; and reaching out to women and minorities to
increase their&lt;br/&gt;exposure to text processing technologies and access to
research&lt;br/&gt;opportunities.