* 0916515
* III:  Small:  Data-Centric Business Processes: Specification and Static Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Victor Vianu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,000.00

Businesses and other organizations increasingly rely on
business&lt;br/&gt;process management, and in particular the management of
electronic&lt;br/&gt;workflows underlying business processes. These workflows
are often&lt;br/&gt;centered around a database. They are typically very complex
and prone&lt;br/&gt;to costly bugs, which leads to a critical need for computer-
aided&lt;br/&gt;design and static analysis tools. Such tools would result in
enhanced&lt;br/&gt;functionality, as well as increased confidence in the
robustness and&lt;br/&gt;correctness of complex business processes. They would
potentially&lt;br/&gt;benefit a wide variety of applications ranging from
e-commerce to&lt;br/&gt;digital government to healthcare and scientific
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical software verification techniques
applicable to static analysis &lt;br/&gt;include model checking and theorem
proving. However, both have serious&lt;br/&gt;limitations: Model checking
requires finite-state abstraction, which&lt;br/&gt;results in serious loss of
semantics for both the business process and&lt;br/&gt;verified properties.
Theorem proving is incomplete and requires expert&lt;br/&gt;user feedback. This
project proposes an alternative approach to&lt;br/&gt;static analysis. Instead
of applying general-purpose techniques with&lt;br/&gt;only partial guarantees of
success, it aims to identify restricted but&lt;br/&gt;sufficiently expressive
classes of business processes for which sound&lt;br/&gt;and complete static
analysis can be performed in a fully automatic
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the target of verification consists of
semantically rich&lt;br/&gt;data-aware workflows, in contrast to the traditional
process-centric&lt;br/&gt;workflows. Data awareness is a feature of central
importance in&lt;br/&gt;applications such as the above, which has recently led
to the&lt;br/&gt;emergence of a new approach to workflow specification in which
data is&lt;br/&gt;pre-eminent. This approach, introduced by IBM, focuses on data
records,&lt;br/&gt;known as "business artifacts" or simply "artifacts", that
correspond&lt;br/&gt;to key business-relevant objects, their life cycles, and
the&lt;br/&gt;services (or tasks) that are invoked on the
artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;IBM's artifact-centric approach has been demonstrated to
yield&lt;br/&gt;substantial improvements to the operations of medium- and large-
sized&lt;br/&gt;businesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the
present project is to develop&lt;br/&gt;new tools for the high-level
specification and verification of such&lt;br/&gt;data-centric business
processes. The project investigates the&lt;br/&gt;trade-offs between the
expressiveness of the specification language&lt;br/&gt;and the feasibility of
the analysis tasks. It aims to establish&lt;br/&gt;tractability boundaries for
static analysis and to develop practical&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and heuristics.
Tools are to be developed for carrying out&lt;br/&gt;analysis tasks, that will
be integrated with Siena, IBM's prototype&lt;br/&gt;for compiling artifact-
centric business process specifications into&lt;br/&gt;workflow support code.
The technical problems raised are&lt;br/&gt;intellectually quite challenging,
and bring into play techniques from&lt;br/&gt;logic, automata theory,
computational complexity, algorithms, and&lt;br/&gt;computer-aided verification.
The resulting static analysis tools have&lt;br/&gt;high potential for becoming a
transformational technology in the area&lt;br/&gt;of business
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web
page&lt;br/&gt;http://db.ucsd.edu/artifacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;