* 0916219
* III:Small: Information Integration and Human Interaction for Indoor and Outdoor Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Michael Worboys, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 484,715.00

The goal of this research project is to provide a framework model that
integrates existing models of indoor and outdoor space, and to use this model to
develop an interactive platform for navigation in mixed indoor and outdoor
spaces. The user should feel the transition between inside and outside to be
seamless, in terms of the navigational support provided. The approach consists
of integration of indoors and outdoors on several levels: conceptual models
(ontologies), formal system designs, data models, and human interaction. At the
conceptual level, the project draws on existing ontologies as well as examining
the "affordances" that the space provides. For example, an outside pedestrian
walkway affords the same function as an inside corridor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal models of place and connection are also used to
precisely specify the design of the navigational support system. Behavioral
experiments with human participants assess the validity of our framework for
supporting human spatial learning and navigation in integrated indoor and
outdoor environments. These experiments also enable the identification and
extraction of the salient features of indoor and outdoor spaces for
incorporation into the framework. Findings from the human studies will help
validate the efficacy of our formal framework for supporting human spatial
learning and navigation in such integrated environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will be distributed using the project Web site
(www.spatial.maine.edu/IOspace) and will be incorporated into graduate level
courses on human interaction with mobile devices, shared with public school
teachers participating in the University of Maine?s NSF-funded RET (Research
Experiences for Teachers). The research teams are working with two companies and
one research center on technology transfer for building indoor-outdoor
navigation tools with a wide range of applications, including those for the
persons with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;