* 0916156
* SHF: Small: Nanocomputing Processes and Artifacts: Fundamental Description and Physical-Information-Theoretic Assessment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Neal Anderson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 363,945.00

As silicon integrated circuit technology approaches its ultimate scaling and
performance limits, we can expect a rapid proliferation of innovative proposals
for fundamentally new information processing technologies. The quest for the
first post-CMOS general purpose computing machines will likely emphasize digital
computation in systems constructed from nanoscale building blocks. Proposals for
new nanocomputing technologies will, however, be dificult to evaluate, both
because nanocircuits are dificult to build and test experimentally and because
phenomena that compromise the reliable physical representation and manipulation
of information in nanoscale systems will pose new and unfamiliar challenges.
These considerations motivate the development of new theoretical tools for
assessing the fundamental physical limits to reliable processing of classical
information in nanoscale systems, limits that follow from generic space, time
and power constraints imposed by the technological objective of superseding
silicon technology at the end of scaling.

This project aims to advance the fundamental physical description of digital
information processing in (generally noisy and faulty) nanosystems and to
develop approaches, built from such a description, that can be used to evaluate
the ultimate information processing capabilities of proposed nanocomputing
technologies. The first prototype assessment studies will emphasize two existing
proposals---quantum-dot cellular automata and nanowire-based NASIC fabric
implementations---and will integrate results from physical information theoretic
analyses and physical circuit models. Other explorations will aim to provide
technology-independent insights into issues of generic importance for
nanocomputation, such as the physical costs of error correction. These
investigations, taken together, will help to clarify the nature of fundamental
physical limits in information processing and their practical consequences,
which will become increasingly important as the quest for new nanocomputing
technologies intensifies.