* 0916624
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Detection, and Analysis of Branching Structures in Medical Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vasileios Megalooikonomou, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 338,286.00

Detection and analysis of branching structures and/or texture is very
challenging; it arises in many areas of science and engineering (e.g., medical
images, chemical compounds, etc). The objective of this proposal is to develop
novel approaches to model, detect, and analyze branching structures obtained
from multimodality data. Such representation and analysis tools are expected to
make many complex problems more tractable. Examples include identifying and
recognizing a large number of structure classes; discovering new relationships
among structure, texture, and function or pathology; evaluating hypotheses;
developing modeling tools; assisting with surgical design; and managing medical
image data efficiently. Specifically, the investigators plan to explore three
research topics under this project: (1) To develop descriptors of branching
structures and texture, and knowledge discovery tools that will enable
hypotheses generation and evaluation and improve modeling of branching
structures; (2) To design automated algorithms and a flexible framework to
detect branching structures. The investigators are especially interested in
addressing challenges of occlusion and topology change; (3) To demonstrate the
applicability of the proposed tools to breast imaging by building a prototype
database of images from various modalities and associated clinical data that
will provide advanced analysis and visualization capabilities. Though the
investigators use breast imaging as the driving application, the proposed
project is expected to provide software and data resources that can assist
clinical tasks and scientific discoveries in general. Developing automated tools
to effectively characterize, detect, and classify tree-like structures in images
would provide great insight into the relationship between the branching topology
and function or pathology. The investigators plan to further contribute to the
medical/scientific community by disseminating the related software and annotated
data sets. The educational goals include incorporating research findings to
graduate courses at Temple (data mining course and medical image analysis
seminar) and at the University of Pennsylvania (medical image analysis course).

