* 0916689
* SHF: Small: An Adaptive Architecture Fabric for Constructing Resilient Multicore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Scott Mahlke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

As semiconductor technologies scale continues to shrink, building fault-
tolerant, defect-free microprocessors becomes increasingly difficult. Tighter
design constraints, lower operating voltages, and increasing power densities
have lead to circuits that are more susceptible to manufacturing defects,
transient faults, and wearout-related failures. It is anticipated that future
designs will consist of 100 billion transistors, many of which will be unusable
due to manufacturing defects and many will fail over time due to wearout and
other errors. Traditional mainframes and mission-critical systems rely on
redundancy to overcome such failures. Reliability is essentially viewed as a tax
that is levied in the form of additional silicon area devoted to constant double
and triple checking of results that end-users must pay to ensure correct
operation. As reliability concerns invade the desktop and cellphone
environments, large scale redundancy is impractical due to the high cost and
energy overheads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes StageNet, a new
style of microprocessor architecture in which reliability is not a tax, but
rather built in to the natural operation of the system. StageNet is both
introspective to enable continuous monitoring and adaptation to reliability
hazards and reconfigurable at a fine-grain level to minimize the lifetime
performance impact that individual failures have on the system. StageNet
consists of three major components: an adaptive computing substrate that enables
dynamic reorganization of individual microprocessors, armored cache designs to
provide high defect tolerance with low area overhead for on-chip caches, and a
dynamic adaptation system to manage the execution of applications and
organization of the hardware over its lifetime. The broader impact of this
research is that it creates cost-effective ways of dealing with faulty
transistors that will enable the proliferation of embedded computers into more
aspects of life, where robustness and reliability are current barriers.