* 0916275
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Evidence-based Reliability Assessment of Software Product Lines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robyn Lutz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 248,901.00

This proposal will be awarded using funds made available by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and meets the
requirements established in Section 2 of the White House Memorandum entitled,
Ensuring Responsible Spending of Recovery Act Funds, dated March 20, 2009. I
also affirm, as the cognizant Program Officer, that the proposal does not
support projects described in Section 1604 of Division A of the Recovery Act.

This collaborative research will create techniques that improve the reliability
of software product lines. A software product line is a family of software
systems that share certain common features and differ according to a set of
specified variations. Use of software product lines has grown rapidly in
industry because such reuse reduces the cost of building new systems.
Reliability is important to product-line developers since many product lines,
such as mobile phones, industrial robots, and surgical imaging systems, require
reliable operation. This project focuses on development of a rigorous framework
for incremental assessment and prediction of software product line reliability
(SPL-iRAP). The research has three major thrusts: (1) developing reliability
modeling techniques for software product lines to handle the effects of
variations and ongoing changes, (2) investigating the use of reliability models
for prediction across the product line based on empirical data, and (3)
quantifying the benefit of the reuse on software quality. The researchers will
train students, particularly women and underrepresented groups, in software
reliability techniques, create new curriculum units for teaching, and partner
with industrial developers of product lines to demonstrate the new techniques.