* 0916892
* CIF: Small: Large-Scale Software Dissemination in Stochastic Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 468,731.00

Commercial providers are increasingly permitting third-party developers to write
and implement their own software applications on wireless devices, ranging from
sensors to 3G cellular phones. As the number of applications and users grow,
reliable software dissemination is quickly emerging as a key enabling
technology, providing fundamental reprogramming services, such as software
download, updates and security patching.

Intellectual Merit This project aims to develop analytical foundations for
efficient software dissemination in loss-prone wireless networks, measured in
terms of delay and communication/computational speed. Planned research will
proceed along four thrusts: 1) PERFORMANCE LIMITS: mathematically formalizing
the problem of software dissemination in multi-hop wireless networks using
stochastic shortest path optimization based on the theory of Markov Decision
Processes; 2) LARGE-SCALE ASYMPTOTICS: analyzing performance at high node
densities using extreme-value theory and comparing state-of-the-art
technologies, including rateless coding, packet-level channel hopping, and
physical-layer cooperation; 3) ACK-LESS PROTOCOLS: eliminating control traffic
(e.g., ACKnowledgments), with high probability, using a combination of extreme-
value theory and shifted rateless codes; 4) IMPLEMENTATION: implementing
theoretically-based software dissemination protocols on sensor motes and,
subsequently, on Android-capable smartphones.



Broader Impact

This work promises a broad impact to various societal needs. On an education
level, open cell phone programming expertise will be incorporated into
innovative class assignments and labs taught by the PIs, including Software
Engineering, Algorithms, and Networking. On a commercial side, the research
identifies and provides directions for fundamental issues that will face private
enterprises attempting to capitalize on emerging smartphone capabilities. The
PIs will also expedite research transfer through liaisons with local and
international industrial partners. Finally, the project will establish
theoretical connections between disconnected fields, most notably bringing tools
primarily used in civil and financial engineering into computing and
communication.