* 0916042
* CIF:SMALL:COLLABORATIVE: Soft-Logic Modeling and Design for Synthetic Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2013
* USD 262,000.00

This project is a multi-institutional collaboration in which we plan to
investigate a new soft-logic approach for creating ?designer gene? circuits.
Genetic circuits are crafted in the laboratory using genomic building blocks,
and are used to control specific behaviors in engineered bacteria. A major
research challenge for genetic circuits is that there is a high level of
randomness in the cell?s internal environment. Belief networks provide a well-
defined solution for handling the effects of randomness in genetic systems. We
propose to study how belief networks can be applied to control and even exploit
randomness to achieve new and useful genetic behaviors. Our research results
will be used to improve a software application for genetic design called
iBioSim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many anticipated benefits for synthetic
genetic circuits, including industrial, environmental, and medical applications.
For example, bacteria can theoretically be engineered to clean oil spills, kill
tumors, and deliver medicines, but only if we can precisely control when and how
the bacteria perform their functions. Our investigation will illuminate the
unique challenges involved in controlling highly random bacterial systems and
will provide the community with rigorous theory and practicable techniques that
resolve these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;