* 0916745
* SHF:Small: Locality-Driven Architectures for Scalable Multicore Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Stephen Keckler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 399,301.00

The successive innovations in semiconductor manufacturing over the last 35 years
of Moore's law have turned what used to be a room-sized computer system into a
single chip composed of billions of transistors. These levels of integration
have forced a change toward parallelism in computer system design, including
both single-chip multiprocessors and systems-on-a-chip. Today, these chips have
a few tens of individual processors but future scaling will make possible
hundreds or thousands of them on a chip. Two important challenges have emerged
which threaten to hinder performance scaling in multicore systems. First, while
technology scaling will continue to enable increased transistor counts for the
foreseeable future, power and thermal limitations will prevent all but a small
fraction of them to be operating simultaneously at full speed. Second, the speed
of the communication paths from the multicore chip to its external memory and to
other processors is increasing at a slow rate. Because these communication paths
must be shared by more and more on-chip processing cores, the paths must be used
as efficiently as possible to prevent them from becoming a bottleneck in the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop new computer hardware
and software mechanisms that exploit data locality in high performance systems,
including repeated use of a data item as well as use of multiple data items that
lie near one another in memory. In particular, the project will develop hardware
mechanisms for bulk data transfers that support renaming, packing, and
integration into the virtual memory system. The PI will also develop hardware
mechanisms in the on-chip memory system that will allow it to adapt to different
programming primitives as well as to different coherence needs among the
processing cores. The mechanisms will be evaluated in terms of effectiveness and
programmability using a range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to develop technologies critical to emerging parallel multicore
chips, without which such chips will not be able to meet performance and power
goals. Enabling enhanced performance in a power-efficient manner is critical to
all deployments of future computing platforms, including those for science,
commerce, and national security. The broader impact of this research will
include training graduate and undergraduate students as researchers, while also
working to increase participation of underrepresented groups in computing. The
primary outreach activity will include participation in a summer camp to attract
high-school girls to computer science.