* 0916154
* RI-Small: Statistical Decoding Models to Improve the Performance of Motor Cortical Brain-Machine Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Wei Wu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 135,592.00

The goal of this project is to develop statistical models to accurately and
efficiently decode population neuronal activity in the motor and premotor
cortex. The study focuses on motor behavior as it is easily measured and
strongly correlated with neuronal activity. Recent advances in motor cortical
brain-machine interfaces have shown that research animals and paralyzed human
patients were able to perform rudimentary actions with external devices such as
robotic limbs and computer cursors. Neural decoding, which provides control
commands to external devices, plays a key role in such interfaces by converting
brain signals (e.g., spiking rates of a population of neurons) to kinematic
states (e.g., hand position, hand movement
direction).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current decoding models are often based on the
strong assumption that the neural signal sequence is a stationary process. This
assumption, however, does not take into account the significant dynamic
variability of spiking activity over time. Moreover, these methods have either
focused on decoding the entire trajectory or on the occurrence times of a few
"landmarks" during the movement. Effective coupling of these two complementary
strategies can be expected to improve the decoding performance by better
exploiting the nature of the landmark-defined movement. This project will
develop computational methods to address these two issues. For the non-
stationarity, the research team will develop adaptive versions of state-of-the-
art decoding methods such as particle filters and point process filters that can
capture the varying patterns in neural signals and update the model accordingly.
To couple trajectory decoding and time decoding, landmark times will be
identified from the neural activity, and then incorporated into the kinematic
model. The team will use simultaneous recordings from multi-electrode arrays in
the primary motor cortex, the dorsal premotor cortex, and the ventral premotor
cortex that were recorded during behavior or visuo-motor tasks. Improved
decoding methods are expected to have significant impacts on neural
prosthetics.&lt;br/&gt;