* 0916001
* RI-small: Simultaneous Groupwise Nonrigid Registration, Segmentation and Smoothing of 3D Shapes and Images
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* JEFFREY HO, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 253,749.00

The goal of this research is the investigation of a computational framework that
allows for group-wise joint segmentation, smoothing and registration of images
and shapes. With recent advances in sensor technology, images (shapes and other
types of data) are being generated in abundance, and there is now a need for
algorithms that operate and process images in collections instead of
individually. In particular, this requires segmentation, smoothing and
registration, three most important image processing operations, to be formulated
in new ways that emphasize the relational aspects of their inputs. In addition,
image data in computer vision applications are usually sampled from low-
dimensional manifolds embedded in high-dimensional features spaces, and an
important problem is to construct versatile and expressive computational models
that exploit their geometries for solutions. The proposed computational
framework addresses these two issues by formulating a variational framework that
unifies smoothing, segmentation and registration. Specifically, it uses
hypergraphs to model the multiple geometric relations among the inputs, and the
three operations are integrated in one single discrete variational framework
defined over a hypergraph. The proposed framework provides a foundation for
several principled joint segmentation and registration algorithms for images and
shapes that can guarantee crucial properties such as compatibility, consistency,
unbiasedness and symmetry. Furthermore, it also provides a new and more
discriminative numerical signature for 2D and 3D shapes that can be important
for many shape-related vision applications such as shape recognition, shape
retrieval and image-based medical diagnosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;