* 0916044
* NeTS:Small:Algorithmic Approaches to Optimizing Hardware-Based Packet Classification Systems via Equivalent Transformation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Eric Torng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 440,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;Using Ternary Content Addressable Memories
(TCAMs) to perform high-speed packet classification has become the de facto
standard in industry. Despite their high speed, TCAMs have limitations of high
cost, small capacity, large power consumption, and high heat generation. The
well-known range expansion problem in converting range rules to ternary rules
significantly exacerbates these TCAM limitations. This project addresses TCAM
limitations by developing new algorithms to transform a given rule set into an
equivalent rule set that requires significantly fewer TCAM entries. This allows
the use of smaller, faster, and more energy efficient TCAM chips. The algorithms
developed by this project significantly outperform prior art because these new
algorithms perform equivalent transformation at the list level whereas prior
approaches only perform compression at the individual rule level.
&lt;br/&gt;Expected results of this project include effective equivalent
transformation algorithms and potentially transformative concepts. Research
results are broadly disseminated through publications, open source software
releases, freely available course modules, and industry interaction. This
project benefits society by decreasing the demand of modern routers for large
TCAMs, lowering router prices and energy cost, enabling the use of small and
cheap TCAMs on low end routers, and extending router life time. The technologies
developed in this project greatly benefit the business of router manufacturers,
TCAM chip providers, and Internet service providers. To promote education and
learning, this effort actively engages high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, especially students from under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;