* 0916750
* RI: Small: Statistical Modeling of Dynamic Covariance Matrices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 455,000.00

Suitable models for dynamic covariance matrices can be extremely useful in
several application domains, such as in text mining and topic modeling, where
one can study the evolving correlation between topics; in financial data ranging
from stock/bond returns to interest rates and currencies, where the paramount
importance of tracking evolving covariances has been widely acknowledged; in
environmental informatics to study trends in dynamic covariance among disparate
variables from the atmosphere as well as the biosphere. In such domains, it is
not sufficient to simply compute the sample covariance at each time step; the
goal is to discover any trends there may be in the evolution of the covariance
structure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project introduces and investigates a
novel family of Dynamic Wishart Models (DWMs), which has the same graphical
model structure as the Kalman filter, but tracks evolution of covariance
matrices rather than state vectors. Similar to the use of multivariate Gaussians
in Kalman filters, the models use the Wishart and inverse Wishart family of
distributions on covariance matrices. Unlike Kalman filters, an analytic closed
form filtering may not be possible in DWMs, but the models still have enough
structure to allow efficient approximate inference algorithms. The project
focuses on approximate inference for filtering, smoothing, and related problems
in the context of DWMs; develop suitable numerically stable recursive updates in
order to prevent numerical loss in positive definiteness; and investigate
generalizations of DWMs including mixture models for tracking complex covariance
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of effective tracking algorithms
for covariances will permit the modeling of dynamic systems where the states
really represent the varying relationships between multiple entities. The key
contribution of the research is in leveraging the existing literature of dynamic
latent state vectors to create equally powerful methods for dynamic latent
covariance matrices. Such a transformation will have direct impact on
applications in text analysis and topic modeling, financial data analysis,
social network analysis, environmental informatics, and several other domains,
and will spawn new opportunities for bringing together researchers and students
across these disciplines, thereby broadening participation in computer sciences.