* 0916117
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Applications and Architectures for Variation-Tolerant Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Anand Raghunathan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2013
* USD 281,065.00

CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Applications and Architectures for
Variation-Tolerant Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scaling of integrated circuits (ICs) into the
nanometer regime has thrown up new challenges for designers, foremost among
which are variations in the characteristics of IC components. Variations
threaten to diminish the fundamental benefits of technology scaling, such as
improvements in cost-per-transistor, performance and power consumption.
Variation-aware design techniques that have been proposed thus far are being
stretched to their limits, and cannot contain the incessant increase in
variations. Therefore, it is important to develop new design approaches for
systems that are inherently resilient to variations in the underlying
components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a framework based on
adaptive applications and architectures for the design of variation-tolerant
application-specific systems. It advances the state-of-the-art by (i) adopting a
cross-layer approach at the system architecture and application layers, (ii)
leveraging the inherent ?elasticity? of a wide class of applications to adapt to
variations in the underlying hardware while still producing acceptable
performance and maintaining end-user experience, and (iii) exploring a hybrid
(design-time and post-fabrication) design methodology, enabling more accurate
and effective system adaptation in response to variations. The developed
technologies will significantly extend our ability to avail of the benefits of
technology scaling in the face of increasing
variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efforts towards broader impact include
working with the semiconductor industry to validate and transfer the developed
technologies, new educational material incorporated in courses on SoC design and
embedded systems, and undergraduate design projects.&lt;br/&gt;