* 0916489
* DC:   Small:   Stream Clustering Algorithms in Mixed Domains with Soft Two-way Semi-Supervision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Olfa Nasraoui, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

One way to form a model of massive data sets is to use clustering techniques
that summarize the data by several cluster representatives. However, clustering
huge data sets is a very challenging problem whose difficulty increases further
when the data is dynamic. We are developing scalable and robust stream
summarization methods to provide a concise summary of huge multi-dimensional
data streams that keep track of each discovered cluster or component of the
summary through time, and that store only milestones corresponding to the
occurrence of significant changes in these cluster representatives. Moreover to
handle possibly diverse data formats and different sources of data, we are using
a semi-supervised framework for (i) combining diverse representations of the
data, in particular where data comes from different sources, some of which may
be unreliable or uncertain; and (ii) exploiting optional external concept set
labels to guide the clustering of the main data set in its original domain.

Our methods have tremendous impact on applications that deal with streaming data
in general, and more specifically on monitoring data streams in real-life
dynamic settings. For example, as more and more everyday activities move online,
network and Web data has been increasing at a rapid pace that precludes standard
and classical data analysis methods, and call instead for real time analysis.
The same can be said about the deluge of data that is being or about to be
generated by new and future sensor networks, astronomical observatories, and
missions in space. Thus, new research efforts and paradigms are needed and will
have a strong impact on our ability to digest and make sense of this data.