* 0916518
* CSR:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  System Support for Managing Carbon Footprints and Electricity Costs in Internet Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ricardo Bianchini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2012
* USD 167,000.00

Society is faced today with three main energy-related challenges: US dependence
on foreign energy sources, world-wide dependence on non-renewable energy, and
climate change induced at least in part by greenhouse-gas emissions. The
computer industry also faces an energy crisis: the nation's data centers consume
a gigantic amount of energy, which translates into large greenhouse gas
footprints. This research explores the implications of these trends on data
center design. In particular, the work considers how to optimize data center
operation in the face of Kyoto-style cap-and-trade frameworks, related cap-and-
pay frameworks, and unregulated scenarios where businesses optimize energy usage
to save money or achieve carbon neutrality. In both cap-and-trade and cap-and-
pay, caps are imposed on activities society wants to discourage. In large
computer systems, excessive brown energy consumption is one activity to
discourage. Through caps on brown energy, society can also promote renewable
energy. &lt;br/&gt;Research challenges include: (i) balancing reductions in
brown energy consumption against cost, performance and service-level agreement
(SLA) impact, (ii) managing energy consumption in the context of variable
electricity prices; and (iii) designing multiple system layers that effectively
integrate and coordinate electricity and performance management, even in the
face of highly volatile request distributions and electricity/carbon prices.
This research has the potential for broad impact both on computer systems
design, and more broadly on an increasingly carbon-conscious world.&lt;br/&gt;