* 0916852
* III: Small:Using Data Mining and Recommender Systems to Facilitate Large-Scale Requirements Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Bamshad Mobasher, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2014
* USD 507,563.00

Problems related to requirements definitions account for numerous project
failures and translate into significant amounts of wasted funds. In many cases,
these problems originate from inadequacies in the human-intensive task of
eliciting stakeholders' needs, and the subsequent problems of transforming them
into a set of clearly articulated and prioritized requirements. These problems
are particularly evident in very large projects such as the FBI Virtual Case
File or NASA's Space Station, in which knowledge is dispersed across thousands
of different stakeholders. On one hand, it is desirable to include as many
people as possible in the elicitation and prioritization process, but on the
other hand this can quickly lead to a rather chaotic overload of information and
opinions. The work proposed under this grant will develop a new framework that
utilizes data mining and recommender systems techniques to process and analyze
high volumes of unstructured data in order to facilitate large-scale and broadly
inclusive requirements processes. The proposal is based on the observation that
the requirements elicitation process of many large-scaled industrial and
governmental projects is inherently data-driven, and could therefore benefit
from computer-supported tools based on data mining and user modeling techniques.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The proposed research will lead to a robust requirements
elicitation framework and an associated library of tools which can be used to
augment the functionality of wikis, forums, and specialized management tools
used in the requirements domain. Specifically, this research will enhance
requirements clustering techniques by incorporating prior knowledge and user-
derived constraints. A contextualized recommender system will be designed to
facilitate appropriate placement of stakeholders into requirements discussion
forums generated in the clustering phase.

BROADER IMPACT The proposed work has potential for broad impact across
organizations that develop stakeholder-intensive systems. Technology transfer
can be expected due to collaborations with organizations such as Siemens and
Google planned as an integral part of this research. Educational materials will
be developed specifically for requirements engineering and recommender systems
courses, and will be broadly disseminated.

Key Words: Recommender systems; Data mining; Clustering; Requirements
engineering; Requirements elicitation.