* 0916465
* CIF: Small: A Space Dimension Approach for Wireless Netowrk Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Massimo Franceschetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 262,331.00

This project considers the physical limits of communication in a wireless
network and how these limits can be achieved by communication protocols in an
effective way. Specifically, it aims at determining the fundamental limits of
the capacity of the network using an innovative approach based on physics,
rather than postulating random propagation channel models. The project focuses
on the characterization of the amount of spatial diversity that a wireless
networks can provide, which is shown to be one of the central issues to
determine its capacity. The spatial diversity is quantified in terms of the
dimensionality of the propagating field, which is what carries the information
through the network. Hence, drawing connections between information theory,
functional analysis of continuous vector spaces, electromagnetic theory, and
networks, the project aims at developing an information theory for wireless
networks. The project considers different geometric configurations of wireless
network, and determines their corresponding number of spatial degrees of
freedom. It then considers both the effects of narrow-band and wide-band
frequency transmission. Results are in terms of scaling laws, as well as
capacity laws that are not asymptotic in the number of nodes in the network.