* 0916565
* DC: Small: Data Streaming through a Complexity-Theoretic Lens
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 336,456.00

The modern, highly digitized world is replete with human activities that
generate copious streams of data on a seemingly-continuous basis. There is
knowledge to be gained by suitably analyzing, mining and monitoring the wealth
of information in these data streams. However, due to the sheer scale of the
data involved, traditional algorithmic thinking is inadequate and one needs data
streaming algorithms that can process inputs memory-efficiently in one, or a
few, scanning passes, ideally operating in sync with data
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of data streaming algorithms, though
dating back to about 1980, has truly come alive only in the last decade or so,
with a wealth of algorithms having been developed for, e.g., various statistical
analyses, geometric problems and graph-theoretic problems. An area rich with
algorithmic ideas deserves sound theoretical underpinnings. Accordingly, this
project shall investigate a number of fundamental questions in this area,
focusing on the delineation of what can and cannot be achieved in this important
computational model. By investigating foundational questions, rather than
focusing too much on particular applications, the project's approach shall be
that of algorithms-and-complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
representative research goals of this project are as follows. (1) Refining our
understanding of the space complexity of various statistical measures,
especially in the multi-pass setting. (2) Understanding the power of randomness
in order-dependent streaming problems. (3) Proving lower bounds in stronger
variants (extensions) of the basic stream model. (4) Attacking fundamental
questions in communication complexity that lie at the heart of current open
questions in data stream complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results obtained in
the course of the project will be disseminated at international conferences,
workshops and seminars at various institutions. The project's educational
component shall consist of the development of a graduate-level course on data
stream algorithms, covering the basics of the field and leading up to the most
significant recent discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;