* 0916716
* CIF: Small: A Stochastic Approximation Approach to Network Communications with Feedback
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* J. Nicholas Laneman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 381,155.00

&lt;br/&gt;Communication across networks with feedback and relays is an
important, challenging, and largely open problem in information and
communication theory. Systematic and scalable communication algorithms will
enhance reliability, decrease coding complexity or delay, impart robustness to
communication schemes by exploiting diversity, and in some cases increase the
achievable communication rates. Since all modern communication systems employ
multiple feedback mechanisms, a better understanding of communication feedback
is imperative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a deeper study of
this topic by viewing it through the lenses of consensus algorithms and more
general stochastic approximation algorithms. This approach yields scalable and
robust algorithms for cases of extreme relevance to modern communication
systems, e.g., network scenarios with noisy feedback. A confluence of problems,
techniques and tools from information theory and distributed dynamic systems are
utilized, with a potential transformative impact on both fields. In addition to
analytical techniques and simulations, the team also utilizes facilities and
experience realizing novel communication algorithms in a wireless network
testbed based upon software-defined radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any impact on
the problem of communication across networks with noisy feedback will have
immediate applications to most modern communication systems. Moreover, this
research furthers the unification of the two aspects and research communities
relevant to a more general information theory - one that considers both the
transmission of data (classical information theory), as well as its utilization
(classical dynamical systems). An emphasis on organizing special sessions in
conferences, offering new graduate courses, including undergraduates in the
experimental research, mentoring minority students, and furthering outreach to
high school students interested in engineering is an integral part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;