* 0916350
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Specification and Verification of Safety Critical Java
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2015
* Gary Leavens, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2015
* USD 249,981.00

Software is increasingly important in aircraft, spacecraft, cars, and medical
devices, which are all safety-critical. As the size and complexity of the
software increases, so does the likelihood for defects with potentially
catastrophic consequences. This research aims to simultaneously increase the
level of assurance and raise the level of abstraction in safety critical
systems, by supporting Safety Critical Java that uses C for driver code (SCJ+C).
The project will implement and evaluate SCJ+C and provide modular specification
techniques and verification tools for it. Few such tools exist for object-
oriented real-time programs, and thus there has been little critical evaluation
of techniques and tools for real-time safety-critical
programming.&lt;br/&gt;Modular reasoning about timing constraints is a known
hard problem, due to the dependence of a method's timing on all methods it
calls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage the Java Modeling Language
(JML) as a specification tool to build a set of practical JML-based tools for
the timing analysis of SCJ+C programs. The research will allow the application
of formal methods for certification, correctness, bug-finding, and timing
properties for real-time critical systems. This will help productivity, by
allowing programmers to develop and reason about their systems at an appropriate
level of abstraction.