* 0916337
* CSR: Small: Monitoring for Error Detection in Today's High Throughput Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Saurabh Bagchi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 275,000.00

CSR: Small: Monitoring for Error Detection in Today?s High Throughput
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Much of our critical infrastructure
is formed by distributed systems with real-time requirements. Downtime of a
system providing critical services in power systems, air traffic control,
banking, and railways signaling could be catastrophic. The errors may come from
individual software components, interactions between multiple components, or
misconfiguration of these components. It is therefore imperative to build low
latency detection systems that can subsequently trigger the diagnosis and
recovery phases leading to systems that are robust to failures. A powerful
approach for error detection is the stateful approach, in which the error
detection system builds up state related to the application by aggregating
multiple messages. The rules are then based on the state, thus on aggregated
information rather than on instantaneous information. Though the merits of
stateful detection seem to be well accepted, it is difficult to scale stateful
detection with an increasing number of application components or increasing data
rate. This is due to the increased processing load of tracking application state
and rule matching based on the state. In this project, we address this issue
through designing a runtime monitoring system focused on high throughput
distributed applications. Our solution is based on intelligent sampling,
probabilistic reasoning on the application state, and opportunistic monitoring
of the heavy-duty rules. A successful solution will allow reliable operation of
high bandwidth distributed applications and those with a large number of
consumers. We will also achieve broader impact through an innovative service
learning program at Purdue called EPICS and a new course. &lt;br/&gt;