* 0916133
* AF:Small: Computation in Very Large Groups
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Gene Cooperman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 07/31/2012
* USD 412,882.00

Mathematical group theory has wide applications to the sciences and to other
branches of mathematics. Some important examples of current interest are fast
matrix multiplication, search in the presence of symmetry, and symmetries to be
found in physics and chemistry. Current algorithms do not always scale or are
not always practical in implementation. Some levels beyond which current
algorithms tend to become impractical are permutations of a million points,
matrix group dimensions beyond a few tens, and coset methods (defining equations
on groups) beyond 100 million cosets. We call such groups "very large groups".

This project will develop a new class of algorithms for very large groups. The
new algorithms will take advantage of the experience of the P.I. and his lab in
previous computations and algorithms using terabytes of parallel disk storage.
The feasibility of a many-disk approach had previously been shown in a popular
demonstration concerning Rubik's cube: Rubik's cube can be solved in 26 moves or
less. Both that and more traditional problems will be used to further develop
the disk-based language, Roomy.

Emphasis will be given to well-known problems not known to be in polynomial time
(centralizer, group intersection, normalizer, etc.). These problems have seen
little progress during the last decade. They are considered hard in part due to
their close connection with the conjugate group action of a group on itself. In
this conjugate action view, a group is seen as a permutation group acting on
almost as many points as there are elements in the group itself. In this view,
even moderate size groups quickly turn into very large groups under the
conjugate action. Novel methods such as the biased tadpole, coupled with the
power of the Roomy language, will enable a resumption of progress in this area.

The broader impact lies in the ability to harness these new algorithms and
implementations in pursuit of applications outside of group theory such as those
mentioned earlier. Researchers outside of group theory have long had the
potential to generate groups beyond the capabilities of standard software, such
as the free and open source GAP package. Extending the capabilities of GAP and
other familiar tools will enable new discoveries. The further development of the
Roomy platform is also an important byproduct, whose value will extend far
beyond its group theory origins.