* 0916481
* SHF:Small: EXACT: Explicit Dynamic-Branch Prediction with Active Updates
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 206,330.00

A computer program consists of many low-level instructions that are executed by
a microprocessor. The key to executing a program faster is executing more
instructions in parallel. Branch instructions hinder this process since a branch
must be executed before subsequent instructions can be executed. A
microprocessor attempts to circumvent this constraint by predicting the outcome
of the branch, enabling instructions from the predicted target to be executed
speculatively and without delay. Because it is so critical to performance,
branch prediction has been studied and steadily improved for decades.
Microprocessor performance is projected to be flat for the foreseeable future,
after decades of exponential growth. A breakthrough in branch predictor design
would be transformational.

This project provides insight into why conventional branch predictors are
limited. A whole new direction in branch predictor design is revealed by this
understanding. Two interrelated problems are exposed: 1) conventional predictors
often fail to distinguish dynamic branches for which specialized predictions are
required, especially memory-dependent branches, and 2) explicitly specializing
predictions for these dynamic branches does not fix the problem alone, because
stores to their dependent memory addresses change their future outcomes anyway.
This project proposes two unprecedented principles for branch predictor design:
first, explicitly identifying dynamic branches in order to provide them with
specialized predictions and, second, actively updating their predictions when
stores occur to their dependent memory addresses. Together, these two principles
are called EXACT, stands for EXplicit dynamic-branch prediction with ACTive
updates.

The goal of the proposed research is to apply these two principles to design
predictors that achieve leaps in branch prediction accuracy, halving or more
than halving the number of mispredictions with respect to the best known
predictor. Results with idealized implementations demonstrate such leaps in
accuracy are possible and a first realistic implementation already achieves a
significant fraction of this potential. To achieve broader impact, project
participants will collaborate closely with industry partners, Intel and IBM, to
translate EXACT technology into future microprocessor designs.