* 0916639
* RI: Small: Ensemble Modeling of Speech Signals for Automatic Speech Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Yunxin Zhao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This project is aimed at developing a new framework of ensemble modeling of
speech signals to address the long standing challenge of robust and accurate
recognition of spontaneous speech. Toward this goal, random forests based
allophonic clustering is used to construct ensemble models of allophones by
random sampling the variables underpinning the allophonic variations; data
sampling is used to enrich the diversity of the ensemble models by balancing
within-set data sufficiency and between-sets data diversity; functional
discriminative training is used to further optimize the efficiency and accuracy
of the ensemble models. Experimental evaluations of these methods are performed
on a standard speech recognition task to facilitate direct assessments of their
efficacy by the speech research community. The ensemble modeling approach
promises higher accuracy performance and lower computation costs than the
current multiple system integration approach, owing to the improved likelihood
scores contributed by the ensemble models in local steps of decoding search. The
approach as advocated in this project opens up a new paradigm for investigating
the many issues in speech acoustic modeling, it offers a new way for ensemble
modeling of structured data generally, and therefore it has the potential of
significantly impacting the fields of speech recognition and other machine
learning applications. The research findings are disseminated via journal
publication, conference presentation, and a website. The methods of this project
have broad applications in speech recognition and structured data
classification, and particularly they are employed to improve the accuracy
performance of a telemedicine automatic captioning system.