* 0916525
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Studies in Nonuniformity, Completeness, and Reachability
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Vinodchandran Variyam, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2014
* USD 272,031.00

Computational complexity theory classifies computational problems into various
complexity classes based on the amount of resources needed to solve them. This
classification is done by measuring various resources such as time, space,
nonuniformity, nondeterminism, and randomness. A better understanding of the
relationships among these various resources shed light on the computational
difficulty of the problems that are encountered in practice.

This project explores several central questions regarding nonuniformity,
complete problems, and space bounded computations. This project attempts to
discover improved upper bounds for problems with high circuit complexity.
Regarding complete sets, non-relativizing properties of complete sets will be
explored. Space bounded computations will be investigated in the context of
planar graph reachability problems.

This project addresses several basic questions in computational complexity
theory. The results from this project will further our understanding of
computational resources such as nonuniformity, nondeterminism, and space.
Research results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and will be
presented at national and international conferences, thus enabling broad
dissemination of the the results to enhance scientific understanding. New
courses will be created and taught along the themes of this project, thus
integrating teaching and research. The project supports various human resource
development activities such as supporting and mentoring graduate students and
inviting visitors.