* 0916828
* SHF: Small: Achieving IC Quality through On-Going Diagnosis and Customized Test
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Ronald Blanton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 357,000.00

Proposal ID: 0916828 &lt;br/&gt;PI name: Blanton Shawn &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Carnegie-Mellon University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Achieving IC Quality through On-
Going Diagnosis and Customized Test&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of computer chip testing has and continues to be the separation
of good chips from bad ones (i.e., ones that do not meet the desired operational
characteristics). Test is now however being expanded as a value-added endeavor.
In this project, we are data-mining test data in order to continuously monitor
chip quality. We propose to use diagnosis-extracted models of chip failures
along with a new technique for estimating chip quality. Both are incorporated in
an on-line, quality-monitoring methodology that ensures a desired level of
quality by changing the actual tests applied to a computer chip to better match
the characteristics of currently-failing chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
approach to quality is dynamic in nature and is a radical change from the
typical approach. Without exception, each chip manufacturer (Intel, IBM, etc.)
assumes that any type of defect can occur anywhere within their chip which means
that each manufactured instance has to be thoroughly tested at considerable
expense. This is akin to prescribing drugs for all possible diseases/ailments
for every patient without performing one diagnostic examination. Opposed to the
traditional approach, this proposed work instead diagnoses chips that have
failed in the past to determine what ?diseases? (i.e., defects) actually are
occurring within the fabricated ICs. The ?prescriptions? (i.e., the tests
applied to the chips) can therefore be changed and/or minimized to match the
diseases found instead of over-testing as is done now, leading to improved chip
quality at minimal cost.&lt;br/&gt;