* 0916221
* TC:Small: Towards Trustworthy Intrusion Monitoring Using Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Donggang Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 443,309.00

Intrusion monitoring using networked sensors has a broad range of applications,
including border security, surveillance, and monitoring of critical
infrastructure such as nuclear power plants. In these hostile environments, the
sensor network will itself be an attractive target that well-funded attackers
will attempt to undermine. The sensor network has to be protected so that no
intruders can evade monitoring, a challenging issue with many aspects not
adequately addressed by existing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates novel techniques for location privacy and jamming-resistant
tracking to defeat smart and resourceful attackers in intrusion monitoring
applications. Location privacy techniques hide the locations of critical
infrastructure such as base stations to make it hard for an adversary to locate
and attack them. Jamming-resistant tracking allows the system to detect and
track intruders in the presence of jamming attacks. However, existing location
privacy techniques do not work effectively against resourceful adversaries who
can monitor all traffic at a large area, and existing jamming-resistant
algorithms do not scale well to large networks. These problems will be addressed
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, we expect to uncover
insights and develop algorithms that will apply to intrusion monitoring systems.
By providing a layered, comprehensive defense system, the success of this
project will have substantial impacts on both civilian and military operations
where security is a major concern. This project will also help develop course
materials on sensor network security and privacy. New course materials will
enhance the information assurance curricula at UTA and other institutions.