* 0916918
* RI:   Small:   Robust Automatic Speech Recognition in Highly Reverberant Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rita Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Speech processing systems, including automatic speech recognition and speaker
identification, are the key enabling technologies that permit natural
interaction between humans and intelligent machines such as humanoid robots,
automated information providers, and similar devices. For example, it is now
commonplace to encounter speech-based intelligent agents handle at least the
initial part of a query in many types of call center applications. While we have
made great progress over the past two decades in overcoming the effects of
additive noise in many practical environments, the failure to develop techniques
that overcome the effects of reverberation in homes, classrooms, and public
spaces is the major reason why automated speech technology remains unavailable
for general use in these venues. Reverberation remains one the most difficult
unsolved problems in speech recognition in open acoustical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel approaches that
combat the effects of reverberation through two complementary perspectives:
contemporary knowledge of human auditory processing and state-of-the art
application of statistical source separation techniques that build on techniques
in image and music processing. The synergistic development of these approaches
is expected to provide substantially improved speech recognition and speaker
identification accuracy in reverberant acoustical environments, along with a
principled structure that enables us to understand on a much deeper level why
the solutions to these problems are effective. This work is expected to have an
enormous impact in extending the applicability of automatic recognition of
natural and casual speech to highly reverberant environments.