* 0916749
* HCC: Small: Perceiving and Enacting Actions in Simulated Environments: The Role of Perceptual Motor Features and Individual Differences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Tracy Henley, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

The long-term practical objective of this research project is to develop
simulated training environments that mesh with the constraints of perceiving and
enacting actions in the real world. Simulated environments differ from real
environments in a number of aspects. In particular, there are significant
differences in perceptual and motor features between these environments.
Advances in embodied cognitive science have consistently demonstrated how the
body, and the environment which it inhabits, are tightly coupled with the mind,
and together they form a complex system for perception and action. The central
questions being investigated in this research involve identifying the conditions
that promote perceiving and enacting actions in simulated training environments,
and include questions such as: (a) whether high fidelity simulation environments
and perceptual motor cues signaling risk are necessary ingredients to enhance
training effectiveness; (b) whether performance pressure is a necessary
component in training paradigms; (c) the extent to which bodily interactivity
with the training environment is necessary; and (d) the extent to which
individual differences in perception and action contribute to training
effectiveness of simulated environments. This research project also begins to
investigate whether encoding events in language that selectively focus on
particular conceptual components can be used as an effective mechanism to guide
visual attention. Simulation environments will be modeled after real world
events, and will vary the degree of user control and level of immersion.
Research participants will have their eye movements recorded, mark off when a
meaningful event ends and another begins, perform perceptual mental simulation
tasks by identifying the correct bodily movements, or manipulate user controlled
simulation environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
investigates how people spontaneously engage in riskier behaviors due to
differences between simulated environments and the real world, whether putting
people under some pressure is critical for successful training in simulated
environments, and what type of physical interactivity with simulated
environments is essential for optimal performance. This research also
investigates whether differences in cognitive abilities and personality types
have effects on performance in simulated environments. This project uses
multiple methods in an attempt to understand along which dimensions training in
simulated environments can effectively transfer to real world practice. This
research pushes forward the frontiers of perceiving and enacting actions in
psychology, computer science, robotics, and human computer interactions. The
results will form an empirical basis promoting the development of improved
methods for training in simulated worlds. Improved designs of simulated worlds
for training and modeling are increasingly important in many areas of our
society including: impacts in education, military, law enforcement and emergency
response organization training; smart environments for the better treatment of
disabled or special needs populations; and entertainment industries and the
arts.