* 0916196
* DC: SMALL - Data-Intensive Computing Solutions for  Neuroimage Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gagan Agrawal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 480,000.00

Several application domains require processing of tera/peta-bytes of data.
Developing data-intensive applications with such massive datasets poses several
challenges, with respect to data management, processing, and resource
allocation. Furthermore, algorithms and their pertinent parameters that yield
robust and near-optimal results are often determined through an iterative
process for which interactive response times are essential. Thus, there is a
need for being able to rapidly create scalable and parallel implementations of a
variety of data analysis algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging and
critical area requiring large-scale data analysis is medical imaging. Complex
algorithms and novel tools are required to be able to analyze such data. In the
project, we consider data obtained from fMRI (functional MRI). Driven by this
domain, this project focuses on how algorithm design, API design, and runtime
system development can be combined to provide effective data-intensive solutions
for spatio-temporal data analysis. Particularly, we target the following four
questions: &lt;br/&gt;1) How can we exploit the map-reduce paradigm to
accelerate advances in neuroimaging and related medical fields? . &lt;br/&gt;2)
What are some of the challenges in using map-reduce paradigm for neuroimage
analysis?&lt;br/&gt;3) What alternative interface to the current map-reduce API
can provide still provide ease of expression of data analysis algorithms, while
enabling better performance? &lt;br/&gt;4) Can we use the map-reduce and similar
paradigms starting from high-level languages, such as Matlab?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also make substantial
contributions towards teaching, human resource development, and increasing
diversity. Most of the requested funds will be used for supporting Ph.D students
on this project. PI Agrawal expects to involve at least one of his three current
female Ph.D students in this project. PI Machiraju also engages with several
undergraduate students at the medical campus of OSU.