* 0916186
* DC: Small: EEGMine: A Distributed Framework for Learning on EEG Data obtained from Epilepsy Patients
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronald Emerson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 439,998.00

The Center for Computational Learning Systems (CCLS) is collaborating with the
Computational Neurophysiology Laboratory (CNL) in the Department of Neurology,
Columbia University Medical School (CUMC) to develop a distributed framework for
data management and machine learning on intracranial EEG data obtained from
patients suffering from epilepsy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Schevon and Emerson
have initiated a trial of a dense, two-dimensional microelectrode array which
can record over long periods of time at a sampling rate of up to 30 kHz per
channel. To date approximately 30 TB of data has been collected. The large
volume of complex EEG data compels us to rethink how we will deal with this
"data avalanche." The design of a data center for storage and analysis is
particularly challenging since traditional methods of storing data on a single
server do not allow machine learning algorithms to be computed within a
reasonable time. Further, due to the conditions under which the data is
collected, noise of multiple types and sources is pervasive; the data must be
extensively cleaned and potential seizure precursors carefully labeled. The
project is investigating mechanisms to develop a cluster architecture (using
Apache Hadoop) for the EEGMine Data Center that incorporates reliable storage
and backup; developing a library of machine learning algorithms (EEGMine- ML
library) and addressing their scalability issues, potentially leveraging the
MapReduce programming paradigm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have
immediate impact for both epilepsy and computer science research. Because of the
uniqueness and value of human-derived microelectrode EEG data, it would be
beneficial for the seizure prediction community to enable data sharing and long-
distance collaborations. The most practical means of sifting through terabytes
of complex EEG data is to combine distributed storage on a cluster with local
processing to prepare data and generate meta-data that can be used as inputs for
machine learning algorithms thus enabling identification of physiologically
significant patterns. From an education perspective, the project will benefit
the EWarn Research Group which is part of CCLS and CUMC by training them in
signal processing, machine learning and basics of EEG.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Website Address:
http://www1.ccls.columbia.edu/~dutta/EEGMine