* 0916015
* TC: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards a Dynamic and Composable Model of Trust
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Adam Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2012
* USD 239,248.00

People rely on two types of trust when making everyday
decisions:&lt;br/&gt;vertical and horizontal trust. Vertical trust captures
trust&lt;br/&gt;relationships between individuals and institutions, while
horizontal&lt;br/&gt;trust represents the trust inferred from the observations
and opinions&lt;br/&gt;of other peers. Although significant benefit could be
realized by&lt;br/&gt;combining horizontal and vertical trust mechanisms, they
have evolved&lt;br/&gt;independently in computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a composable
trust model capable of&lt;br/&gt;tightly coupling vertical and horizontal trust
in a manner that is&lt;br/&gt;both amenable to formal analysis and efficiently
deployable. This&lt;br/&gt;research advances the state of the art in trust
management through a&lt;br/&gt;series of innovative results, including the
design of a unified&lt;br/&gt;framework for specifying composite trust policies
and the design and&lt;br/&gt;analysis of efficient algorithms for policy
evaluation. The composite&lt;br/&gt;trust management approach championed by this
project also enables&lt;br/&gt;policy authors to move beyond simple proof of
compliance to identify&lt;br/&gt;the "top-k" preferred users satisfying security
policies including&lt;br/&gt;subjective assessments. The beneficiaries of this
research range from&lt;br/&gt;administrators of traditional computing systems
who can better&lt;br/&gt;incorporate previous history into their decision-making
processes, to&lt;br/&gt;users in social networks who can more carefully manage
the exposure of&lt;br/&gt;their personal data.