* 0916260
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Creating and Evolving Software via Searching, Selecting and Synthesizing Relevant Source Code
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 216,141.00

Software developers rely on reusing source code snippets from existing libraries
or applications to develop software features on time and within budget. The
reality is such that most previously implemented features are embedded in
billions of lines of scattered source code. State-of-the-art code search engines
provide no guarantee that retrieved code snippets implement these features. Even
if relevant code fragments are located, developers face rather complex task of
selecting and moving these fragments into their applications. Finally,
synthesizing new functionality by composing selected code fragments requires
sophisticated reasoning about the behavior of these fragments and the consequent
code. The result of this process is an overwhelming complexity, a steep learning
curve, and a significant cost of building customized
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program proposes an integrated
model for addressing fundamental problems of searching, selecting, and
synthesizing (S3) source code. The S3 model relies on integrating program
analysis and information retrieval to produce transformative models to
automatically search, select, and synthesize relevant source code fragments. The
S3 model will directly support new methodologies for software change and
automated tools that assist programmers with various development, reuse and
maintenance activities. Among the broader impacts the project includes
collaboration with industry to transfer technology.