* 0916995
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Transmission Re-Ordering in Wireless Networks: Protocols and Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Romit Roy Choudhury, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,991.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The edge of the Internet continues to
spread rapidly over the wireless medium. To cope with the escalating demand,
every available opportunity in wireless networking will has to be maximally
exploited, particularly at the border of physical and higher layers. One such
opportunity is the capability of successfully capturing a frame even in the
presence of an interfering frame, i.e., message-in-message (MIM). With MIM, two
concurrent transmissions may be successful if they are activated in a specific
order, but not the reverse. Towards harnessing MIM, this project aims to: i)
Understand the intrinsic potential of MIM through theoretical analysis; ii) Draw
on this understanding to design efficient higher layer protocols; iii) Develop a
prototype testbed to validate/evaluate the MIM-aware protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers obvious benefits to the broader
community as it attempts to satiate the growing demand for bandwidth hungry
applications over wireless networks by extracting the most from the scant
spectral resources. Additionally, this project facilitates: i) Development and
strengthening of the laboratory and curriculum for wireless networking at
University of South Carolina and Duke University; ii) Involvement and mentoring
of undergraduate students in wireless networking research; iii) Deployment of
experimental wireless technologies within The Duke SmartHome.