* 0916235
* CCF: AF: Small: Volumetric Mesh Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

With the rapid development of volumetric acquisition and computational
technologies in numerous applications, such as industrial inspection and medical
imaging, there is a growing need for tools for processing such datasets to
analyze the topology and geometry, including volumetric mapping to canonical
structures, volumetric registration, volumetric feature extraction, geometric
database indexing, volumetric parameterization, etc. In this project the PI and
his team will develop rigorous algorithms for computing the topology and
geometry for general mesh volumes, a nontrivial and fundamentally more
challenging problem than for surfaces. To capture the tunnels, handles, and
voids of a volume, homology and cohomology groups need to be computed; to
describe the tangling, twisting, and linking patterns among the handles,
tunnels, and voids, fundamental groups need to be computed as well. Because it
is NP-hard to verify whether two fundamental groups are isomorphic, conventional
algebraic topological methods are inadequate and geometric structures such as
Ricci flows need to be incorporated. Thus, a major focus of this project is
development of computational algorithms for Ricci flows. On the other hand, it
is highly desirable to map one or more volumes to a canonical domain, in order
to support database indexing and volume registration, yet it is an open problem
to obtain canonical geometric structures for volumes using computational
methodologies. The PIs are confident that Ricci flows are the key to solving
this problem, too. Project outcomes will include rigorous computational
algorithms for processing volumetric data based on 3-manifold topology and
geometric structures, which will be developed in a sequence of interrelated
steps as follows: design and implementation of algorithms to compute topological
invariants, including homology, cohomology groups, and fundamental groups;
design and implementation of algorithms to compute canonical geometric
structures, Riemannian metrics with constant section curvatures for discrete
3-manifolds, based on curvature flow and differential forms; design and
implementation of algorithms to incorporate canonical geometric structures to
the topological invariants, such as finding the closed geodesics and minimal
surfaces as homotopy class representatives; design and implementation of
algorithms for volumetric mapping to canonical structures, volumetric
registration, volumetric feature extraction, and volumetric parameterization;
design and implementation of parallel version of the above algorithms, and use
of a GPU cluster for speed up; and investigation of the complexity, the
stability, and the convergence rate of the above
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PIs will build and
disseminate a concrete set of software tools for computing and visualizing the
topology and geometric structures for mesh volumes, including volumetric
parameterization, volumetric registration, volumetric mapping to canonical
structures, fundamental groups computation, and topological and geometric
feature extraction. Diverse disciplines such as engineering, science, medicine,
computer graphics, vision, scientific computing, and mathematics, as well as a
host of industrial applications, will directly benefit from these tools, which
can be used for volumetric texture mapping, spline volume construction,
volumetric deformation, etc.