* 0916919
* CIF: Small: New Approaches to the Design and Analysis of Graphical Models for Linear Codes and Secret Sharing Schemes
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,729.00

NSF Proposal 0916919 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New approaches to the design and
analysis of graphical models for linear codes and secret sharing
schemes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Error-correcting
coding enables one to design reliable systems of transmission and storage of
information and is used universally for sending packets over the web, in writing
data on CD's and flash memory devices, and other similar means of modern
communication. A very efficient method of encoding information for error
protection is the so-called "iterative decoding," which assumes that every
binary digit of transmission is recovered based on its realiblity and the
realibility of a few other, carefully selected bits of the encoded message. This
method of error correction is analyzed based on the representation of the
encoding as a graph in the plane in which recovery from errors proceeds by
successive exchange of information between the nodes of the graph in an
iterative procedure performed in a number of rounds. One of the main goals of
this research is to reduce complexity (the number of rounds) needed for reliable
recovery of the transmission from errors in the communication
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphical models of linear codes have so far been
restricted to trellises, i.e., cycle-free graphs, and graphs with exactly one
cycle (tail-biting trellises). This research studies complexity of realization
of codes and iterative decoding algorithms on connected graphs with cycles,
deriving complexity estimates from the tree-decomposition of graphs. One of the
goals of this research is to find methods of constructing low-complexity
realizations of codes for such well-known code families as Reed-Muller and Reed-
Solomon codes, and explore the optimality gap of these representations. Methods
of matroid theory used in the study of graphical models will also be explored in
the analysis of access structures of secret sharing schemes and secure multi-
party computation protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;