* 0916440
* DC: Small: Collaborative Research: Managing Extreme-Scale Data Intensive Computing:  Fundamental Design and Control Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Cathy Xia, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Vasant G. Honavar
* 08/31/2013
* USD 280,000.00

With the continuous growth of data production and the ever expanding computing
infrastructure, future extreme-scale data intensive computing systems are facing
unprecedented design and control challenges to meet the continuous and
increasing demand for information processing.&lt;br/&gt;Scalability, robustness,
continuous availability, and service quality are the key attributes desired to
ensure that the system designed today is capable of operating with the same
efficiency on the extreme scale of the future.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
research described in this proposal is to develop theoretical foundations and
practical control algorithms that enable the scalable design and efficient
management of future extreme-scale data-intensive computing. Specifically, the
researchers will&lt;br/&gt;1) identify fundamental design principles needed to
achieve scalability when developing network infrastructure and software systems
in large scale. Here the concerns are to understand the performance degradation
limited by various factors, including network structure, processor speeds,
buffering/storage capacities, etc.&lt;br/&gt;2) develop distributed control
strategies on operator placement, data storage, load shedding, and resource
allocation so as to enable efficient in-network information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce a deeper and quantitative
understanding on the fundamental design principles and control strategies needed
to achieve scalability, robustness and quality of service for future data-
intensive information service systems. These advances will occur through a
collaborative effort spanning multiple disciplines ranging from performance
modeling, networking, queueing, to optimization.