* 0916937
* Complete Genome Sequencing of the Chromatically Adapting Cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* George Weinstock, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2010
* USD 165,722.00

This project will produce a genome sequence of the fresh-water filamentous
cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon UTEX 481. New DNA sequencing methodology
(pyrosequencing) will be used to sequence the 12 million base pairs of this
genome, one of the largest known in bacteria. These data will be used to compile
a complete description of the genes contained in this bacterium, to reveal
important physiological and regulatory mechanisms involved in prokaryotic
responses to changes in ambient light color. The genetic content will also be
compared to other sequenced cyanobacterial species and photosynthetic bacteria,
to provide a broad picture of the evolution of photosynthesis and the
cyanobacterial species. F. diplosiphon is a well-developed model organism that
for some forty years has been used to advance understanding of how
microorganisms sense and respond to their environment. Initially selected and
cultivated for its ability to sense and respond to changes in ambient light
color conditions, the response of its photosynthetic light harvesting antennae
to light color changes is now the best understood of any organism. F.
diplosiphon is used to study a wide range of additional physiological and
biochemical processes such as "proteome remodeling" in response to nutrient
limitation. It is also used to study developmental responses such as gas vesicle
formation and phototropism, the ability of an organism to grow in a specific
direction in response to the presence or absence of unilaterally applied light.
Important biochemical processes, including chlorophyll and bilin biosynthesis,
are also studied in this species, and F. diplosiphon is one of the few
prokaryotes that produces both cAMP and cGMP in signal transduction, key
signalling molecules in plants and animals. The sequencing of F. diplosiphon
fulfills the goals of the Microbial Genome Sequencing Project because of the
community of physiologists and developmental biologists who will benefit from
the sequence data, and participate in its analysis, the public release of the
sequence and gene predictions, and the impact this work will have on many areas
of fundamental biology.

Light responses are important in the process of photosynthesis, which played a
critical role in the evolution of our planet, and are necessary for the
maintenance of nearly every ecosystem. Moreover an understanding of these
physiological processes can contribute to the development of bioenergy sources.
An important aspect of the project will be the thorough annotation of the DNA
sequence, performed by a consortium of the relevant scientific community. This
will involve Masters and Ph.D. students and postdoctoral fellows, and will
provide significant training in the use of bioinformatics approaches for
manipulating and annotating microbial genomes. This activity will also be used
for undergraduate training in genomics in at least three laboratories in the
United States and in one undergraduate course at Stanford University. Finally,
high school students in Bloomington, Indiana will learn the basics of genome
structure and function through an outreach program that will bring this
information to their classes.