* 0917686
* Number Theory Problems Over Local Fields and Function Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2013
* Brian Conrad, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,484.00

DMS-0600919&lt;br/&gt;Brian Conrad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to work
on some geometric questions that arise in &lt;br/&gt;number-theoretic questions
over global function fields and p-adic fields. In the theory of overconvergent
classical modular forms, the canonical subgroup of Lubin and Katz (for a p-adic
analytic family of elliptic curves) has been an important tool. The recent
interest in p-adic modular forms beyond the classical case has motivated several
different constructions of canonical subgroups for abelian
varieties,&lt;br/&gt;and recent work of the PI has led to another higher-
dimensional theory &lt;br/&gt;that, at least in its geometric aspects, has a
wider range of applicability than the other approaches. The PI proposes to use
deformation-theoretic methods to make explicit certain abstract estimates in the
theory, and to draw &lt;br/&gt;arithmetic consequences for p-adic families of
automorphic forms.&lt;br/&gt;In another direction, the PI and co-workers have
used methods from &lt;br/&gt;deformation theory and rigid-analytic geometry to
develop a theory of a &lt;br/&gt;new global parity obstruction to randomness
properties of prime &lt;br/&gt;specialization of inseparable irreducible
polynomials over&lt;br/&gt;certain coordinate rings of curves over finite
fields. This has given &lt;br/&gt;rise to families of elliptic curves with
unexpected rank behavior&lt;br/&gt;over global function fields (under some
standard conjectures) and seems &lt;br/&gt;likely to have further Diophantine
applications&lt;br/&gt;to Mordell--Weil ranks for families of abelian varieties
over global &lt;br/&gt;function fields. The PI proposes to develop a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of this basic arithmetic phenomenon and to work
out some &lt;br/&gt;further consequences for ranks in
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is among the oldest subjects in
mathematics, since it is &lt;br/&gt;ultimately concerned with the relatively
concrete&lt;br/&gt;problem of studying properties of whole numbers. Such
problems can &lt;br/&gt;take on the form of finding whole number
solutions&lt;br/&gt;to systems of equations in many variables, or problems
relating to &lt;br/&gt;properties of primes, and so on. Typically one has to
bring in some deeper structural information (provided by geometric, algebraic,
or analytic ideas) to make progress on such questions, and in the last several
decades a very wide range of sophisticated geometric techniques have been
developed to attack these problems. Moreover, though the initial motivation
comes from within pure mathematics, security of&lt;br/&gt;electronic
telecommunications has come to be related in an essential way to many of these
number-theoretic problems (such as&lt;br/&gt;prime factorization and studying
points on curves over finite fields) &lt;br/&gt;and the geometric concepts used
to attack them. This proposal focuses&lt;br/&gt;on both geometric and prime
factorization questions that arise in &lt;br/&gt;several number-theoretic
settings, aiming to develop some&lt;br/&gt;new theoretical methods and to apply
them to specific problems. In &lt;br/&gt;addition, the PI proposes to continue
his long-standing tradition of supervising high-level number theory research by
talented high school students and giving talks to larger groups of students at
the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. He will also complete two
books that, together with assorted freely available notes already posted on his
web site, will provide useful references for graduate students who wish to learn
about some fundamental topics in arithmetic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;