* 0917059
* NetSE:   Small:    A Framework to Identify Relationships Among Students in School Bullying Resulting from using Digital Communication Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Tatsuya Suda, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan Fussell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 0.00

Bullying among students at a school has become a serious social problem. In the
project, researchers at University of California, Irvine and at KDDI Research
and Development Laboratories study school bullying using digital communication
media (such as cell phones, short messaging systems, emails, blogs) and create a
sociological based network framework to help teachers and parents identify
whether school bullying may exist among students. The project models
interactions among students as a relationship network, constructs a relationship
network from usage statistics of digital communication media, and identifies
whether unique structural features exist in a relationship network that may
indicate bullying among students. The framework is designed based on two key
hypotheses: (1) school bullying imposes distinct structural features in a
relationship network, and (2) a relationship network is constructed with some
degree of accuracy from usage statistics of digital communication media without
examining privacy-violating information. The framework only uses usage
statistics that maintain privacy of communication, and it extracts such usage
statistics from those publicly available, those collected by and traditionally
made only available internally to a service provider, and those that the
framework directly monitors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs collaborate with
researchers in sociology and social psychology to empirically verify the
hypotheses used in the framework, design the framework and empirically examine
the framework. The intellectual merit of the project includes considering
privacy of communication and applying sociology and social psychology knowledge
in framework design. The broader impact of the project includes advancing
understanding of school bullying, creating a framework that helps teachers and
parents, and sharing of the project findings and artifacts with a large segment
of the research community.&lt;br/&gt;