* 0917199
* HCC: Small: A Physical Vocabulary for Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,11/30/2012
* William Smart, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2012
* USD 495,209.00

We are the victims of our own success. We can now deploy mobile robots in real-
world environments and have them operate completely autonomously for extended
periods of time. We no longer have to surround our robots with graduate student
wranglers to keep them functional, and to keep the general public at a safe
distance. These technical successes mean that members of the general public must
now interact directly with robots, without the aid of an interpreter. But
members of the public are poorly equipped for such interactions, since they are
unfamiliar with real robots and how they work. Thus, the interactions often go
poorly; the robot is hindered in performing its task, and the human is unhappy.
For people to be comfortable interacting with a robot, they must feel that they
understand what it's thinking, what it's trying to do, and the actions that it
will take. Moreover, people must be able to deduce this information from
observing the robot for a short period of time, just as we do with other humans
that we encounter. The fundamental problem here is that humans communicate a
wealth of information by means of a non-verbal "vocabulary" in which body
language (how we stand, how we hold our arms, etc.), eye contact, nods, and
other subtle cues ostensibly not essential to the task at hand play significant
roles. We do this naturally, and without conscious effort. Taken in context,
this information allows us to infer another person's state of mind, goals, and
intentions with surprising accuracy; this, in turn, allows us to predict how a
given interaction will unfold, and gives us some control over it. Because people
take this ability for granted, they suffer when it is absent, as is currently
often the case when interacting with a mobile robot. The PI intends to address
this deficiency in the current project. He argues that to make human-robot
interactions as natural as possible, we must equip robots with our physical
vocabulary and ensure that they use it appropriately, following social norms. To
achieve this goal the PI will turn to the performing arts, where actors are
trained to express themselves physically. A good actor can convey a vast amount
of information about a character's state of mind, goals, and intentions by
simply walking across the stage in a particular way. The actions may be styled,
larger-than-life, or subtle, but they are intended to convey information about
the character's internal mental state. The techniques that actors employ have
been honed and refined for hundreds of years and tested for effectiveness on the
general public. In this research, the PI will exploit such insights and skills
to develop a physical vocabulary that can communicate beliefs, intentions, and
goals to humans interacting with a robot, thereby enabling people to better
predict the robot's actions. Finally, the PI will rigorously evaluate these
actions to verify that they are actually useful.

Broader Impacts: Robots are becoming more and more a part of our lives, and
members of the public will be forced to deal with them sooner or later. If we
have an understanding of the physical aspects of these interactions, the
integration of robots into our everyday lives will be made much less painful and
distressing.