* 0917097
* NeTS: Small: Addressing Research Challenges in Low-Duty-Cycle Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Tian He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2013
* USD 327,590.00

Energy-efficient wireless communication is critical for long-term sensor network
applications, such as military surveillance, habitat monitoring and
infrastructure protection. To reduce the energy costs of RF listening, a node
has to reduce its duty-cycle by sampling wireless channels very briefly and
shutting down for long periods. Consequently, the connectivity of low-duty-cycle
networks becomes time-dependent. Previous research in this type of networks
predominately focused on physical and link-layer designs. This project is
positioned to provide significantly added value to these earlier successful
research by conducting the first systematic research at the network layer for
low-duty-cycle communication under a wide spectrum of network configurations
covering a large design space. The key research challenge addressed by this
project is to optimize networking performance (e.g., delay, reliability, and
cost) in the presence of sleep latency and other practical considerations
including (i) unreliable links, (ii) dynamic energy availability, and (iii)
mobility. With a successful outcome from this project, long-term sensor
applications can be supported by low-duty-cycle networking technologies, leading
to significantly reduced costs in development, deployment, and maintenance.
These applications, in turn, can improve the safety of transportation, the
quality of education and learning, and the development of innovations in many
scientific frontiers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).