* 0917266
* RI: Small: Scalable Roadmap-Based Methods for Simulating and Controlling Behaviors of Interacting Groups: from Robot Swarms to Crowd Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Nancy Amato, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2015
* USD 504,000.00

Simulating and controlling communities of characters that can
&lt;br/&gt;interact with each other and their environment, and dynamically
&lt;br/&gt;react to changes, is a challenging problem with many important
&lt;br/&gt;applications ranging from homeland security (e.g., simulation
&lt;br/&gt;of disaster scenarios and responses), to civil crowd control
&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., planning exit strategies for sporting events), to
&lt;br/&gt;education and training (e.g., providing immersive museum exhibits
&lt;br/&gt;and training systems). While there are existing methods that
&lt;br/&gt;attempt to address the simulation aspect, there is a lack of
&lt;br/&gt;methods that support interaction of multiple types/groups of
&lt;br/&gt;agents and little work has been done on the control or steering
&lt;br/&gt;aspect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to address these
challenges by integrating &lt;br/&gt;roadmap-based planning with agent-based
modeling. This hybrid &lt;br/&gt;approach enables the development of methodology
for modeling group &lt;br/&gt;interactions which are also influenced by
constraints imposed by &lt;br/&gt;the environment (e.g., wide or narrow
corridors) and techniques, &lt;br/&gt;including interfaces that enable planning
and experimentation, that &lt;br/&gt;can scale to large numbers of agents. The
results of this work will &lt;br/&gt;be shared with the community via
publications and open source &lt;br/&gt;software. An anticipated outcome of this
research is a tool for &lt;br/&gt;simulation and control of large crowds at
major events (e.g., &lt;br/&gt;sporting events, political rallies, emergency
evacuations of a &lt;br/&gt;building, region, or city). This could allow
emergency response &lt;br/&gt;planners to investigate the crowd response when
officials are placed &lt;br/&gt;in particular positions, or architects to study
how evacuation times &lt;br/&gt;are affected by widening or narrowing
corridors.&lt;br/&gt;