* 0917517
* NOVA scienceNOW Seasons 5 and 6
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Paula Apsell, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,600,000.00

WGBH is producing the fifth and sixth seasons of NOVA scienceNOW, a multimedia
project that addresses a wide array of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics subjects via multiple platforms. They include national PBS
broadcast, the PBS web site, and innovative outreach activities such as an
expanded Science Café initiative. Hosted by astrophysicist Dr. Neil deGrasse
Tyson, Season Five will air in 2010; Season Six in 2011. The focus is "stories
of transformative research," e.g., nanotechnology, stem cells, quantum
computing, as well as clean energy, and climate change. Project goals are to
"produce a lasting impact on Americans' appreciation for and understanding of
current scientific research," and to encourage an interest in STEM careers among
younger viewers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Building upon solid prior work, the
proposed project is finding new ways to interweave the television show, web
materials, and Science Cafés to provide multiple entry points and pathways for
the audience. For example, they will produce 32 web-only scientist profiles
supported by a blog and social media tools, and then train these scientists as
presenters for the Science Cafés. NOVA is planning a new strategy to maximize
carriage and increase audience for the six new programs per year; the programs
will run consecutively in the NOVA Wednesday evening primetime slot during the
summer. During Season Three, over 2.7 million television viewers per week tuned
in NOVA scienceNow, with 62,000 unique visitors to the web site per month and 75
active Science Cafés across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanded
Science Café initiative is designed to become self-sustaining beyond the grant
period through new partnerships with groups such as the Astronomical Society of
the Pacific, the American Chemical Society, and the Coalition for the Public
Understanding of Science. The project will also collaborate with the Association
of Science-Technology Centers and science centers around the country to host
Science Cafés featuring scientists profiled on the
web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goodman Research Group will assess the reach and
effectiveness of Seasons Five and Six. The focal/primary evaluation activity is
a viewing and engagement study on the influence of viewing the series along with
accessing and participating actively with the increased web and outreach
offerings. This study will comprise web-based surveys with adaptive branching
patterns, which will include data collection from a variety of participants and
will focus on participants? use of the series, website, and outreach. The
summative evaluation will measure how the project is reaching these audience
segments, while also meeting the overall goals of increasing public
understanding of science and engagement in science-related activities.