* 0917265
* CIF: Small: Energy Efficiency in Wireless Communications under Queueing Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Mustafa Gursoy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2012
* USD 335,856.00

Abstract ? NSF 0917265

The two key characteristics of wireless communications that greatly impact
system design and performance are randomly-varying channel conditions and
limited energy resources. In wireless systems, the power of the received signal
randomly fluctuates over time and distance due to multipath fading, mobility,
and changing environment. Moreover, mobile wireless systems can only be equipped
with limited energy resources, and hence energy efficient operation is a crucial
requirement in most applications. In many wireless communication systems, in
addition to energy-efficient operation, satisfying certain quality-of-service
(QoS) requirements is of paramount importance in providing acceptable
performance and quality. For instance, in voice over IP (VoIP), interactive-
video (e.g., videoconferencing), and streaming-video applications in wireless
systems, latency is a key QoS metric. Therefore, the central design challenge in
next-generation wireless systems, which has the vision of providing
communications anytime, anywhere in a reliable and robust fashion, is to provide
the best performance levels while making efficient use of energy resources and
satisfying certain QoS constraints (e.g., latency, packet loss, buffer violation
probability).

The overall goal of this research is to identify the fundamental limits on the
energy efficiency of wireless systems operating under queueing constraints
through a unified analysis of information- and queueing-theoretic aspects. The
investigators will employ a novel approach to analyze the energy efficiency by
combining information-theoretic tools, such as minimum bit energy and wideband
slope, with queueing-theoretic tools, such as effective bandwidth and effective
capacity. This project seeks to establish a strong analytical framework by
rigorously establishing fundamental limits on the energy efficiency under buffer
constraints, and also at the same time has the goal of conducting experiments
with a testbed and making comparisons with the theoretical findings.



