* 0917612
* ScienceMakers: African Americans and Scientific Innovation
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Julieanna Richardson, The HistoryMakers
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Schatz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 2,344,500.00

The ScienceMakers: African Americans and Scientific Innovation is a three-year
project designed to increase awareness of the contributions of African American
scientists, raise awareness of STEM careers, and increase understanding of STEM
concepts through the creation of education, media, and career resources. The
project team is supplemented with an extensive advisory board of STEM education,
museum, and community professionals, as well as representatives from partnering
science centers. Project partners include the St. Louis Science Center, Liberty
Science Center, New York Hall of Science, Pacific Science Center, Franklin
Institute, COSI Columbus, Lawrence Hall of Science, SciWorks, Detroit Science
Center, and MOSI Chicago. Additional collaborators include middle and high
schools with high minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
deliverables include a fully accessible multi-media archive of video oral
histories of 180 African American scientists and web resources and contests
utilizing Web 2.0 and 3.0 applications such as social networking tools that
foster engagement and build community around the ScienceMakers. Public programs
for youth and adults at science museums, after-school programs, and community
organizations highlight African American contributors, and encourage interest in
science and science careers and the ScienceMakers DVD Toolkit expand the reach
of this innovative project. Intended impacts for youth and adults consist of
increased awareness of STEM concepts and career options, exposure to African
American scientists, awareness of the contributions of minority scientists, and
21st century skills. Intended impacts on professional audiences include
increased awareness and understanding of STEM careers and workforce diversity,
21st century skills, and STEM career options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
evaluation, conducted by Knight-Williams Research Communications, utilizes a
mixed-methods approach. The evaluation assesses the impact of the oral history
archive, public programs, and other deliverables on public and professional
audiences' knowledge, interest, and awareness of the contributions of African
American scientists, STEM concepts, and STEM careers. The evaluation also
includes an ethnography which examines factors that contribute to success in
STEM careers by African-American scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ScienceMakers significantly expands the world's largest searchable oral history
archive and may have an enduring impact on research and practice in the field of
informal science education. The project has the potential to enrich programs and
exhibits, while raising awareness of the contributions of African-American
scientists among informal science education professionals and the general
public.