* 0917664
* A Mathematical Study of the Biochemical and Electrical Dynamics of Pancreatic Islets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Richard Bertram, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 237,549.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research
project is to understand how the many subsystems of the pancreatic beta-cell
interact to produce insulin oscillations in mice (rats and humans also exhibit
oscillations). These oscillations are crucial for the normal regulation of blood
glucose levels, and loss of oscillations is linked to type II diabetes. Rhythmic
insulin secretion from pancreatic islets of Langerhans is due to rhythmic
bursting electrical activity in the beta-cells, and a consequent rhythm in the
intracellular calcium concentration. Both the intracellular calcium and
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) feed back onto the cell's electrical subsystem,
opening or closing ion channels and thus affecting the cell's electrical
activity. This project focuses on the metabolic subsystem that produces ATP, and
on a mathematical analysis of previously-developed models of metabolismdriven
bursting and the fast electrical bursting that occurs in single beta-cells that
are isolated from the islet. The central hypothesis is that the slow electrical
bursting oscillations and episodic bursting that are often exhibited by
pancreatic islets, and that have the same period as insulin oscillations
observed in vivo, are driven by oscillations in metabolism. One mechanism for
these oscillations is in glycolysis, the first stage of glucose metabolism.
However, it is possible that oscillations inherent in one of the other two
stages of metabolism, the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, could
be the slow process that drives slow bursting activity and that clusters faster
bursts together into periodic episodes. This possibility will be investigated
using mathematical modeling and analysis, as will what measurements of
periodicity in citric acid cycle intermediates indicate about the mechanism of
the oscillations. Returning to the glycolytic component of metabolism, modeling
studies will be conducted in parallel with experimental studies in a
collaborating laboratory to determine how the enzyme phosphosphofructokinase-2
(PFK-2) may modulate glycolytic oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insulin
secretion in mammals, including rats, humans, dogs, and humans, is pulsatile,
with a period of about five minutes. These insulin oscillations, which can be
measured in the blood, are important for normal glucose homeostasis, since
disruption of the oscillations is linked to type II diabetes. Insulin is
secreted from micro-organs in the pancreas called Islets of Langerhans, composed
largely of insulin-secreting beta-cells. For more than a decade now, the
principal investigator has been investigating the biophysical mechanism for the
oscillations in insulin secretion. This research involves mathematical modeling
and analysis, and parallel experimental studies in a collaborating laboratory.
It is thus a truly multidisciplinary project. The current project uses a current
mathematical model of pancreatic beta-cells to understand how oscillations in
the metabolism of glucose by the beta-cells can lead to oscillations in the
electrical activity and insulin secretion from the beta-cells. In addition,
bifurcation analysis and recent mathematical methods in the area of Mixed Mode
Oscillations will be used to understand the oscillatory electrical activity of
beta-cells that have been isolated from an islet. The intention is to determine,
using this mathematical analysis, how single-cell behavior is converted to the
very different behavior of beta-cells in an intact islet. The long-term goal of
this research is to better understand the normal functioning of islets, which
will ultimately provide insights into the dysfunction of islets that occurs in
type II diabetes.