* 0917576
* Taking NPASS to Scale (NPASS2): Creating State-based Professional Development Networks for Out-of-School Time Science
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2015
* Timothy Porter, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 02/28/2015
* USD 1,996,468.00

Taking NPASS (National Partnerships for Afterschool Science) to Scale builds on
a previously funded effort (DRL 0515549) designed to provide professional
development for out-of-school time (OST) science trainers, administrators, and
frontline staff. Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC), in partnership with
the Boston Children's Museum, utilizes a tiered-training approach to increase
understanding of the nature and value of informal science programming and
improve program development and presentation skills. The professional
development content is aligned with state standards in earth, life, and physical
sciences for grades K-8 and emphasizes science inquiry and process skills. In
addition to disseminating the NPASS model to eight states (CA, GA, MD, MN, MO,
NH, NJ, OH), this project examines the factors that contribute to success at the
local and statewide levels. Collaborating NPASS Leadership Teams are located at
the California School-Age Consortium, the Georgia Afterschool Investment
Council, The After-School Institute, Minnesota School Age Child Care Alliance,
University of Missouri-Columbia, University of New Hampshire, and the Ohio Child
Care Resource and Referral Association. Rutgers University-New Brunswick and the
National Institute on Out of School Time (NIOST) assist with recruitment and
training.

The primary target audience for this effort is OST science trainers,
administrators of statewide OST networks and local programs, and frontline
staff. The secondary audience is youth participating in afterschool programs,
most of whom are from traditionally underserved and economically challenged
groups. Deliverables include three-day, semi-annual train-the-trainer
institutes; annual seminars for NPASS leaders; professional development tools;
science kits; and the NPASS website. The project design consists of four levels
of management and delivery. At Level 1, the NPASS2 primary partners, EDC and the
Boston Children's Museum, provide three-day state-based OST Science Trainer
Institutes on a semi-annual basis. The Science Trainer Institutes combine hands-
on experience with pedagogical training in informal science learning, youth
development, and the logistics of working with OST sites. During Level 2, the
eight State Leadership Teams recruit two cohorts of OST practitioners to attend
Science Trainer Institutes. The new Science Trainers then identify OST sites to
attend a series of half-day science trainings in Level 3. Each session
introduces and models new science projects for use in afterschool settings,
including the NSF-funded Design It! or Explore It! materials. Finally, at Level
4, OST sites serving children from predominantly underserved and
underrepresented populations are invited to join the NPASS2 initiative. OST
sites receive a materials kit and guide for the activities at each training
session, while support and scaffolding such as mentoring, a helpline, FAQ
archive, bi-monthly newsletter, and social networking site are available
throughout the program. It is estimated that as many as 30 OST state leaders,
300 managers, and 100 science trainers will be reached at 750 community sites
serving 22,000 youth. The combined intervention has the potential to change the
OST landscape.

The project evaluation to be conducted by the Goodman Research Group (GRG)
employs a longitudinal design to determine participants' growth over time and
the magnitude of change among the variables. The formative evaluation is
designed to assess the development of the project's deliverables while the
summative evaluation focuses on professional audience impacts. The NPASS2
summative evaluation examines the OST science trainers, OST state network
administrators, youth workers, and site administrators through a baseline
survey, in addition to annual questionnaires and interviews of network
administrators and OST site administrators. The pre-post design measures changes
in trainers' understanding, attitudes, behavior, and skills related to informal
STEM education research or practice. To maximize the efficiency and authenticity
of the evaluation, GRG will use the SET/STEM Leader Competencies Rubric
currently being developed jointly by EDC in collaboration with the National 4-H
Council's SET PD Committee.