* 0917708
* SGER: 2- and 3-D Visualization of Ecological Phenomena - Transition to the Petabyte Age
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,10/31/2010
* Judith Cushing, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2010
* USD 92,977.00

The informatics problem facing scientists in the Petabyte Age has three parts:
1) finding, accessing, and loading massive amounts of data, 2) figuring out the
appropriate data reduction or abstraction to make sense of the combined data
set, and 3) operationally processing those data. n this SGER, the focus is on
the second of these sub-problems ? how scientists deal cognitively with petabyte
size data sets of their own and others? provenance. Natural language processing
applications saw orders of magnitude improvement when statistical
processing/machine learning was applied to massive data sets. Some linguists
observe that these improvements level off at some point, and that subsequent
improvements come only after domain knowledge (in that case, linguistic theory)
is also applied to the processing. There is a similar situation in science.
While some application areas in a Petabyte Age might require only non domain-
specific machine learning to predict phenomena (what Chris Anderson calls
?agnostic statistics?), others will require the deeper understanding of
phenomena that most scientists seek. In other words, for some domains, and in
most sciences, it is not enough to answer ?what? ? one also needs to answer
?how?. This work is high risk because there is little research on the extent to
which visualization of natural phenomena can be made "cognitively" consonant
across disparate spatial and temporal scales, Further, because of disparity
between the scientific- and information-visualization communities, it is unclear
how to connect analytics with visualization of ecological phenomena. Finally,
the data integration necessary for the proposed visualization requires managing
much larger volumes of data, and many more different kinds of data. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work lays in new conceptual data structures
and data representations for scientific visualization that can be used to
generate domain specific visualization templates from which a range of specific
visualizations for a domain could be drawn.

The broader impacts of the proposed work are three-fold: 1) potential
application of the work beyond the realm of environmental science and climate
change to that of natural resource management and policy, and to other sciences,
2) educational impact to computational thinking in terms of curricular
development at Evergreen College, which will be disseminated via the NSF CPATH
project Northwest Distributed Computer Science Department (NWDCSD), and 3) free
open-source distribution of the software tool to the scientific community.

