* 0917098
* NeTS: Small: Greed-Resistant Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 499,344.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication protocols on the Internet
are typically designed first to work, then to interoperate and evolve, and
eventually to be resilient to misbehavior and selfishness. Unfortunately, these
extensions to protocols often sacrifice backward compatibility, because
otherwise a misbehaving user can claim to be legacy. At the other extreme, the
``incentive compatible'' protocols are often designed assuming selfish users are
also myopic, focusing narrowly on the short term and unwilling to donate
resources for no immediate gain. This project investigates the iOwe, a new
primitive for exchanging value in competitive protocols, and applies it to two
new overlay network protocols, PeerWise and HoodNets. The iOwe is a verifiable
promise of future service that can be exchanged by nodes that trust the issuer.
PeerWise and HoodNets are protocols by which users can achieve better network
performance, either in terms of latency (PeerWise) or wireless bandwidth
(HoodNets). Both rely on a non-simultaneous exchange of service: PeerWise
because simultaneous use is unlikely, HoodNets because channel bonding achieves
better apparent bandwidth only when both links aren't already saturated. The
project results are expected to provide new facilities to help build protocols
in which repeated interactions permit users to operate at a short term loss for
long term gain. Similarly, the protocols being prototyped can aid in the
robustness and performance of network service.&lt;br/&gt;