* 0917520
* The Blue Mars Science Center: Designing a virtual science learning environment
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2011
* USD 687,831.00

TERC Inc. will conduct a one-year proof of concept study that includes the
design, development, and research of two prototype science activities for the
virtual Blue Mars Science Center located on the Blue Mars 2150 platform
developed by Virtual Space Entertainment. Blue Mars is a science fiction-themed
virtual world set on Mars far in the future and will be rendered in High
Definition, an important incremental step in the development of highly realistic
virtual worlds. It is in this virtual world context that the proposed learning
activities and research are to be conducted. TERC's research will examine the
challenges of learning in virtual environments and which types of tools and
interactions can encourage and support collaboration, the results of which will
advance both informal and formal learning in virtual worlds. Avatar tracking
data, participant observations, interviews, and surveys will be used to study
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to advance
areas of computational visualization systems and cognitive science and will
afford an array of learning opportunities using real time data. Millions of
visitors to the Blue Mars world will be able to share in an unprecedented range
of virtual activities and experiences. It is anticipated that the research will
inform the future development of even more advanced immersive interactivity,
such as avatar-based models and computationally-oriented interactivity. The
study will serve as a basis for both further development of the Blue Mars
Science Center and the advancement of research on science learning in virtual
worlds. The investigators are interested in continuing to expand as the
scientific community evolves in the virtual world. The online world has the
potential to become a powerful attractor for the general public to engage in
science learning.