* 0917595
* Sustainability: Promoting Sustainable Decision Making in Informal Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2015
* Victoria Coats, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 04/30/2015
* USD 2,320,021.00

The Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) will partner with the City of
Portland's Office of Sustainable Development, Metro Regional Government,
Portland Community College, Verde, and the Coalition for a Livable Future, to
create a series of informal science education experiences on the theme of
Sustainability. For this project, sustainability is defined in terms of a triple
bottom line of economic, social, and environmental needs. The project responds
to calls for broad environmental education of the public in response to
environmental crises (such as climate change), and specific research suggesting
that even museums that do provide information about such issues rarely help
their visitors learn to make the comparisons necessary to make more sustainable
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the public audience, the project team will
create a 1,500 sq. ft. bilingual (Spanish/English) exhibition to encourage the
public to develop skills in making personal choices that affect the
sustainability of their community. They will also create 25-40 bilingual cell
phone tags that will provide listeners who dial the phone numbers with
information, personal perspectives, current STEM research, invitations to
contribute ideas or vote on issues, interactive phone-based activities, and
links to websites, all in service of helping them make intentional and informed
personal decisions on sustainability. The cell phone tags will be located at
approximately 100 locations in the Portland area, including predominantly
Hispanic neighborhoods, public transit locations, public works, and community
projects. The team will also create a bilingual website and will offer quarterly
bilingual events at the museum on the topic of sustainable
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the professional audience, the team will create
a set of tools and indicators for assessing the sustainability of exhibit-
development processes, using the triple bottom line of financial, environmental,
and social impacts. For example, a Green Exhibit Guide will provide resources
and a checklist for exhibit development projects, and will propose field-wide
standards analogous to the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
rating system for green buildings. Regional workshops will engage exhibit
developers, designers, fabricators, and administrators in using the tools in
their own institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a
coordinated set of resources to inform the public about the science of
sustainability and to engage them in making informed choices in their daily
lives, both in the museum and beyond. The topic of sustainability is timely and
important, and the use of cell phones as a mobile technology linked to web
resources and an exhibition constitute an innovative synergy of media to create
impacts on a city-wide scale. The project serves underrepresented Hispanic
audiences through its creation of bilingual materials, placement of cell phone
tags, and community involvement in the development process. Finally, the project
advances the ISE field in proposing and broadly disseminating a set of standards
for green exhibit design, along with developing resources and tools for
assessing sustainability. Created in collaboration with other organizations,
this work has the potential to reduce the environmental impact of museums while
providing highly visible examples of sustainable practices for visitors.