* 0917176
* NeTS: Small: Network Failure Recovery Employing Network Coding
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Ender Ayanoglu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Facilities used in long-distance communications networks incorporate mechanisms
to overcome failures, however, these result in the use of spare capacity
(redundancy) to achieve relatively short restoration times (about 50 ms).
Therefore, some providers have implemented proprietary network failure
restoration techniques with a smaller degree of redundancy and with a larger
restoration time. Restoration from network failures is particularly difficult
for networks that employ routers and the Internet Protocol. This research is
applying using network coding techniques for hitless (transparent to the user)
restoration of services in the networks of future. The research is investigating
topology and code design algorithms for actual networks, to understand their
performance, to compare restoration time and extra capacity requirements of the
new approach with conventional techniques, and to discover new protocols to
implement the new technique. In this work, failure recovery design using network
coding will be implemented in two steps. In the first step, for a given network,
a failure recovery network will be designed using a linear program. In the
second step, the needed Galois field size will be determined. The new hitless
restoration technology will be compared with conventional failure recovery
techniques using disjoint paths in terms of spare capacity, restoration speed,
and operation complexity. The new technique will also enable packet loss
recovery in the network, as opposed to on an end-to-end basis as performed
conventionally. A special implementation for wireless networks is also under
development. The successful outcome of this research can have a broad impact on
future networks.