* 0917677
* Colonization, Ecology, and Adaptive Adjustments of Paleocoastal Peoples on California's Northern Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jon Erlandson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 98,593.00

Documenting when people first colonized the Americas is crucial to understanding
the evolution of ancient North American cultures and ecosystems. Definitive
archaeological evidence for human occupation of the Americas appears during the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition (~14,500-13,000 cal BP), a time of dramatic
environmental and climatic changes as the planet moved from glacial to
interglacial conditions. Several models have been proposed for the colonization
of the Americas, including land-based and coastal migrations during the Late
Pleistocene, with a Pacific Coast migration gaining increasing credibility.
Rapid sea level rise in the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene submerged
ancient shorelines and coastal lowlands, however, making it difficult to locate
early coastal sites. Rising seas and climate change also caused significant
geographic and biological reorganization that posed challenges for early coastal
peoples.

The earliest evidence for seafaring and maritime adaptations in the Americas
currently comes from California's Northern Channel Islands. Excavation of five
Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocene sites on Santa Rosa and San Miguel
islands, including three of the earliest known from the Pacific Coast of North
America (~12,000-11,500 cal BP), will document the life ways of these ancient
peoples, the environments they lived in, and their effects on island ecosystems.
Archaeological survey will also search ancient landforms for additional early
sites.

This project will provide important new data on the Paleocoastal people who
first settled the Channel Islands and Pacific Coast, how they adapted to the
dynamic environments of the Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene, and the
strategies they used to survive such changes. The broader impacts of this
project include providing research training for graduate and undergraduate
students and local Chumash tribal members. Presentation of research results in
public lectures will highlight how archaeology can inform contemporary
environmental issues facing society.