* 0917141
* RI: Small: Recursive Compositional Models for Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Alan Yuille, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 399,999.00

Detecting and recognizing objects from real world images is a very challenging
problem with many practical applications. The past few years have shown growing
success for tasks such as detecting faces, text, and for recognizing objects
which have limited spatial variability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly speaking,
the difficulty of detection and recognition increases with the variability of
the objects ? rigid objects being the easiest and deformable articulated objects
being the hardest.&lt;br/&gt;There is, for example, no computer vision system
which can detect a highly deformable and articulated object such as a cat in
realistic conditions or read text in natural images. This project develops and
evaluates computer vision technology for detecting and recognizing deformable
articulated objects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy is to represent objects
by recursive compositional models (RCMs) which describe objects into
compositions of subparts. Preliminary work has shown that these RCMs can be
learnt with only limited supervision from natural images. In addition, inference
algorithms have been developed which can rapidly detect and describe a limited
class of objects. This project starts with&lt;br/&gt;single objects with fixed
pose and viewpoint and proceeds to multiple objects, poses, and viewpoints.
Theoretical analysis of these models gives insight and understanding of the
performance and computational complexity of RCMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results are a new technology for detecting and recognizing objects for
the applications mentioned above. The results are disseminated by peer reviewed
publications, webpage downloads, and by university courses.&lt;br/&gt;