* 0917666
* SGER: EScience in the All-Digital Library
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2009,08/31/2010
* William Arms, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

Digital library developments currently emphasize traditional services, such as
searching, archiving, and access to digital information (e.g., the HathiTrust
and Google Book Search), but fail to recognize the potential for eScience to
identify latent information that is buried in digital collections and scientific
databases. This SGER is exploring the new forms of scientific research that are
possible in an all-digital library. As a case study we are using Cornell's Mann
Library, which will be one of the first large scientific libraries to digitize
at least 80 percent of its book collections. As yet, only a few scientists are
aware of the opportunities that an all-digital library offers. The first part of
the study is gathering information from scientists about the potential for
information-driven research in their domains, and the tools and services that
they need. The second part of the study is undertaking pilot experiments to gain
insights into the practical difficulties in carrying out information-intensive
research on digital book collections. This will use an initial collection of
100,000 digitized books to which we are providing tools for indexing, simple
data mining, and extraction of subsets.

Public dissemination of the results is an integral part of this study. The aim
is not simply to explore eScience in the all-digital library, but to enable
scientists to carry out eScience research without the help of computing
specialists. For this they need support from universities, libraries, and the
government. This support must be built on a well-informed analysis of the
technical, human, and organizational factors that will maximize the benefits of
the all-digital library.

