* 0917170
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Word Sense and Multilingual Subjectivity Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rada Mihalcea, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2013
* USD 224,796.00

Approaches to subjectivity and sentiment analysis often rely on manually or
automatically constructed lexicons. Most such lexicons are compiled as lists of
words, rather than word meanings ("senses"). However, many words have both
subjective and objective senses as well as senses of different polarities, which
is a major source of ambiguity in subjectivity and sentiment analysis. The
proposed work addresses this gap, by investigating novel methods for
subjectivity sense labeling, and exploiting the results in sense-aware
subjectivity and sentiment analysis. To achieve these goals, three research
objectives are targeted. The first is developing methods for assigning
subjectivity labels to word senses in a taxonomy. The second is developing
contextual subjectivity disambiguation techniques to effectively make use of the
word sense subjectivity annotations. The third is applying these techniques to
multiple languages, including languages with fewer resources than English. The
project will have broader impacts in both research and education. First, it will
make subjectivity and sentiment resources and tools more widely available, in
multiple languages, to the research community, which will help advance the state
of the art in automatic subjectivity analysis, which in turn will benefit end
applications. Second, several educational goals will be pursued: training
graduate and undergraduate students in computational linguistics; augmenting
artificial intelligence courses with projects based on the proposed research,
which will offer students hands-on experience with natural language processing
research; and reaching out to women and minorities to increase their exposure to
text processing technologies and access to research opportunities.