* 0917773
* Collaborative Research III-COR: From a Pile of Documents to a Collection of Information: A Framework for Multi-Dimensional Text Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2008,07/31/2011
* Stuart Shulman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2011
* USD 213,114.00

Many information workers are swamped with unfamiliar collections of text. One
challenge is to obtain an accurate overview of a large text collection, such as
the public comments collected in ''''''''notice and comment'''''''' rulemaking.
No single tool currently provides a sufficiently diversified picture of such a
corpus, and no adequate theory exists to help people explore and form a deep and
nuanced understanding of such a text collection. This research seeks to develop
a computational framework that allows further exploration of this problem from
multiple, integrated perspectives. All the assembled perspectives will be
brought together into a single overall supra-document structure that is
dynamically constructed under user guidance. In this structure, hierarchical
topic clusters will be cross-linked by opinion and argumentation links, using
two classes of text analysis engines: one for topics and subtopics, and the
other for argument structures. The research team will design, develop, build,
and systematically test an overall text exploration framework, an application to
support federal regulation writersone called the Rule-Writers Workbench. There
is a strong collaboration with Federal government officials who will provide
data and participate in user testing. The three PIs have successfully
collaborated on a related project under previous NSF funding.

Intellectual Merit: This is a sustainable collaboration between computer science
and political/social science research, rooted in a challenging and important
real world application and informed by years of end user research. Dynamic,
user-driven subtopic definition and clustering algorithms coupled with language
modeling are an innovative yet reachable set of goals. The framework to be
developed will be grounded in the humanities disciplines'' expertise in
rhetoric, discourse structure, and subjectivity.

Broader Impacts: The Rule-Writers Workbench will allow federal government
regulation writers to employ a suite of technical tools that perform independent
analyses of public responses to proposed regulations, including near-duplicate
detection and clustering, user-based topic selection from dynamically extracted
keywords, opinion identification, and subtopic clustering. These capabilities
will open new avenues for federal comment analysis.