* 0917973
* PFI: Wireless Grid Innovation Testbed
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Tamal Bose, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2014
* USD 801,006.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type II (A:B) partnership
between Syracuse University, an NSF PFI graduate (0227879, initiated at Tufts
University), and Virginia Tech University, which is currently a research site of
another NSF-supported partnership program: I/UCRC Wireless Internet Center for
Advanced Technology (WICAT) (0809036)--is focused on the creation of the first
national Wireless Grid Innovation Testbed (WGiT). The project integrates prior
knowledge and technology. Scientists at universities will work with a consortium
of private organizations in a laboratory with the resources to support open
innovation and user-created innovations in a system that supports their capture,
documentation, and improvement. The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the innovative combination of grid networking and wireless networking. The
ultimate vision of the wireless grid is that of an adaptive network with secure,
inexpensive, and coordinated real-time access to dynamic, heterogeneous
resources, across geographic, political and cultural boundaries without
forsaking stability, transparency, scalability, control and flexibility. Better
assessment of wireless grids technology, network performance, and user behavior
will inform design, manufacturing and commercialization of next generation
information and resource sharing innovations. The test bed will support training
and courses related to innovation, wireless grids technologies and
business/social impact opportunities. Students within a variety of courses from
middle school through doctoral levels, as well as community workforce training
programs, through work at the associated labs and in the field, will be given
the opportunity of hands-on experience in the use of the wireless grid beta
applications as they become available. Students will have the opportunity to
develop their own wireless grid applications, building upon the open platform
provided. New knowledge will be generated both on innovation models and
entrepreneurial ecosystems, and on wireless grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of wireless grid connectivity specifications developed with WGiT
support will be determined ultimately by their utility to user and device
communities. Open source developers interested in wireless grids distributed
collaboration and network mash-up features will be significant early users. A
wide range of new applications is expected across industry sectors and social
communities. Businesses, government agencies and private individuals will have
new options for interacting within and across regions. The testbed will provide
students, faculty, firms, and representatives of government an opportunity to
learn from and participate in the growth of this new market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are Academic
Institutions: Syracuse University (lead institution), Virginia Tech University,
Tufts University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Instituto Superior
Technico (IST), Lisbon, Portugal; Private Sector Organizations: Center for
Advanced Engineering &amp; Research, Inc. (CAER); Clear Channel Radio; MOD-ECO;
Qualcomm, SenSyr LLV; Syracuse Research Corporation (SRC); Wireless Grids
Corporation (WGC); Governmental and Intergovernmental Organizations: Knowledge
Society Agency (UMIC) Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education,
Portugal; and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
France.