* 0917974
* PFI: Commercialization of Advanced Composites in Offshore Wind Energy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Habib Dagher, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between the University of Maine (UMaine), an NSF PFI graduated grantee
(0125343), and Maine Maritime Academy, an institution new to the PFI Program
(defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee) and, in this case, new to NSF
as well?seeks to enable the acceleration of the development of Maine?s deepwater
offshore wind energy resource by employing an innovation model that will draw
upon knowledge and technology from diverse sources. The proposed research
addresses the development of key knowledge, experimentally-validated numerical
models for combined aerolastic/hydrodynamic loadings; and an enabling
technology, Rapid-Formed Composite Structures (RFCS). Neither the knowledge nor
the technology currently exists for deepwater offshore wind turbines and both
are critical to the development of offshore wind energy. The University of Maine
brings to the partnership RFCS technology, which eliminates and will
significantly reduce, platform construction and deployment costs. . The project
addresses the energy crisis facing Maine and the US which requires new
strategies and innovations. Working with floating platform developers and
composites manufacturers, platforms for offshore floating turbines will be
developed by the Advanced Structures and Composites Center (newly renamed in
response to the evolution of its research mission) at the University of Maine.
Thus, this project presents an opportunity to progress toward the goal of
delivering installed wind power capacity at a cost that is competitive with
existing technology. Floating offshore wind platform technology offers the
following benefits: 1) reduction of reliance on foreign energy sources, (2)
development of a renewable, carbon-free energy, and 3) creation of domestic
manufacturing and service jobs focused on offshore wind energy.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: University
of Maine (lead institution) and Maine Maritime Academy; Federal Laboratory:
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); Private Sector Organizations:
Cianbro Corporation and Maine Composites Alliance; and State Organizations:
Governor?s Ocean Energy Task Force and Maine Technology Institute (MTI).

