* 0917794
* Soft Condensed Matter Physics:  Soft Meets Biology Conference: New London, NH; August 9-14, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* David Nelson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 04/30/2010
* USD 12,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0917794 PI: Nelson, David ORG: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Gordon Research Conference on Soft
Condensed Matter Physics: Soft Meets Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT: The Conference will address an interesting and timely group of topics at
the interface of condensed matter physics and quantitative biology, and an
exceptionally strong group of speakers has been assembled. Topics include
Biophysics of Viruses, Directed Assembly of Biopolymers, Biologically Inspired
Materials Science, Collective Effects in Soft Matter, Cooperative Effects in
Bacteria, Genetic Regulation and Evolution, Biophysics of Lipids and Polymers,
Motors and Forces in Biology, and Self-Organization and Self-
Assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The Conference will bring
together scientists from the soft matter and materials communities to encourage
interdisciplinary discussion of issues of mutual interest. The organizers have
given appropriate attention to the application of NSF funding to broadening
participation, with a significant number of females included among the speakers
and session chairs. More than 25% of the total proposed budget for the
Conference is devoted to supporting participation by students, postdoctorals,
and early career faculty. Female applicants and applicants from underrepresented
groups will be targeted for use of these earmarked funds.&lt;br/&gt;