* 0917070
* Global Graphs: A Middleware for Data Intensive Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2013
* USD 515,997.00

It is often the case that the time and effort required to develop effective and
efficient software on high-end computing systems is the bottleneck in many areas
of science and engineering. This project is building a novel middleware
framework called Global Graphs that targets this bottleneck. Global Graphs takes
a data-structure centric view of shared data where graph-based dynamic data
structures drive the development of the rest of the system.

A key scientific outcome of this proposed framework is to allow the programmer
to have multiple views of the shared data as well as multiple views of the
control and tasking model. This flexibility can be leveraged along a discrete
scale of data and process views depending on whether the goal is to develop a
quick prototype for validating ideas on small scale problems, or the goal is
efficient realization on large scale problems, or something in between these two
extremes. An additional outcome will be the development of a performance
feedback engine that will provide the programmer insights into parts of the
program to focus on for performance tuning.

The proposed work has important implications for a range of domains requiring
the processing of large scale datasets, including data mining, scientific
computing and XML data management. The broader outcomes of this work will be to
train capable undergraduate and graduate students. The PIs are actively
encouraging under-represented minorities to participate in this effort.