* 0917985
* PFI: ACTiVATE at NIH Program
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Ellen Hemmerly, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2013
* USD 599,625.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), an NSF PFI graduate
(0438617), and Johns Hopkins University (JHU), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee)--seeks to create the
first applied entrepreneurial training program focused on meeting the special
needs of post doctoral fellows (postdocs) in federal laboratories. With 10% of
all postdocs in the U.S. working in Maryland, these highly-trained scientists
are a valuable, yet untapped, resource for economic development in the region.
The ACTiVATE at NIH program will build on the success of the original ACTiVATE
(Achieving the Commercialization of Technology in Ventures through Applied
Training for Entrepreneurs) program at UMBC. While the original program was
focused on training mid-career women to commercialize technologies from
universities and federal labs in the State of Maryland, the ACTiVATE at NIH
program focuses on training postdocs in their final year to start companies
based on technologies from the National Institutions of Health (NIH). Following
the proven ACTiVATE model, postdocs will partner with individuals from the
business community to select technologies identified and screened from the NIH
Office of Technology Transfer. These individuals will follow a year long,
applied training program, customized to address the specific needs of postdocs.
The goal of the program is to start 10-12 technology-based companies in
Maryland, and train 45 postdocs and 45 business people to commercialize
technologies from NIH. The Program will extend to significant numbers of
postdocs awareness of, and information about, entrepreneurship opportunities in
technology fields. The training will take a learn-by-doing approach that can be
disseminated to, and replicated at, other federal labs in other regions of the
country&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACTiVATE at NIH program will provide a model
for teaching scientists to work with business people and commercialize
innovations from their own laboratories that can be used at other research
institutions across the country and in other parts of the world. The formation
of new ventures will create wealth, build the regional economy, and provide new
products that will improve the national well-being. At the same time, the
program will demonstrate to postdocs across the country that entrepreneurial
careers are a viable alternative to academia. The ACTiVATE at NIH program will
increase the number of university start-ups in Maryland, and innovations from
NIH and other federal labs will be commercialized. Through a partnership with
JHU's Carey Business School, the ACTiVATE at NIH program will be studied and
modified so it can evolve into a program that could be offered by prestigious
business schools in a way that would complement their traditional
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) (lead
institution), Johns Hopkins University (JHU)(Carey Business School), Montgomery
College (Montgomery County Community College), and George Mason University;
Private Sector Organizations: Human Workflows, LLC and Rockville Economic
Development, Inc.; Local and Federal Governmental Organizations: Incubator
Network of Montgomery County and NIH-Office of Technology Transfer.