* 0917719
* Collaborative Resarch:  Terrestrial Support of Lake Food Webs:  A Multi-Isotope Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 228,020.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The support of animals in ecosystems ultimately comes from two sources: primary
production within an ecosystem (e.g. newly grown plant material) or primary
production imported from other ecosystems (e.g. inputs of terrestrial material
to an aquatic system). In lakes, it is well known that external inputs are large
compared to internal primary production, but how these materials support lake
food webs is less well documented. Deuterium is a stable isotope of hydrogen and
deuterium content of terrestrial and aquatic primary producers is significantly
different. Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios, while less well
contrasted, are also helpful, when coupled with deuterium, in discriminating
sources of consumer support. Thus, integrated analysis of hydrogen, carbon and
nitrogen stable isotopes can distinguish the use of internal versus external
primary production by lake animals and microbes. In this proposal the PIs will
use measurements of the stable isotopes carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen along
with a new modeling approach to test hypotheses about variation in terrestrial
subsidies of aquatic consumers and how these vary among different types of
lakes. The multi-isotope approach will also be applied to a whole lake nutrient
fertilization experiment to test differences in the support of benthic versus
pelagic consumers by external organic matter. This research will directly
measure variation in the support of consumers by external materials and
contribute to understanding the drivers of variation among ecosystems in these
processes.

Several undergraduates and 2 graduate students will receive training through
this research in ecosystem ecology, limnology, modeling, and stable isotope
methodology. Results from this research will contribute directly to courses
taught by the PIs. The stable isotope model to be utilized in this study is a
tool that will be of interest to other researchers. The model which runs on open
access software will be made available through our website along with
documentation, tutorials, and test data. In addition, the PIs propose to sponsor
a half-day workshop at a national meeting on modeling methods in isotopic
studies. Providing a multi-isotope model approach to the larger research
community will be a significant component of the Broader Impacts of this
project.