* 0917899
* PFI: The Collaboration for Leveraging Energy And Nanotechnology (CLEAN) Project
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Pradeep Haldar, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type III (C: A) partnership
between the College of Nanoscale Science & Engineering (CNSE) at University of
Albany, State University of New York (UAlbany), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee), and Marist College
(Poughkeepsie, NY), an NSF PFI graduated grantee (0438561). This Collaboration
for Leveraging Energy and Nanotechnology (CLEAN) focuses on specific efforts
that include: 1) fostering of extensive information exchange amongst industry,
university, and government stakeholders; 2) expanding knowledge transfer through
the Nanotech Innovation in Renewable Energy (NIRE) efforts; and 3) creating a
workforce development program based on industry needs. These activities, managed
by the Energy and Environmental Technology Application Center (E2TAC) at CNSE,
accelerate the integration of nanotechnology in alternative energy technologies
among businesses located in the Tech Valley Region of Upstate New York. Drawing
on cutting edge research in nanotechnology and the capability of many of the
nation's leading advanced energy technology businesses that utilize
nanotechnology, the project provides increased organization and coordination
that is needed to share and communicate the industry's most pressing needs to
academia and to transfer the most appropriate technologies from academia to
industry.

Through its outreach and Energy Innovation Camp, the project will present to the
public and key stakeholders from legislators to high school students the
importance, challenges, and opportunities of developing clean energy
technologies. Through its Energy Test Farm, the project will provide an
opportunity for workforce training and education by facilitating competency to
develop, install, maintain, and service high tech energy related equipment such
as solar cells, fuel cells, and energy efficiency devices through established
training programs. The ability to provide this expertise to manufacturing and
end-user organizations will serve to accelerate deployment of these new
technologies. The project leverages significant physical and research
infrastructure that is in place at CNSE to grow the regional economy. By 2015,
New York's target is to supply 45 percent of its electricity needs through
improved energy efficiency and clean renewable energy. Within the rich context
of nanotechnology education and outreach at CNSE, this project focuses on
applying nanotechnology to "clean energy related applications" and in so doing,
it has the potential to make major contributions to New York's "45 by 15"
program, one of the most aggressive and ambitious clean energy goals in the
nation.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: College of
Nanoscale Science and Engineering (CNSE) at UAlbany (lead institution) and
Marist College; Private Sector Organizations: New Energy New York (NENY),
Arsenal Business and Technology Partnership, Center for Economic Growth; and
State and Local Government Organizations: Empire State Development (ESD), New
York State Foundation for Science Technology and Innovation (NYSTAR), New York
State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA), and Saratoga
Technology + Energy Park (STEP).