* 0917447
* Academic Travel Support for the Process Systems Engineering Conference 2009 in Salvador Brazil: August 16-20, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Lorenz Biegler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2010
* USD 22,500.00

0917447&lt;br/&gt;Biegler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a travel grant for 30 U.S. chemical
engineering junior-level academics (graduate students, postdoctoral researchers
and assistant professors) to participate in Process Systems Engineering
Conference (PSE 2009), August, 16-20, 2009 in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. The
budgeted allocation of $750 per person is for partial airfare or registration
fee support. The special focus of the PSE 2009 is Sustainability, Energy and
Engineering. PSE 2009 is the tenth in the triennial series of international
conferences on process systems engineering initiated in 1982. The PSE
conferences are the premier meetings for process systems engineering,
encompassing the areas of process design, control and operations. Previous
venues for these meetings include Keystone, Colorado, USA (2000), Kunming, China
(2003) and Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany (2006). The purpose of the meeting is
to bring together the worldwide PSE community of researchers and practitioners
who are involved in the creation and application of computing-based
methodologies for planning, design, operation, control and maintenance of
chemical, petrochemical and biological process industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The special focus of
PSE 2009 is on the topic of how these PSE methods and tools can support
sustainable resource systems and emerging technologies in the areas of green
engineering, i.e., the environmentally conscious and energy efficient design and
operation of these processes.&lt;br/&gt;