* 0917660
* Early Epipaleolithic in the Western Highlands of Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2016
* Deborah Olszewski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 246,227.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Deborah I. Olszewski and
Maysoon al-Nahar will lead an international team on a three-year project
investigating late Pleistocene hunter-gatherer adaptations in the Jordanian
Western Highlands (Transjordanian Plateau). During this period, changes in
behavioral strategies used to exploit landscape resources led to long-term
processes that resulted in one of the key economic transitions in prehistory,
the origins of agriculture, which in turn fueled the development of
civilizations and state-based societies. This Western Highlands project focuses
on Early Epipaleolithic (ca. 25,000 to 18,000 calibrated years BP) hunter-
gatherer strategies during a period of major climatic change, including the Last
Glacial Maximum and a climatic amelioration, all of which impacted plant and
animal communities. Previous research at Ohalo II, Sea of Galilee, which dates
to the Last Glacial Maximum, documented extensive use of wild cereals (barley).
What is not clear, however, is the extent to which intensive use of wild cereals
was a strategic economic pattern for these groups across the region and whether
this strategy persisted through time or was reintroduced just prior to the onset
of food production economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the Jordanian
landscape is currently under-explored from this perspective. To this end, the
Western Highlands project will investigate three sites that are situated in
different ecological zones - Mediterranean forest, Irano-Turanian steppe, and
open parkland - covering the Late Glacial Maximum and the succeeding climatic
rebound. Specific tasks include 1) mapping sites with a Total Station; 2) point
proveniencing all cultural materials (stone artifacts, fauna, shell, etc.) and
samples recovered during excavations with the Total Station for accurate
locations and to examine site taphonomy; 3) specialist analysis of fauna and
samples for pollen, phytoliths, macrobotanical remains, radiocarbon dating, and
geoarchaeology, which will yield data on subsistence, chronology, and landscape
use; 4) field analyzing stone artifacts which will inform about site activities
and mobility; 5) labeling and properly curating all cultural materials; and, 6)
storing all project data, including images, in databases, as well as making this
information available on a project website which will include a public-oriented
component (including a section in Arabic). Understanding Early Epipaleolithic
decisions and strategy options regarding food resource use in different habitats
is the primary intellectual merit of this project and a crucial step that will
provide new and important data relevant to how hunter-gatherer settlement and
subsistence strategies are modified in the face of climatic and
paleoenvironmental changes, leading to more informed insight into how
domestication economies may have originated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of
its broader impacts, the Western Highlands project is designed as an
international partnership between Jordanian and non-Jordanian (U.S., France,
Croatia, U.K.) participants at all levels from the Principal Investigators to
the student members. In particular, each Jordanian student will be paired with a
non-Jordanian student; this will facilitate learning different archaeological
methods from each other, as well as result in enhanced cultural understanding.
All student participants will be trained in Total Station use, lithic analysis,
excavation techniques, and Jordanian prehistory prior to the advent of
agriculture. Additionally, the PIs and specialists will offer opportunities for
students to use the project materials for theses, and encourage the students to
collaborate as co-authors on project publications.