* 0917538
* SGER: High-resolution digital scanning of the Thermopolis Archaeopteryx
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Jacques Gauthier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 07/31/2011
* USD 41,996.00

High Resolution Digital Scanning ofthe Thermopolis
Archaeopteryx&lt;br/&gt;Jacques Gautier and Ryan Carney, Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fossil bird Archaeopteryx (meaning ancient
wing), the earliest and most primitive flying dinosaur, lived in the Jurassic
Period around 150 million years ago. It is the critical missing link between
extinct dinosaurs and modern birds, and belonged to a group of dinosaurs most
closely related to the raptors made famous in the movie, Jurassic Park. The
spectacular quality of the Thermopolis specimen, the most complete and best-
preserved of the ten known Archaeopteryx fossils makes this a key specimen for
understanding the early evolution of flight, and firmly places it in the center
of centuries-long debate on the origin of birds. The specimen will be scanned in
Livermore, California at the national security research facility, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). This particular scanning process, never
before used in paleontology, will combine several different state-of-the-art
digital scanning technologies normally used to scan space shuttle wings and
nuclear warheads to obtain unprecedented resolution of the fossil in 3D.
Additionally, given the exciting and novel nature of this project, LLNL has
pledged to substantially reduce the scanning charges, thereby providing scans
that are not only of better quality, but at a better price than what could be
achieved elsewhere. However, the narrow window of opportunity to scan this
privately-owned specimen in summer of 2009 adds urgency to this unprecedented
opportunity. Scanning will digitally preserve this important fossil for future
scientific study and educational use. It will provide the opportunity to examine
the entire anatomy of Archaeopteryx in high-resolution 3D, and compare it to
that of its closest living relatives, the alligator and the pigeon. Results will
be published and made available online for scientists and the public. This may
also include interactive 3D images and animations that can be manipulated
through web browsers, which would allow the public to easily visualize and
understand complex concepts related to anatomy and evolution. The data from this
project will in turn spur innovative research in a number of subsequent studies
as well. This includes an anticipated project to reconstruct and animate the
skeleton and muscles of Archaeopteryx in 3D, in order to study how well this
animal was able to fly. These subsequent studies may provide crucial new
insights into the trees down vs. ground up origin-of-flight debate, and greatly
enhance our understanding of the evolution of birds. Such findings will reach
broad audiences through museum exhibits, scientific presentations to the public,
and diverse published material in formats understandable and useful to non-
scientists. These efforts will have Broader Impacts for promoting the global
participation of geographically-underrepresented groups, and for fundamentally
enhancing the teaching and understanding of evolutionary science.