* 0917693
* DDIG: The Social Context of Naming Conventions and Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Jack Shoemaker, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,966.00

Graduate student Jack C. Shoemaker (Southern Methodist University), under the
supervision of Dr. Robert V. Kemper, will undertake research on the social
contexts of naming practices. In many societies, names constitute a social
commentary, and thus convey important information that otherwise would be
invisible to social scientific analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be carried out as a multi-generational study of the personal names that members
of the Ma'di population of northern Uganda give their children. The Ma'di are a
good site for the development of onomastic (naming) theory because of their
particular naming practices. A high percentage of Ma'di children are named by
their mothers, who live as perpetual outsiders in the clans of their husbands. A
name often reflects the the mother's circumstances at the time the child was
born. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shoemaker will gather and analyze the names of every
person from a sample of 30 multi-generational extended families. he will employ
systematic qualitative data gathering techniques such as pile sorts. He also
will gather data on birth order, important events that occurred around the time
they were born, who named the child, what the name meant, and what message the
name was intended to communicate. Those who gave names will be asked to explain
their choice of name. Since many names refer to death, the researcher will also
conduct interviews with each woman to place each of her children in a
reproductive history. To ascertain how well names communicate the messages
encoded in them, the researcher will ask groups of Ma'di to state what meanings
they attribute to a set of names, and will then compare the suggested meanings
to any messages the name givers intended to
communicate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because while names
and naming practices are known to be significant in human societies and to vary
cross-culturally, they have received little systematic attention. This research
will help to fill that significant gap. The research also will contribute new
information on the ethnography of the Ma'di people by highlighting issues that
women consider significant. This will make possible better social policy
addressing women's problems. The research also will contribute to the education
of a social scientist.