* 0917581
* My Climate, My Community: Sustainable Climate Change Exhibits for Rural Audiences
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Ross, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2012
* USD 74,346.00

This planning grant project addresses the problem that individuals and
communities in rural areas do not have access to typical informal science
education venues that help the public better understand significant issues that
impact their lives. A team of Cornell University investigators will develop
strategies to educate rural communities in New York State on science-based
issues such climate change and energy. The project seeks to determine how to
effectively meet audience needs through a set of sustainable traveling exhibits
tailored to very small rural venues. If successful, the practices could be
expanded into a nationwide initiative for rural communities.

The specific objectives of the planning work are to determine the most effective
strategies for communicating science-based topics, the baseline knowledge of the
communities on the topics; how to engage communities that are under-served by
traditional informal science education venues; which human behaviors after the
interventions are responsive to the proposed efforts; and how they can broaden
their efforts to create a robust model for the nation. Steps to achieve these
objectives will include: regional and local climate change opinion surveys, the
establishment of rural partnerships and networks, content materials development
targeted at specific audiences and regions, development of prototypes of small
traveling exhibits, experiments to foster learning in rural communities through
Web 2.0, groups and individual discussions, and internet dialogs.