* 0917435
* The Dynamics and Evolution of Semelparity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Jim Cushing, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Biological semelparity is a life history adaptation in which an individual
organism reproduces once and then, or shortly thereafter, dies. This
reproductive strategy is found throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. The
trade-offs between reproduction and survival and the distinctions between
semelparous and iteroparous life cycles have long been recognized as key issues
involved in the study of life history strategies. Major topics of interest are
the population dynamic consequences and the evolutionary advantages (or
disadvantages) of semelparity versus iteroparity. Recent developments in the
mathematical modeling of semelparity, using methods of nonlinear dynamics and
bifurcation theory, have established a fundamental dynamic dichotomy that is of
both biological and mathematical interest. From a mathematical point of view,
models for the dynamics of semelparous species lie outside the standard theory
of general structured population dynamics. Specifically, the fundamental
bifurcation theorem that deals with the passage from population extinction to
persistence (as the expected lifetime number of newborns produced by a newborn
increases through the critical value of one) fails to hold. The challenge of
determining the dynamic consequences of this fact have been met only in low
dimensional cases (i.e., short maturation periods) and even then not thoroughly.
These studies have established that, in lower dimensional cases, semelparous
models exhibit a dynamic dichotomy that consists, roughly speaking, of an
alternative between equilibration with overlapping generations and oscillations
with non-overlapping generations. The oscillations in the later case can be
strictly periodic, but also might be aperiodic. (They result from an invariant
loop whose structure is a heteroclinic cycle.) Which of the two dynamics results
(i.e., which is mathematically stable) depends on the magnitude of inter-stage
competition present (relative to intra-stage competition). The first part of
this project addresses the conjecture that this dynamic dichotomy is also
present in semelparous models of higher dimension, to quantify the amount of
inter-stage competition that results in an oscillatory dynamic, and to clarify
the nature of these oscillations. The methods involve stability analysis,
bifurcation methods, perturbation expansions, monotone semi-flow theory, the use
average Lyapunov functions, persistence theory, and numerical simulations. The
second part of the project addresses questions about the evolution of
semelparity and the possibility of its being an evolutionary stable strategy
(ESS). The method to be used is based on evolutionary game theory (and is called
Darwinian dynamics), a methodology that extends a population dynamic model to
include the dynamics of an evolving (mean phenotypic) trait, which in turn
affects the population dynamics (through its influence on vital birth, growth,
and death rates). The approach is primarily by means of bifurcation theory and
will depend on the dynamic studies in the first part of the project. Indeed,
part 2 will obtain (among other things) generalizations of the results in part 1
to an evolutionary setting. The theoretical results and methodology developed in
part 2 will then be used in applications that address specific evolutionary
questions. Using biologically reasonable trade-offs to build sub-models for
fecundity and survivorships as functions of an evolving trait, we will study the
circumstances under which semelparity is evolutionarily favored and when it is
not. The Darwinian dynamics approach allows the methods of nonlinear dynamics
and bifurcation theory to be applied to these evolutionary
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigations of many problems in biological
sciences are based fundamentally on an understanding of population dynamics.
This includes problems concerning the effects of climate change on ecosystems,
the spread and control of diseases and pests, the protection of endangered
species, the invasion of non-native species, the management of agricultural
systems, the operation of fisheries, the design of wildlife refuges, and many
others. Mathematical models derived to study problems such as these must, if one
hopes to obtain accurate descriptions and predictions, be based on accurate
dynamic models of the populations involved. For example, there is currently a
great deal of research being carried out to "downscale" global climate data,
i.e., to resolve the data to smaller scales, so that it can be used in
population (ecosystem) dynamic models, the ultimate goal being an ability to
predict the effects of future climate change on specific species of plants and
animals. Accurate models of population dynamics must take into account, to some
level of resolution, details concerning the life history strategy of species,
i.e., the growth and reproduction schedule by means of they optimize fitness.
Species with one type of life history will likely be quite differently affected
by climate change (or by an invasive species or diseases or management
decisions, etc.) than will be a species with a different life history.
Biologists recognize two broad types of life histories: one in which individuals
reproduce and then, or shortly thereafter, die (referred to as semelparity) and
individuals who have repeated reproductive events throughout their life
(referred to as iteroparity). There are numerous species throughout the plant
and annual kingdoms that are semelparous (annual plants, a great many insects,
some species of salmon, etc.). Models of semelparous population dynamics have
not received the attention, with regard to many of their important aspects, as
have those for iteroparous populations. Recent preliminary studies have shown
that semelparous populations exhibit dynamic features that are, in several
fundamental ways, very different from those typical iteroparous populations.
These features, among others, have to do with the propensity of semelparous
populations to exhibit periodic crashes and booms (as, for example, seen in the
notorious cicada cycles or disastrous outbreaks of forest insect pests). The
main goals of this research project are: (1) to develop a broad based theory of
semelparous population dynamics and understand the properties of population
oscillations (periodic outbreaks) and ascertain the conditions under which they
do and do not occur; (2) extend the population dynamic theory to an evolutionary
context so as to provide an understanding of how semelparous populations adapt
and evolve; (3) to apply the findings to carefully selected and derived models
of specific, important types of life histories studied in both theoretical and
applied ecology. The mathematical models to be used in this research are of a
type that is particularly accessible to those with limited backgrounds in the
mathematics of dynamical systems. Because of the quick learning curve associated
with these kinds of models, the project provides abundant research opportunities
for students (both undergraduate and graduate) that, on the one hand, introduces
them in an accessible context to sophisticated concepts and methods in the
mathematical theory of dynamical systems and, on the other hand, permits them to
carry out interesting applications that make solid contributions to biological
problems.