* 0917499
* MSB: Single Cell Ecology - Developing a new paradigm for the Microbial Diversity course of the Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Buckley, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 204,802.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microbial Diversity Summer Course
has been taught since 1971 at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole,
MA, and is internationally recognized as one of the great advanced research
courses in biology. This project will develop and implement new techniques and
develop a new course curriculum that fosters the application of single cell
ecological techniques as a paradigm to explore the microbial diversity, and will
train the next generation of scientists to apply this single cell paradigm.
Microorganisms are the most diverse and ubiquitous form of life on the planet,
they have fundamentally influenced the development of our biosphere, and they
continue to do so today, yet we are still only beginning to understand the vast
biodiversity of the microbial world and the principles that govern how these
organisms mediate and respond to changes in the biosphere. In addition, the
reservoir of genomic information contained within the microbial realm represents
a treasure trove for those interested in natural product discovery. The vast
majority of microorganisms in natural systems have yet to be cultivated in the
laboratory and characterized, and their genomes exhibit a degree of fluidity
unparalleled in other forms of life. As a result, individual cultivated isolates
may contain only a fraction of the total genetic diversity present in wild
populations. Perhaps it is not surprising then that microbes in captivity can at
times demonstrate different properties from their wild counterparts. Biologists
are still grappling with the implications of these discoveries, trying to
understand how these dynamic evolutionary mechanisms impact the ecology of
microorganisms and their ability to deliver ecosystem services. Single cell
approaches make it possible to examine the genotypes of individual cells using
single cell genome amplification or their activities using techniques like
secondary ion mass spectrometry (Nano-SIMS). These exciting developments are
providing information needed to build a fundamental understanding of the ecology
of diverse microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microbial Diversity course
is a research incubator that provides advanced training for individuals from a
variety of backgrounds who seek a fundamental understanding of microbial
diversity and its theoretical underpinnings. As such, the training provided in
the course has a unique impact that spans multiple fields that focus on the
diversity and ecology of microbial life. The course provides graduate students,
postdoctoral scholars, and established investigators from fields such as
microbiology, ecology, geobiology, biogeochemistry, marine biology,
environmental engineering, and even astrobiology and bioinformatics, with an
unequaled opportunity to receive training in advanced methods for exploring the
biodiversity of the natural world. The course also has a strong commitment to
the advancement of women in science and enhancing the participation of
underrepresented minorities. It is an immersive research experience consisting
of 6.5 weeks of lectures, laboratory exercises, field work, and it culminates
with self-directed research projects in which participants use their new
knowledge and skills to make novel discoveries, some of which have become career
research projects. Foremost investigators from around the world visit the course
every summer to participate in course mini-symposia, to lecture, and interact
with students in the laboratory and in the field. The immersive, integrative,
inter-disciplinary, and international nature of the course provides a training
opportunity that is currently not provided elsewhere in the United States. The
funding of this project will help support several students, fund visits by
numerous renowned investigators in single cell approaches to microbiology, and
provide material support for laboratory studies by the students.