* 0917663
* A "DAY AT THE NSF" For Presidents/CAOs of Minority-serving Institution Grantees
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2010
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Claudia M. Rankins
* 04/30/2010
* USD 103,903.00

Quality Education for Minorities Network's one-year project has the goal to
provide an opportunity for leadership of minority serving institutions (MSIs) to
learn about current priorities and initiatives at NSF and to reinforce their
role as catalysts for STEM initiatives on their campuses. The activities planned
are: i) a Day at NSF in Arlington, VA for Presidents/CAOs of fifty MSIs; ii)
dissemination of materials and follow-up evaluation on the effectiveness of the
activity.

NSF Day will expose participating Presidents/CAOs to new knowledge about and
understanding of the critical need for transformative research and education at
our Nation's higher education institutions. Through reflection with peers, NSF
staff, and program officers during NSF Day, participants will explore their
pivotal role in catalyzing innovative, integrated, and transformative STEM
initiatives on their campuses. NSF Day will foster ongoing relationships between
MSI leaders and NSF staff. through roundtable discussions. NSF staff and program
officers will become better informed about MSIs and their contributions to
advancing the STEM enterprise.

The expected outcomes of the project are that participants will benefit from
insights critical to the development of STEM education and research and become
aware of strategies that can be used to improve and transform STEM education and
research at their institutions.

QEM Network brings leadership and expertise in working with MSIs to this
project.