* 0917832
* 2009 MRS Symposium BB, "Material Systems and Processes for 3D Micro- and Nanoscale Fabrication &amp; Lithography,"  San Francisco, CA; April 14 - 16, 2009
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Stephen Kuebler, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 03/31/2010
* USD 4,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 0917832 PI: Mammarella, Paula ORG: Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: MRS Symposium BB on Materials Systems and
Processes for 3D Micro- and Nanoscale Fabrication and
Lithography&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This Materials Research
Society Symposium will provide a forum for presenting and discussing the latest
discoveries in material systems and processes for 3D microfabrication and their
application for preparing functional 3D micro- and nanoscale devices. The
growing interest in 3D fabrication and assembly approaches stems from the
shortcomings of past attempts simply to extend 2D micropatterning approaches to
form three-dimensional structures with high yield and reliability. Additionally,
the challenge extends to the ability to pattern a wide range of. materials
including polymers, semiconductors, ceramics, metals, biomaterials, and
composites. To address these challenges, the symposium topics will cover a range
of multidisciplinary topics from assembly and optical tweezers-based patterning
to lithography and direct-write approaches. A strong panel of speakers has been
assembled to describe both top-down and bottom-up methodologies, including DNA,
protein, and viron-directed assembly and self
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The symposium brings together
experts in top-down and bottom-up patterning techniques to promote an exchange
of ideas for combining these methods for specific applications. The organizers
have given appropriate attention to the NSF objectives of broadening
participation. Support provided by NSF will be used principally to support
participation by graduate students and early career faculty, with particular
attention to females and members of underrepresented groups. Plans for
announcing the availability of travel and subsistence support for these
populations are described as are appropriate procedures for selecting from the
applicants for this support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;