* 0917761
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Urban History and Political Complexity in First Millennium CE Thailand: The Kamphaeng Saen Documentation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Matthew Gallon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,720.00

Under the direction of Dr. Carla Sinopoli, Mr. Matthew Gallon will conduct
archaeological survey and excavation at the first millennium AD fortified town
of Kamphaeng Saen in central Thailand. Kamphaeng Saen is located in the
heartland of Thailand's first state, the Dvaravati kingdom (7th-10th century
AD). This poorly understood kingdom was located at the crossroads of the early
long-distance trade routes between East Asia and the Indian subcontinent. The
development of the Dvaravati kingdom coincided with an increase in the number
and the size of towns and cities in central Thailand. However, the relationship
between the development of the Dvaravati kingdom and the spread of urbanism in
central Thailand remains unclear. Gallon will investigate this relationship by
examining how changes in the size, organization, and function of a Dvaravati
town, Kamphaeng Saen, corresponded to the rise and fall of the Dvaravati
kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The urban centers of the ancient world exhibit a
wide range of forms and functions. Some urban centers were highly specialized
ceremonial centers, craft production centers, or military garrisons.
Alternatively, some towns and cities had more generalized functions and were
home to a wide range of different production and ceremonial activities. The
population density and number of different ethnic groups and social classes also
differed between urban centers. The extent to which the characteristics of an
urban center varied in response to the strength and goals of the political
authorities that controlled it remains unclear. This project will investigate
how Kamphaeng Saen changed in response to the development and decline of the
Dvaravati kingdom. Gallon will collect evidence of the spatial distribution of
monuments, craft production debris, and household objects at Kamphaeng Saen.
These different categories of evidence will enable him to assess how the site
size, population density, range of production activities, level of social
inequality, and investment in monuments changed over time at the settlement.
Finally, Gallon will compare Kamphaeng Saen to neighboring urban centers to
determine if there is a general pattern of urban change in central Thailand that
corresponds to the rise and fall of the Dvaravati kingdom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its intellectual significance, the project
will have several broader social impacts. Data collected during the project will
provide the basis for Gallon's doctoral dissertation, as well as several papers
to be presented at conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals. The
project will also train two Thai M.A. students from Silpakorn University
(Bangkok) in archaeological research design and field methods. The ancient town
of Kamphaeng Saen is currently a scout camp. Gallon will give presentations and
site tours to interested scout groups. Similarly, the local Kamphaeng Saen
school groups will also be invited to tour the site and excavations. The project
will engage the general public through an "open house" day at the site. After
completion of the project a small exhibit will be installed at the Kamphaeng
Saen monastery museum with an accompanying Thai-English publication. These
public outreach efforts are designed to increase the local community's awareness
of its rich cultural heritage and the importance of protecting ancient
settlements for potential development as tourist attractions.