* 0917933
* Comparative aspects of goal-oriented locomotion in decapod crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2007,03/31/2011
* Jim Belanger, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 03/31/2011
* USD 214,000.00

Lay Abstract for NSF Proposal # 0544639, "Comparative aspects of goal-oriented
locomotion in decapod crustaceans"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early in the twentieth
century, the Russian physiologist Nikolai Bernstein posed what has come to be
known as "the degrees of freedom problem": most movements can, in principle, be
produced by an infinite number of different combinations of muscle activity. For
example, a human reaching in space can attain a target through various
combinations of motion at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. How does the nervous
system choose among all of the possible ways of producing a desired motion? Is
the same motion always produced by the same combination of muscle activations?
Is this combination constant across motions, individuals, or even species?
Despite several decades of research, we still do not have clear answers to these
questions. Certainly part of the difficulty, at least in mammalian systems, is
the number of elements involved: even motion involving just a single joint
typically requires several muscles and the activity of hundreds, if not
thousands, of motor units. This project will approach the degrees of freedom
problem using legged locomotion in crabs (Carcinus, primarily a sideways-walking
crab, and Libinia, primarily a forwards-walking crab) as a model system.
Movements of each leg in these animals are controlled by only a few dozen motor
units. Dr Belanger will take advantage of the fact that crabs will orient to and
track plumes of attractive odorant (typically indicating a food source). This is
a natural behavior, and one that allows him to predict an area through which the
animal will locomote at a relatively constant speed. Animals will be placed in a
small recirculating flume, with an odor source at the upstream end. The source
will be placed so that the resulting plume of odorant passes through a "target
area" in the center of the flume. As the animal follows the odor plume and
passes through this area, multiple video cameras will monitor the movements of
each of the limb segments. A 3 D motion analysis system will be used to derive
the corresponding changes in joint angles. Simultaneously, the electrical
activity of leg muscles will be recorded to determine the patterns of muscle
activation underlying these movements. With these data Dr Belanger can begin to
ask how (or if) muscle activation differs for particular movements across
individuals and species, and how similar sets of muscles are used to produce
both forwards and sideways locomotion. In addition to answering a fundamental
question in motor control, these data will be extremely useful to engineers
designing biomimetic robots and smart prostheses. This project will provide
multidisciplinary training for both graduate and undergraduate students, in a
region designated as an EPSCoR state. In particular, undergraduate participants
in the project will be recruited, via Louisiana State University's summer
research programs, from historically black colleges in Louisiana and
Mississippi, and from primarily Hispanic schools in
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;