* 0917777
* Second International Conference on Self-Healing Materials; held in Chicago, IL, June 28-July 1, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Scott White, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 11/30/2009
* USD 25,000.00

This is a workshop proposal on an emerging subject area in multi-functional
materials. The particular focus is materials that have self-healing
functionality for engineering.

The concept of self-healing in artificial materials systems is relatively new,
arising from attempts to emulate one of the most beneficial properties of
biological materials ? the ability to recover from inflicted damage ? and
combine that with the many structural, chemical, optical and other properties
obtainable through synthetic processing. This new field is focused on
incorporating functionality that allows partial or full materials repair leading
to prolonged lifetimes, reduced maintenance and overall greater autonomy from
outside manipulation. An International Conference on Self-Healing Materials
(ICSHM) will bring together scientists, engineers, and technology managers from
across the world for an intensive series of research talks, poster
presentations, and group discussions on advances in the field. This conference
is scheduled for June 28-July 1, 2009 in Chicago, IL with 300 attendees
expected. Special scientific symposia are being organized on self-healing
cementitious materials, self-healing supramolecular polymers, mechanochemically
active polymers, thermally activated/ thermoplastic self-healing, self-healing
fibre-reinforced composite materials, self-healing metallic materials, self-
healing with internal liquid healing agents, numerical analysis tools for self-
healing, experimental techniques for assessment of self-healing, concepts and
limitations in self-healing materials