* 0917988
* PFI: From Whiteboard to Boardroom: Creating Innovation Infrastructure in Institutions with Modest R&amp;D Funding
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Donna Duffey, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI)
project is a Type III (A:C) partnership between the University of Missouri
Kansas City (UMKC), an NSF PFI graduate (0090578), and Johnson County Community
College (JCCC) (Overland Park, KS) and William Jewell College (Liberty, MO),
both institutions new to the PFI Program (defined as ones that have never been
PFI grantees). The Whiteboard to Boardroom (W2B) partnership seeks to maximize
the ability of all higher education institutions, including those with R&amp;D
funding of less than $100 million per year, to make a vital contribution to the
region's economy by creating a system that identifies commercialization
opportunities in the higher education institutions and seamlessly connects them
to myriad community resources that support business development. It focuses on
identifying, supporting, and capitalizing on existing resources in the Kansas
City region to realize technology commercialization. It will invoke a process
that creates a mechanism that "pulls" technologies out of the institution rather
than waiting for an innovator to ask for assistance with an idea and actively
moves them through the business development pathway. The W2B team brings
together faculty and professions that collectively have the knowledge of the
academic process and business creation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;W2B will provide a
replicable method to train faculty and students in the understanding of the
commercialization process. It will broaden the participation of all types of
academic institutions in the innovation process by defining ways that community
colleges and other non-research intensive institutions can contribute to this
process. It will create a technology platform supporting replication in other
communities. A partnership with the U.S. Small Business Administration (U.S.
SBA) will allow results to be disseminated directly to small business
development resources in universities and colleges around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: University of Missouri Kansas City (UMKC) (lead
institution), Johnson County Community College, William Jewell College, and
University of Kansas; Private Sector Organizations: Citizens Bank &amp; Trust
Company, Enterprise Center of Johnson County/Mid-America Angels; Kansas City
Area Life Science Institute, Kansas Women's Business Center/Women's Capital
Network, Kauffman Foundation, Polsinelli Shalton Flanigan Suelthaus PC, Show-Me
Angels, Tradebot Ventures, Inc., and KCSourceLink; State and Local Government
Organization: Missouri Technology Corporation; and Federal Government
Organization: U.S. SBA, Kansas City District Office (Kansas City, MO).