* 0917232
* HCC:  The Effect of Tiled Display on Performance in Multi-Screen Immersive Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Frederic Parke, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2012
* USD 266,172.00

New immersive display systems are emerging as platforms for presenting three
dimensional data and virtual worlds. However, little effort has been spent on
evaluating these systems or providing guiding design principles from a human
factors point of view. The PIs argue that interconnected tiled screens have the
potential to be as effective as more costly continuous image systems.
Demonstrating this potential would in effect significantly drive down the cost
of 3D immersive visualization, paving the way for much broader application areas
than are now possible (imagine, for example, a science teacher able to show her
students a 3D visualization of DNA and to have them interact with the model on a
low cost immersive display). To this end, in this project the PIs will compare
performance and user interaction on a low-cost, multi-screen spatially immersive
visualization system against a more expensive continuous image platform. Their
hypothesis is that the low-cost system will present a perceptually equivalent
visual experience, despite image seams introduced by the connecting display
screens. Psychophysical experimentation will compare the two systems through
human judgments based on performance. Project outcomes will also provide
insights into optimal hardware and software display configuration when building
large multi-screen displays. The PI has an extensive background in conducting
experiments involving human subjects, while the Co-PI brings expertise on
building and configuring next generation immersive displays, including one of
those to be used in this work, which was developed under a prior NSF award. The
team has access at Texas A&amp;M to two complementary immersive systems, putting
them in a unique position to conduct this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The knowledge and insights gained from this work should help make
immersive visualization systems available in areas currently unable to afford
such systems or to justify the expense, and thus advance discovery and
understanding by enhancing the infrastructure for research, while also promoting
teaching, training and learning by engaging more (and more diverse) students in
science and technology.