* 0917151
* RI:  Small: Region-based Probabilistic Models for Descriptive Scene Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Daphne Koller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,999.00

This project focuses on the task of providing a consistent, semantic
interpretation of all components of an image of an outdoor scene. The image is
automatically segmented into large regions, each of which is a coherent scene
component that is labeled with a rough geometric configuration (distance from
the camera and surface normal), and with one of a subset of semantic classes,
which include both background classes (such as water, grass, or road) and
specific object classes (such as person, car, cow, or boat). The approach is
based on the development of a holistic probabilistic model (a Markov random
field) whose parameters are automatically learned from data. The model exploits
both scene features and contextual relationships between scene components (e.g.,
cows are typically found on grass and boats on water). It also utilizes object
shape and appearance models to identify specific object instances in the image.
To address the complexities of reasoning using these richly structured models,
new probabilistic inference algorithms are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project helps train graduate and undergraduate students within the PI's group,
as well as students in an annual project class in this area. The project also
develops significant infrastructure, including an extensive data set of labeled
images and efficient inference algorithms, which are freely distributed to the
research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to provide a coherent
interpretation of a scene composition is an important step towards automatic
image annotation, with benefits both for image retrieval and for providing image
summaries to visually impaired users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;