* 0917593
* Differential Object Marking in Spanish, Hindi and Romanian Heritage Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2013
* USD 303,444.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heritage speakers are adults who grew
up hearing and even speaking a language other English but who are now more
comfortable in English. Recent studies of heritage speakers have documented
incomplete acquisition of aspects of inflectional morphology and syntax. This
project investigates heritage languages as linguistic systems in their own right
and their accompanying patterns of incomplete acquisition. The research
questions addressed are 1) Which specific aspects of a native speaker's full
grammar are systematically affected under incomplete acquisition and 2) What
language-internal and language-external factors contribute to the vulnerability
of particular grammatical features? The project investigates these questions
with respect to the domain of Differential Object Marking (DOM): the overt
morphological marking of some direct objects. Previous results demonstrate the
fragility of DOM and dative case marking in Spanish heritage speakers. This
research will study DOM in Spanish, Hindi and Romanian heritage speakers. These
three languages were chosen because the salience of the DOM marker varies: it is
a vocalic preposition in Spanish (a), a syllabic preposition in Romanian (pe),
and a syllabic post-position in Hindi (-ko). The project will test the
hypothesis that the acoustic salience of the object marker contributes to its
erosion or retention in these heritage languages. Experimental data will be
collected from native speakers with full command of the language, and heritage
speakers of each language who were born in or immigrated to the United States in
childhood. Extensive language background questionnaires and oral/written
production, comprehension and grammaticality judgment tasks will be used. The
study is one of the first theoretically informed large-scale investigations of
the acquisition of DOM in different heritage languages, and the first study on
Hindi and Romanian heritage speakers. Since the experimental design includes a
sizable number of fluent native speakers of Spanish, Hindi and Romanian, the
results will also add to existing studies of DOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will impact Spanish, Hindi and Romanian linguistics, and linguistic
theory in general. More centrally, it will have theoretical implications for
first language acquisition and language maintenance/loss in bilingual settings.
It will shed light on the range of early bilingual acquisition as a function of
age and linguistic environment. It will provide information on how age of second
language acquisition affects linguistic competence in heritage language
speakers. Most importantly, by identifying what heritage speakers retain from
childhood, what biographical factors contribute to language maintenance, as well
as potential linguistic gaps in their knowledge, the results will inform the
teaching of heritage languages. Heritage language instruction is a new field in
urgent need of solid basic research findings from which to build sound
pedagogical materials.