* 0917129
* III: Small: Making and Tracing:  Architecture-centric Information Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Taylor, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,596.00

In many scientific domains information is scattered across numerous interrelated
and heterogeneous artifacts. In software engineering in particular, artifacts
such as requirements, design documents, and code are often isolated by tools,
development groups, and geographic locations. Current traceability approaches ?
attempts to link related information ? fall short in tracing across
heterogeneous artifacts and in supporting user-customized links. This project is
aimed at crossing these information barriers, enabling the creation of
traceability links between related artifacts, to support tasks such as impact
analysis and software maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets
automated architecture-centric traceability which centers links on the
architecture, enabling scalable and flexible link capture. Furthermore,
stakeholders control link capture, enabling them to directly benefit from the
links. The prevalent approach to automatic traceability is to recover links from
existing artifacts. In contrast, this project pursues prospective generation of
trace links which captures links in situ, while artifacts are generated or
modified, enabling the capture of contextual relationships. Open hypermedia
adapters enable the capture of links across heterogeneous artifacts and the
rendering of resources at different levels of granularity. Users can determine
the artifacts to trace and the link semantics to assign via externally
customizable rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is applicable to data
provenance capture in e-Science. Prospective capture can aid in inferring
experiment design and capturing links across heterogeneous artifacts like
publications, data files, and plots. The results will also be valuable to the
development of safety critical systems where satisfaction of all requirements is
part of safety assurance.&lt;br/&gt;