* 0917315
* CSR:Small:Estimating the End-system Network I/O Bottleneck Rate to Optimize Transport Layer Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Dipak Ghosal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 410,946.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The bottleneck for the transferring data at very high speeds
often turns out to be the end-system performance. In the absence of definitive
knowledge about the workload at the receiving end-system, the sender's
transmission rate often overshoots the critical bottleneck rate of the receiver.
This typically results in oscillations between the extremes and poor
performance. To optimize the performance of the transport protocols and achieve
the important flow control functionality, it is important to estimate the
receiving end-system effective bottleneck rate. In this project we will use
modeling and active analysis of the end-system to estimate this rate. We will
develop queueing network models for representing the different multicore and
multiprocessor end-systems running different types of workloads. We will develop
a software tool to be integrated with existing transport protocols. We will
carry out experimental analysis for different types of end-systems with
different configurations and workloads. We will apply and extend methods that
have been proposed to address the limitations of queueing network models for
performance analysis of computer systems with bursty workloads and correlated
service times. The software tool will be made available to the research
community to analyze and optimize distributed applications and systems. The
research project will provide a framework to train graduate and undergraduate
students in both analytical and experimental methods, and develop knowledge and
intuition about next generation computer systems and distributed applications.