* 0917228
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Mining and Optimizing Ad Hoc Workflows
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Xifeng Yan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 264,607.00

Ad hoc workflows are everywhere in service industry,
scientific&lt;br/&gt;research, as well as daily life, such as workflows of
customer&lt;br/&gt;service, trouble shooting, information search, etc.
Optimizing ad&lt;br/&gt;hoc workflows thus has significant benefits to the
society.&lt;br/&gt;Currently the execution of ad hoc workflows is based on
human&lt;br/&gt;decisions, where misinterpretation, inexperience, and
ineffective&lt;br/&gt;processing are not uncommon, leading to operation
inefficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to
design and develop&lt;br/&gt;fundamental models, concepts, and algorithms to
mine and optimize ad&lt;br/&gt;hoc workflows. The project includes novel
research on the following&lt;br/&gt;key areas: (1) Network Modeling and
Structure Mining. A network model&lt;br/&gt;is built that statistically captures
the execution characteristics&lt;br/&gt;of ad hoc workflows, and is optimized to
improve the execution of&lt;br/&gt;new workflows with respect to different
optimization objectives.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Workflow Artifact Mining. The network
model built on workflow&lt;br/&gt;executions is then extended with workflow
artifact mining to realize&lt;br/&gt;an optimization system that is able to take
advantage of both&lt;br/&gt;executions and text contents. (3) Role Discovery and
Relation&lt;br/&gt;Assessment. A computational framework is built to analyze the
roles&lt;br/&gt;and relationships of agents involved in ad hoc workflow
executions&lt;br/&gt;in order to further optimize
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances from this project include models to
represent ad hoc&lt;br/&gt;workflows, algorithms for mining hidden collaborative
models, and&lt;br/&gt;techniques that optimize ad hoc workflow processing. The
project&lt;br/&gt;bridges two emerging research areas: service science and
network&lt;br/&gt;science, and enriches the principles and technologies of data
mining.&lt;br/&gt;It also enhances research infrastructure through the
collaboration of&lt;br/&gt;team members from different areas (data mining,
database, and&lt;br/&gt;network). This research is tightly integrated with
education through&lt;br/&gt;student mentoring and curriculum development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publications, software and course materials that
arise&lt;br/&gt;from this project will be disseminated on the project
website:&lt;br/&gt;URL: http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~xyan/smartflow.htm