* 0917918
* Pathways of Power and the Colonial Process in Petén, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Timothy Pugh, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 194,443.00

With National Science Foundation funding, Dr. Timothy Pugh and a team of
international scholars will investigate the creation of political power and the
flow of valued goods among the Itza, the last independent Maya kingdom, during
initial contact with the Spanish and subsequent colonialism. This research will
involve two seasons of archaeological excavation and laboratory analysis in
Petén, Guatemala. Team members will include professors and students from the
United States and Guatemala.

This project will illuminate the roles of, and reactions to objects appropriated
in situations of cultural contact and how, over time, these roles/reactions
relate to social value and power. The Petén is a particularly good place to
study these issues since its Maya inhabitants were able to successfully deter
Spanish incursion, while adopting some European material culture far longer than
other Maya groups. Items produced by Colonial powers and traded into groups
unaccustomed to them are frequently appropriated initially as highly valued
objects of political and religious power for the receivers. As time passes and
the relations between the intruders and the indigenous populations become closer
and intermeshed, the roles of appropriated objects likewise change. The project
will investigate these complex changes in power relations as they are manifest
in material culture using Spanish-Maya contact at the lowland Itza Maya sites of
Tayasal and Nixtun-Ch'ich', Guatemala, as a case studies. The project will
explore the shifting role of European material culture in the Itza socio-
political system from the Contact period (A.D. 1525-1697) through the early
Spanish Colonial period (A.D. 1697-1750), and the effect of Spanish conquest and
subsequent colonialism upon Maya social organization and political power.

Through the examination of the practices of restriction and redistribution of
European items, the work will illuminate something of the value of these
objects. The study of restrictions of use and redistribution by Maya elite of
iron, glass, and other European objects will reveal how colonial objects can be
strategically appropriated and rejected in the course of contact. The
examination of social restrictions will inevitably tell us something about
gender relations in the stream of colonial process, as we know that the
Spaniards gave many of these items to women. The project will reveal the
hierarchies of power and their transformations over the course of contact and
conquest.

The research will make a number of broader impacts including the training of
both U.S. and Guatemalan students. Dr. Pugh has a longstanding relationship with
Centro Universitario del Petén (CUDEP) and will support CUDEP students' efforts
to complete research practicums and theses at various levels. This particular
impact is critical as students from Petén do not have the resources to undertake
and complete their research without external collaborations. Graduate students
from The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, Southern Illinois
University Carbondale, and other universities will also be supported and will
conduct research leading to graduate degrees.