* 0917213
* NeTS:Small:A Unified Lookup Framework to Enable the Rapid Deployment of New Protocols in High-Speed Routers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Cristian Estan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2013
* USD 385,775.00

&lt;br/&gt;High-end routers and switches perform performance-critical
lookups&lt;br/&gt;into large data based on network packet content. Current
designs rely&lt;br/&gt;on specialized hardware modules for high performance.
While mostly&lt;br/&gt;sufficient, emerging new protocols create a problem; for
these to be&lt;br/&gt;deployed, expensive equipment upgrades are required. To
support the rapid deployment of new data plane protocols, we need a flexible
hardware/software framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing
such a unified framework for future&lt;br/&gt;network devices with four
components: a) an abstract execution model&lt;br/&gt;to represent hardware, b) a
toolchain to ease implementation, d)&lt;br/&gt;quantitative performance
evaluation of protocols, and d) programmable&lt;br/&gt;hardware architectures
specialized for the core operations in network&lt;br/&gt;protocols. Leveraging
trends in tiled architectures, the project is&lt;br/&gt;developing a specialized
tiled architecture that moves computation close&lt;br/&gt;to storage and thus
provide efficient lookups. The project is also&lt;br/&gt;investigating how these
design methodologies extend beyond protocol&lt;br/&gt;processing to payload
inspection as required by intrusion prevention,&lt;br/&gt;application
identification and other functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deploying and
implementing new protocols is challenging. This project&lt;br/&gt;will result in
specification of flexible hardware for high-end&lt;br/&gt;routers. This
flexibility to support multiple protocols using a single&lt;br/&gt;toolchain and
architecture framework will reduce development costs of&lt;br/&gt;future high-
end routers and speedup the deployment of new&lt;br/&gt;protocols. Another
outcome will be the open-source release to&lt;br/&gt;the academic community of
the toolchain for developing high-speed&lt;br/&gt;implementation of protocols,
reference implementations of various&lt;br/&gt;protocols, standard data sets,
and a NetFPGA implementation of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed hardware architecture.