* 0917345
* SHF: Small: RUI: Observationally Cooperative Multithreading
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Christopher Stone, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2013
* USD 308,875.00

Modern processors are designed to perform more tasks simultaneously, rather than
to perform single tasks more quickly. These new multicore processors are
powerful, but using that power is challenging; interesting problems often divide
irregularly, requiring difficult and error-prone coordination among subtasks.
Consequently, parallel programming is considered hard to learn and harder to do.
Observationally Cooperative Multithreading (OCM) is a new approach. In programs
written for cooperative multithreading (CM), subtasks take turns and execute one
at a time. The CM model is well-known to rule out conflicts and to simplify
programming. OCM takes these same programs but runs them on modern multicore
machines, executing subtasks simultaneously when there are no conflicts. The
result can be a speed and resource-utilization benefit with no extra complexity
for programmers. Potentially, OCM could make concurrency more accessible to a
broad audience, including introductory students. The research will develop OCM
implementations using techniques such as Transactional Memory and Lock
Inference, with the aim of fostering adoption of OCM by a large user community.
Realistic benchmarks will be constructed to analyze the speed and scalability of
OCM implementations, and to verify ease of programming in the OCM model.