* 0917082
* NeTS: Small: Scalable Wireless Mesh Network Technology at the Edge for Efficient Mobile Video Data Access on Demand
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kien Hua, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 07/31/2013
* USD 420,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing popularity of wireless
networks at the periphery of the Internet, combined with the need for ubiquitous
access to video on demand (VoD) applications, calls for a new generation of
video streaming technology. This research is investigating techniques to enable
efficient VoD service over wireless mesh networks (WMN). Four methods are
studied: wPatching is a multicast technique designed to leverage the broadcast
nature of WMN to support VoD applications; Dynamic Stream Merging utilizes smart
mesh nodes to merge video streams in order to conserve wireless resources; a
hybrid environment uses mobile nodes as relay nodes to extend the service range
of the WMN; and Constrained Multicast provides efficient and seamless handoffs
for mobile users in the WMN by eliminating Internet router (layer-3) handoff
delay. Along with extensive simulation studies, a prototype is developed to
experiment with the Dynamic Stream Merging and Constrained Multicast techniques.
These new streaming methods provide an enabling technology to extend VoD
applications beyond the traditional wired environment to reach mobile users on
wireless networks at the edges. The result is a new paradigm for efficient
management of VoD traffic over a WMN. Applications such as digital libraries,
distance learning, public information systems, electronic commerce, and video
entertainment will benefit from this innovative streaming technology. The
software and protocols developed for this project will be made available to
other researchers to facilitate and encourage future research and application
experimentation.