* 0917846
* Participant Support for 2009 Snowbird Workshop on Particle Astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology; Salt Lake City, UT
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2009,01/31/2010
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 01/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide participant support for the 2009 Snowbird Particle
astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology workshop (SnowPAC 2009, Feb 1-7, 2009 in
Salt Lake City, Utah). The SnowPAC conference is an international conference
that seeks to review the current status of recent developments in particle
astrophysics, dark matter, dark energy and cosmology, to establish new cross-
connections between these disciplines, and to establish new collaborative ties
between individuals working in these research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funds will be used for increasing participation in the conference by young
scientists, including graduate students, postdocs, and young faculty members.
These funds will be used to waive registration fees, travel, and local expenses
of these individuals in order to enable their participation in the conference.
Improving the participation by under-represented minorities is a high priority
for use of these funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of this proposal
derives through three elements:&lt;br/&gt;1) Development of new, cross-
disciplinary research ties between young scientists;&lt;br/&gt;2) Potential
start of a new, yearly conference series in particle astrophysics, astronomy and
cosmology that can result in a long term effort to provide a forum to integrate
research ideas between particle astrophysics, astronomy and cosmology;
and&lt;br/&gt;3) Providing increased national visibility and research
connections for the growing astronomy and astrophysics community in the
Intermountain West.&lt;br/&gt;