* 0917134
* SHF:  Small:  Rethinking Computer Architecture for Secure and Resilient Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Ruby Lee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Our society, economy and national security are critically dependent on computers
and computing devices. With a few hops, commodity computers and mobile phones
can be connected to secret or sensitive information or to critical
infrastructures. However, mainstream commodity computers have not been designed
with security in mind, for the last three or more decades. Rather, they have
been designed to improve performance, energy efficiency, cost or size, with
security added on as an after-thought. While some specialized secure computers
have been built, up to now, one had to sacrifice performance (or cost and
convenience) for security. In this research, the PI plans to explore what is
feasible if we allow ourselves a clean-slate design, where security is a first-
class goal, on par with performance and other goals. The investigation will
rethink computer architecture from first principles to significantly improve
both the security and the performance of future
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two thrusts: how to design
computer architecture to enable more secure software and systems, and how to
design computer hardware components that are themselves more trustworthy. The PI
will develop a new threat-based design methodology for computer architecture,
examining how to build security awareness into the design of each basic aspect
of computing. New architectural foundations for secure processing, secure
memories, secure caches, secure virtual memory translation, secure storage, and
secure control flow will be developed. The research will focus on providing the
cornerstones of security: Confidential and Integrity of critical information,
and Availability, in the sense of resilient attestation and execution of
security-critical tasks even when parts of the system may have been corrupted.
The solutions will also consider hardware attacks, in addition to the software
and network attacks considered by software security solutions and the current
state-of-the-art hardware TPM (Trusted Platform Module) solution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual contributions of this research will be
new architectural foundations, and a new dimension of "threat-based design" in
the research and development of all future computers. The broader impact of this
research is to provide core security technology that can be built into commodity
computing devices and their servers. These can be used in computer,
communications, control, entertainment and embedded systems to build
significantly more secure systems that will provide a leap forward in
information and cyber security, benefiting our society.