* 0917149
* III: Small: Techniques for Integrated Analysis of Graphs with Applications to Cheminformatics and Bioinformatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ambuj Singh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 509,261.00

&lt;br/&gt;A number of scientific endeavors generate data that can be modeled as
graphs: high-throughput biological experiments on protein interactions, high
throughput screening of chemical compounds, social networks, ecological networks
and food-webs, database schemas and ontologies. Access and analysis of the
resulting annotated and probabilistic graphs are crucial for advancing the state
of scientific research, accurate modeling and analysis of existing systems, and
engineering of new systems. This project aims to develop a set of scalable
querying and mining tools for graph databases by integrating techniques from
databases and data mining. The proposed research work is theoretical as well as
empirical. New theoretical ideas and algorithms are being developed and these
are being applied to the domains of Cheminformatics and
Bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research thrust examines
primitives for graph data management and graph mining. A declarative query
language for graphs is being investigated. This language is based on a formal
language for graphs and a graph algebra, and separates the concerns of
specification and implementation. Scalability of techniques for similarity
search on graphs and mining for significant patterns is being investigated as a
part of this thrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second research thrust applies the
developed techniques to the domain of Cheminformatics. Specific tasks that are
being examined are search for similar compounds, mining for significant motifs,
diversity analysis, and analysis of macromolecular
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final research thrust applies the developed
methods to the domain of Bioinformatics. There has been an explosion of data of
widely diverse biological data types, arising from genome-wide characterization
of transcriptional profiles, protein-protein interactions, genomic structure,
genetic phenotype, gene interactions, gene expression, proteomics, and other
techniques. Techniques being developed can integrate and analyze data from
multiple sources and models efficiently, while accelerating (interaction and
function) prediction, and pathway discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further
information about the project can be found at the project web page
http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~dbl/0917149.php.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;