* 0917839
* PFI: Information Products Laboratory for Emergency Response
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Donald Boyd, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2014
* USD 720,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type II (A:B) partnership
between the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), an NSF PFI graduate
(0090569), and SUNY at Buffalo (UB), which hosted a NSF ERC (9701471)-- is
focused on innovation in disaster management, with specific goals of developing
disaster management tools based on remote sensing research and geospatial
analysis technology. The three-tiered disaster management approach: disaster
planning, disaster response, and disaster recovery is ripe for innovation
through integrated knowledge and technology transfer efforts among university
researchers, technology companies, and public sector responders. RIT brings
extensive experience in basic and applied remote sensing research, a history of
collaboration with local emergency response and emergency providers, and a
special expertise in fire detection and fire behavior to the partnership. UB
team members bring expertise in geospatial analysis of a variety of natural and
man-made disasters, including fire and floods. Both universities have strong
policy components. The integrated team will apply a systems engineering approach
to define user needs in disaster management, perform targeted research and
development of disaster management products, and form a sustainable
infrastructure for knowledge and technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two primary academic institutional components, RIT and UB, will leverage their
collective experience to create a laboratory and resource, the Information
Products Laboratory for Emergency Response (IPLER), to broaden the participation
of all types of entities along the spectrum of disaster management. The IPLER
will facilitate economic development by establishing and maintaining a
continuous dialogue between the developers and providers of technologies and the
people who use them in disaster response. The diffusion of technologies will
improve the prevention and mitigation of disasters in the United States and lead
to innovative tools for response and recovery with societal benefit. Students at
RIT and UB will be actively engaged in the targeted research and will be
uniquely qualified to contribute to disaster management research, development,
and response. The IPLER is designed to grow and will incorporate new members
from the academic, public, and private sectors. The outcomes of the IPLER
include potentially life-saving innovations and will be broadly
disseminated&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: Rochester Institute of Technology (lead institution), and
SUNY at Buffalo; Private Sector Organizations: DigitalGlobe, ImageCat, Kucera
International, and Pictometry International; Local, State and Federal Government
Entities: Monroe County Office of Emergency Management; New York State
Foundation for Science, Technology, and Innovation (NYSTAR), New York State
Office of Homeland Security, and US Forest Service, Remote Sensing and
Applications Center.&lt;br/&gt;.