* 0917362
* HCC-Small: TextSL: A Virtual World Interface for the Visually Impaired
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Eelke Folmer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2014
* USD 499,332.00

The immersive graphics, the large amount of user-generated content, and the
social interaction opportunities offered by the greater sophistication of
virtual worlds are leading to an explosive growth in their popularity, with
millions of participating users. Unfortunately, however, virtual worlds are not
accessible to users who are visually impaired. In this project the PI's goal is
to alleviate this deficiency by developing a virtual world interface for
visually impaired users called TextSL, which is able to extract a textual
representation from a virtual world that can be read with a screen reader. Users
interact with TextSL by means of a command-based mechanism inspired by multi-
user dungeon games. A prototype of the system that allows for a basic form of
access to the popular virtual world of Second Life has shown that such an
approach is feasible. But the prototype lacks two of the most important features
offered by virtual worlds: the ability to create content, and the ability to
interact with interactive objects. Additional problems identified by the PI's
preliminary work are that less than half of the objects in Second Life have a
meaningful descriptive name, which makes the majority of objects invisible to
visually impaired users, and that virtual worlds contain such vast amounts of
content that merely converting it somehow into a textual description may easily
overwhelm the user. To address such challenges, the PI will develop a game based
on the "games-with-a-purpose" paradigm that allows sighted users to make virtual
worlds accessible to visually impaired users by labeling objects without a name,
while also establishing a taxonomy of objects that can be used to provide a more
usable form of feedback. He will create a new 3D object recognition algorithm
based on the "bag-of-features" approach that takes advantage of the unique way
objects are represented in Second Life, and which can efficiently and
automatically recognize large numbers of objects without a name. And he will
also develop techniques that are able to provide feedback on a user's
environment without overwhelming the user with large amounts of information,
that are able to convey textually a user's interaction with an interactive
object, and that support creation of 3D objects using command or haptic based
methods.

Broader Impacts: This research will increase the quality of life for the
millions of people who are visually impaired, by allowing them to participate
more fully in the information society. In particular, the social interaction
offered by virtual worlds will benefit people who are visually impaired as well
as other individuals whose disabilities often lead to both physical and social
isolation. Furthermore, as virtual worlds are increasingly used as educational
platforms, access for all to this technology is doubly critical. The interaction
models of virtual worlds resemble those of games, so project outcomes may also
provide new insights into how to make games accessible to the visually impaired.