* 0917965
* Middle Pleistocene Human Behavioral Adaptations in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 290,945.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Sally McBrearty and a
team of collaborators will conduct three seasons of field work in Kenya to
examine changes in stone technology and ancient environment. The project focuses
upon the Kapthurin Formation, a well dated Middle Pleistocene sequence that is
rich in stone artifacts, fossil bone, fossil plants, and other paleohabitat
indicators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of our species, Homo sapiens,
occurred in Africa during the time interval spanned by the Kapthurin Formation,
and the appearance of early Homo sapiens coincides with the archaeological
change known as the Acheulian to Middle Stone Age transition. Acheulian
technology, characterized by handaxes, disappeared, and was replaced by Middle
Stone Age artifacts such as points and other small flake tools. This shift
reflects a profound behavioral reorganization that may be the product of the
increased cognitive ability of Homo sapiens. Alternatively, the technology
itself may have played a role in the construction of the unique human adaptive
niche, leading to the anatomical changes seen in the human fossil record. Thus
the timing of events, and the environmental circumstances under which they
occurred, are critical to understanding the processes leading to the origin of
our species. The aims of the project are to identify variations in technology
and use of the landscape, to detect any changes through time, and to establish
the temporal framework for these developments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will contrast two time intervals in the Kapthurin Formation, the first
dating to 550,000 - 509,000 years ago, the second to 509,000 - 235,000 years
ago. Previous work in the older time interval provides a baseline to which
results from the current work in the younger interval can be compared.
Excavations at two sites in the younger time interval will provide information
on the density and characteristics of artifacts and fossil bones. Geologic
mapping will furnish important information on the ancient topography and
environment which will be integrated using a Geographic Information System
(GIS). The ancient vegetation will be documented by the study plant fossils,
pollen, grass cuticles, phytoliths, and the stable isotope content of mammalian
fossil teeth. Fossil footprints of a variety of animals at one of the excavated
sites will be conserved and cast, and footprint identification will provide
unique insight into the faunal community present at the time the site was
occupied. Correlation of specific tool types and habitat features will be sought
to assess environmental explanations technological variability. Patterns
discovered will be compared to those of the older time interval to assess the
nature and degree of change through time. &lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
critical new information about the nature of the processes leading to the origin
of Homo sapiens, a key issue of debate in human evolutionary study today. The
project is conducted in collaboration with the National Museums of Kenya. It
will contribute to the training of both American and Kenyan students and the
enhancement of museum collections and infrastructure. American, European, and
Kenyan scholars will participate in data collection, analysis, and dissemination
of results.