* 0917285
* SHF:Small: Portable High-Level Programming Model for Heterogeneous Computing Based on OpenMP
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Barbara Chapman, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,923.00

High-end systems and general-purpose computers alike are increasingly being
configured with hardware accelerators. A typical system, or node of a large-
scale platform, contains a few multicore processors that share memory, together
with one or more coprocessors, such as a high-end accelerator board, an
inexpensive programmable graphics card (GPGPU), or an FPGA (Field Programmable
Gate Array). The coprocessors will typically have a different instruction set,
distinct memory, a different operating environment and markedly different
execution characteristics than the multicore component of the system. As a
result, these heterogeneous platforms pose tough challenges with regard to their
programmability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this research is
to significantly simplify the process of developing code for heterogeneous
platforms by providing a single, high-level programming interface that may be
used across, and within, multicore processors and a broad variety of
accelerators. Language features will be designed, in the form of an extension to
the industry standard OpenMP API, that will enable the application developer to
specify code regions for acceleration, along with the necessary synchronization
and data motion. The implementation will translate the resulting enhanced OpenMP
for a variety of heterogeneous platforms. &lt;br/&gt;