* 0917229
* TC: Small: Keeping Jack in the Box: Confining the Role of Untrusted Inputs in Web Scenarios
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* V. N. Venkatakrishnan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 450,000.00

A significant number of attacks on Web browsers and Web
applications&lt;br/&gt;are successful through the use of malicious
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;For instance, attacks on web browser extensions target
browsers by&lt;br/&gt;exploiting vulnerable extensions (add-ons) by supplying
malicious input. &lt;br/&gt;Malicious inputs exercise unintended behaviors
leading to attacks that&lt;br/&gt;compromise confidentiality, integrity
and&lt;br/&gt;availability of web-based systems. This project
systematically&lt;br/&gt;examines the role that user inputs play in web browsers
and &lt;br/&gt;applications, and develops techniques to prevent these attacks by
&lt;br/&gt;confining their influence. The challenge is to develop sound and
&lt;br/&gt;precise automated analysis mechanisms for web based platforms
&lt;br/&gt;such as JavaScript. Research from the areas of static and dynamic
analysis, &lt;br/&gt;information flow tracking and learning program
behaviors&lt;br/&gt;will be used to develop robust, efficient and highly precise
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Papers from the project will be distributed in
popular online&lt;br/&gt;resources for Web security for the widest possible
dissemination and&lt;br/&gt;further enhancement. Furthermore, the PIs will
transition results from&lt;br/&gt;this research to Web development and standards
communities. &lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be integrated into the
new and&lt;br/&gt;existing courses in the undergraduate and graduate curricula
at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois campuses at Chicago and Urbana
Champaign. &lt;br/&gt;These courses will train a growing workforce of software
engineers&lt;br/&gt;who will be more security-aware and apply these principles
for&lt;br/&gt;laying a platform for a more secure Web. This project will also
directly&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the research training of three Ph.D.
students&lt;br/&gt;supervised by the PIs. This project will also support the
involvement&lt;br/&gt;of the PIs in outreach activities aimed at K-12 teacher
training and&lt;br/&gt;minority groups, and contributions by designing programs
that create&lt;br/&gt;awareness and interest in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;