* 0917335
* A Proposal to Conduct the HBCU0UP Leadership Institute
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2012
* USD 1,095,467.00

ABSTRACT HRD 0917335

The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network is conducting an HBCU-UP
Leadership Development Institute (LDI) for a cohort of 30 assistant professors
in STEM disciplines at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) with
HBCU-UP Implementation Awards. The goals of the project are to: (1) enhance the
leadership and research capabilities of STEM junior faculty from
underrepresented minority groups at these institutions; and (2) build a
community of emerging leaders in STEM at HBCUs.

The HBCU-UP LDI consists of four sessions held over a one-year period. LDI is a
faculty professional development initiative designed to foster and promote
enhanced academic leadership among the participants. The sessions include: a
five-day summer session in 2009; a two-day winter session in 2010; a ten-week
summer research appointment at an NSF-supported research center; and a
concluding five-day summer session in 2010.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT LDI Sessions focus on self-assessment; the characteristics of
effective leadership; time management strategies; negotiating skills; scholarly
productivity; proposal preparation and evaluation; and effective oral and
written communication skills. Other topics emphasized include team building, the
integration of research and education, mentoring, and the professional
development of STEM students.

Each HBCU-UP LDI member receives guidance on the preparation of an Individual
Leadership Development Plan (ILDP) to assess and guide his/her leadership
activities during and following the Institute. Each member also develops a STEM
or STEM education research proposal and identifies potential funding sources for
a project to be implemented on his/her campus for which he/she would serve as
principal investigator/project director. The IDLP includes short and long-term
goals and involves participants in an off-campus summer research activity at an
NSF-supported research center. Between sessions, ongoing communication is
facilitated through the project?s web-based electronic community.

The project builds on QEM?s experience in conducting three-part Leadership
Development Institutes for STEM faculty at grantees in the Foundation?s Tribal
Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) and adds the summer research
appointment as a fourth major component, based upon insight gained by QEM in the
placement of STEM faculty in summer research positions at NSF-funded Science and
Technology Centers (STCs). The project adds new knowledge about the
effectiveness in enhancing STEM education and research at HBCUs of this approach
to faculty professional development.

BROADER IMPACTS The HBCU-UP LDI enhances the skills of a cadre of
underrepresented STEM faculty who are part of a community of emerging leaders at
HBCUs. The HBCU-UP LDI participants share the knowledge and experience gained
through the Institute with other STEM faculty at their institutions and with
colleagues beyond their campuses through presentations at professional meetings,
use of a dedicated website and a listserv, and the promotion of campus efforts
that combine STEM education and research. Participants are in a better position
to assist their institutions in securing external support for research,
including campus-based undergraduate research opportunities for students. Beyond
the duration of the LDI, the efforts of participants will provide a foundation
for sustaining and strengthening the STEM research and education infrastructure
at the HBCUS they represent.