* 0917008
* TC: Small: Denial-of-Service Attacks and Counter Measures in Dynamic Sepctrum Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rajarathnam Chandramouli, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract: 0917008: TC: Small: Denial-of-Service Attacks and Counter Measures in
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies
denial-of-service (DoS) attacks that are unique to dynamic spectrum access (DSA)
networks: (a) DoS attacks by incumbent user emulation; (b) DoS attacks by
protocol manipulation. In the first case, one or more malicious nodes pretend to
be the primary by mimicking the power and/or signal characteristics to deceive
legitimate secondary nodes into vacating the white space unnecessarily. In the
second case, the malicious users either modify spectrum sensing related
information or falsify their own sensing data thereby affecting the final
decision. A number of mathematical models for the DoS attacks and several
counter measures based on game theory, decision theory, stochastic learning,
cryptography and Byzantine fault tolerance are developed in this project. Some
defense mechanisms and protocols developed through this project will be tested
on SpiderRadio (a cognitive radio test-bed being developed in the PIs?
laboratory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Since DSA networks are
expected to play an important role in first responder networks, the solutions
proposed here are expected to impact design of such networks. Since research in
DSA network protocols and architectures are still in the formative stages, the
proposed security solutions can be incorporated into the design phase of the
system rather than being added on as an after
thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate level courses and
Technogenesis&amp;#61651; scholarships will be used to disseminate the finding
of this project. Special efforts will be taken to mentor women and minority
students via established connections.&lt;br/&gt;