* 0917943
* PFI: Innovation in Precision Manufacturing: New Technology to New Business
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Michael Malone, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type II (A:B) partnership,
occurring within the University of Massachusetts Amherst with participation from
the NSF PFI graduated grantee (0090521) in collaboration with participants from
two other NSF partnership supported programs (both &lt;br/&gt;I/UCRCs): Center
for University of Massachusetts and Industry Research on Polymers (CUMIRP),
which was founded in 1980 and has since graduated but is still active, and
e-Design Center (0332508/0838747). The precision manufacturing sector, primarily
Small and Mid-sized Enterprises (SMEs), is an important part of the economic
base of Western Massachusetts with significant employment. The industry is
currently challenged by cyclical markets, increased global competition, aging
facilities/technologies and insufficient labor supply. The PFI program which was
put in place in 2000 successfully established a regional industry network,
Regional Technology Corporation (RTC), and this proposed program will enable
significant enhancement and sustainability of technology transfer. This project
will stimulate transformation of relevant new discoveries at UMass to SMEs that
have little or no experience working with a research institution. Drawing upon
the scientific and engineering research conducted at UMass, the university and
the SMEs will collaborate on targeted and tailored research projects focused on
translation and application. UMass facilities, state-of-the-art testing and
characterization equipment, as well as its engineering design and management
tools, will complement the project's translation and application
process&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome of this program is a
sustainable regional innovation infrastructure that supports effective
transformation of the precision manufacturing SMEs to new markets through
infusion of new technologies with a flexible and capable workforce. SMEs are a
significant part of the U.S. economic engine and have contributed greatly to
employment growth and economic development. The evaluation and assessment of
this program should lead to important and transferable learning. The focus on
enhancing technology transfer and translational work with SMEs, on partnering
with regional assets, and on seeking additional financial support should ensure
that the impacts of the program are meaningful, documented, disseminated and
sustained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: University of Massachusetts Amherst (lead institution),
including participation of the Office of the Vice Chancellor of Research and
Engagement, Office of Research Liaison and Development, Office of Commercial
Ventures and Intellectual Property, Polymer Science and Engineering Department,
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Center for UMass-Industry
Research on Polymers, Center for e-Design, and Department of Landscape
Architecture and Region Planning; and Holyoke Community College; Private Sector
Organizations: Ben Franklin Design and Manufacturing Company, Inc.; State and
Regional Organizations: Regional Employment Board of Hampden County, Inc., MA;
and Regional Technology Corporation,(RTC), MA. Other participating organizations
and personnel include Academic: Springfield Technical Community College; and
State and Regional Organizations: Economic Development Council for Western
Massachusetts, and Western Mass Chapter-National Tooling and Machining
Association (WMNTMA).