* 0917450
* Driven to Discover: Enabling Authentic Inquiry through Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Nathan Meyer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,228,587.00

The University of Minnesota is partnering with several nature centers in the
Midwest to transform citizen "technicians" into citizen "scientists." The Driven
to Discover project will use existing citizen science programs with strong
educational components to engage 12-14 year old youth and their adult mentors in
authentic research. The goal of the project is to develop a training model for
adults who work with youth in a variety of informal education settings to
involve them in authentic scientific inquiry via citizen science rather than
just data collection activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proof-of-concept
phase, teams consisting of 4-H youth, adult leaders, and several scientists are
conducting participatory action research to understand what factors lead youth
to full engagement in ecological research. In phase two, project personnel are
training 4-H educators, naturalists, and teachers how to engage youth and their
adult leaders in other 4-H programs and other informal education programs to
conduct ecological research with scientists in advisory roles. Phase one
involves approximately 10 adults and 70 youth, whereas phase two involves
approximately 40 adults and 300 youth. A front-end study defined the project's
target audiences and partners. Formative evaluation study will monitor
interactions among members of the research teams and summative evaluation will
measure impacts on participants' knowledge, skills development, attitudes, and
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project deliverables include youth-generated
ecological research findings, web-based program implementation materials, an
annual conference, and a model for engaging youth groups in informal settings in
authentic scientific inquiry. The model is expected to impact more than six
million youth nationwide.