* 0917960
* Wetlands and the Transition to Agriculture in Europe: The Southern Albania Neolithic Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Susan Allen, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 191,806.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Susan E. Allen and an
international team of colleagues will conduct three seasons of archaeological
and palaeoenvironmental research on a critical shift in human economic history,
the widespread dispersal and adoption of agriculture beyond its centers of
origin. In particular, this research focuses on the transition to agriculture in
Europe approximately 9,000 years ago and tests the hypothesis that the earliest
farmers preferentially selected wetland ecotones for settlement and agricultural
land use. While the significance of wetlands in the process of initial
domestication of plants in many primary centers of agriculture in different
areas of the world is widely acknowledged, their importance in the dispersal of
agriculture beyond those centers has been obscured by the disproportionate
attention given to documenting the role of indigenous populations and immigrant
farmers in this process. In consequence, there has been little consideration of
the way that early farmers negotiated environmental variables in various
spatial, social, and temporal contexts. By adopting an ecological approach that
emphasizes early farmers' deliberate selection of key locations and recognizes
variation found in agricultural strategies across time and space as key aspects
of the dispersal of farming, the project is designed to test the broad model of
a time-transgressive pattern from southeast to northwest that emerges from
radiocarbon dates for Europe. Situated at the leading edge of this transition,
the southeastern Balkans are a key area for understanding the shift to
agriculture in Europe.

To address their objectives, the team will recover relevant data from Early
Neolithic (EN) sites located in a former wetland setting and adjacent
environmental settings in Southern Albania. Research focuses on renewed
excavation, surface survey, and coring at the site of Vashtëmi. Vashtëmi was
selected on the basis of results from the team's surface survey and coring in
2006 that demonstrate high potential for recovering the data relevant for their
research question and the potential threat posed to the site by illicit
development due to its location near the city of Korça and adjacent to a major
highway. The team will recover plant and animal remains, other organic
materials, and evidence of landform changes that will enable them to reconstruct
the site's environment and land use practices. Of particular importance is the
collection of materials datable by 14C in order to construct a regional
chronology for the EN which has not yet been possible.

The intellectual merits and broader impacts of this project are particularly
apparent in four areas: 1) understanding the transition to agriculture in Europe
and variability among early farming practices, which are poorly understood due
to the paucity of floral and faunal remains and radiocarbon dates in this key
region; 2) examining the importance of wetlands in this transition and their
long-term and widespread cultural significance in human history; 3) salvaging
potentially significant archaeological data from destruction by unauthorized
development; and 4), offering environmental archaeology training opportunities
for young Albanians in order to foster the incorporation of these methods into
standard archaeological practice in Albania and contributing to European
prehistoric archaeology as a whole.