* 0917157
* CSR: Small: Workload Shaping for Capacity and Power Provisioning in  Storage Data Centers
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Varman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* M. Mimi McClure
* 09/30/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Workload Shaping for Capacity and Power Provisioning in Storage Data Centers

Abstract

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Tremendous growth in hosted services and data sharing are motivating a new
generation of storage virtualization technologies that encompass the entire data
center or ensembles of data centers. Accurate dynamic resource provisioning is
critical to achieving cost-effective and environmentally-sensitive operation of
these service centers in order to (i) reduce fixed costs for floor space, server
hardware, and infrastructure for power distribution and cooling, (ii) lower the
operational costs for management and electricity, and (iii) mitigate the hidden
environmental and social costs of excessive energy use.

The goals of this project are to develop effective dynamic resource provisioning
and scheduling schemes for storage servers using novel workload shaping
techniques to improve cost and energy consumption. The research involves the
design, analysis, implementation, and performance evaluation of new algorithms
for workload shaping with superior performance characteristics. This will result
in significant improvements in resource provisioning, capacity prediction, and
admission control, as well as energy and power consumption. Unlike traditional
server scheduling techniques in which the negative effects of workload bursts
affect even well-behaved portions of the workload, the proposed workload shaping
approach isolates the bursts and confines their effects to localized regions
using online workload decomposition and recombination.

The project will support the education of graduate students in an emerging
sector of Information Technology, and will also involve undergraduate
engineering students in research in a topical technical area.