* 0917730
* PFI: A Multinational Partnership to Incite Innovation via New Generation Tailored Polymers for Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2013
* USD 599,715.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between University of Southern Mississippi (USM) an NSF PFI graduated grantee
(0227827), and Jones County Junior College (JCJC) (Laurel, MS), an institution
new to the PFI Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI
grantee)--focuses on the processes for creating new polymers and in doing so
represents an opportunity to raise awareness and acceptance of high-throughput
experimentation into the mainstream of industrial chemistry. In addition
students will be exposed to the range of companies that use such techniques
internationally. The proposal selects a specific focus; namely,
polymeric/surface interactions important for delivery and control of active
ingredients in consumer products that can bear the high cost of functionally
tuned specialty polymers. If successful, the proposed activity will introduce
new concepts and tools that will accelerate the rate of discovery. The members
of this large multidisciplinary team, which collectively brings substantial
resources to this major effort, are at the frontiers of their respective areas
and the resulting collaboration will yield results that should advance
scientific understanding as well as increase commercial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed directly at bottlenecks
in discovery, innovation and commercialization. The proposed team will be
partnered with world-leading companies which will implement the successes of the
project. By advancing high throughput experimentation, the route to discovery
will be accelerated and by linking with large multinational companies,
commercialization of entrepreneurial innovations will be sped to market by the
global logistics of the multinational corporations. The proposed activity will
prepare the advanced workforce that will be necessary to master the concepts,
the skills, and the new tools. The attention that the proposers have paid to the
education and development of that workforce should yield rich dividends, and the
lessons learned will be publicized broadly and are likely to be relevant to
other industries and other ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project are Academic Institutions: University of Southern
Mississippi (lead institution), Jones Country Junior College, Louisiana Tech
University, Petal High School, State Board of Community and Junior Colleges, and
University of Mississippi; Private Sector Organizations: Ablitec Technologies;
Amerchol Division of Dow Chemical; BASF; Business Launchpoint; Chemspeed
Technologies USA and Switzerland, DSM Nutritional Products-USA, Holland, and
Switzerland; Glactech; Glaxo Smith Kline; Hub City Technologies; Hybrid
Plastics; Johnson and Johnson; MBM Tech; Mississippi Power; Scigenesis; The
Procter &amp; Gamble Company; and Trechem; and Local Government Organizations:
Areas Development Partnership, Mississippi Development Authority, and
Mississippi Technology Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;