* 0917865
* PFI: Transforming Environmental and Physiological Assessments Using Fish Erythrocyte Gene Expression to Measure Responses
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Ronald Hardy, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2013
* USD 599,996.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type III (A:C) partnership
between University of Idaho, an NSF PFI graduate (0090635), and Idaho State
University, an institution new to the PFI Program (defined as one that has never
been a PFI grantee) seeks to address the lack of modern techniques and protocols
to assess physiological health of fish by development, validation, and
calibration of a novel and potentially transformational product: the erythrocyte
assay system for fish (EASY-F). This assay system will capitalize on the fact
that fish erythrocytes are nucleated and thus have a complete genome to respond
to environmental conditions and experimental manipulations. Assessment of the
physiological health of fish requires sensitive, accurate tools that can provide
rapid assessments and predictive information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fish play
crucial and multiple roles in human society; they are valued as essential
components of the aquatic environment in the U.S.; they are considered
biomarkers to assess the health of aquatic ecosystems, and they are important to
the sport and recreation industry in the U.S. What unites the various roles of
fish in the environment and human society is that they all depend on production
of healthy fish, both in nature and in farms and hatcheries. Testing and
development of the proposed EASY-F quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR)
mini array will have an impact on Native American interests in salmonids
directly. Tribal Groups are co-managers of salmonid fisheries and each tribe
operates its own fisheries department. Successful partnership with tribal
stakeholders begins with research collaboration, technology sharing, and data
exchange. Development and validations of the EASY-F system will rely in large
part on the direct collaboration of tribal stakeholders. In turn, the use and
commercialization of the EASY-F technology will directly affect tribal interests
by providing additional opportunities to train tribal fisheries scientists,
raise the level of technological expertise in tribal fisheries departments, and
improve information exchange among stakeholders crucial to the co-management of
the fisheries. Ultimately, technology transferred from this project has the
potential to influence the management of fish populations affected by disease or
other environmental stressors, populations under restoration, and captive
populations being enhanced to increase
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are:
Academic Institutions: University of Idaho (Moscow and Hagerman, ID) (lead
institution), Idaho State University (Pocatello, ID), and University of Chile
(Santiago de Chile; Private Sector Organizations: Cooke Aquaculture Inc. (Blacks
Harbour, New Brunswick, Canada), Portneuf Regional Medical Center (Pocatello,
Idaho); Federal Government Organizations: Agriculture Research Service,
Department of Agriculture; and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Bozeman Fish
Technology Center, Bozeman, MT), Department of Interior; and Native American
Organization: Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (Portland,
OR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.