* 0917489
* Arabidopis 2010:   Functional Evolutionary Genetics of an Arabidopsis Regulatory Polymorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Michael Purugganan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2013
* USD 547,866.00

The identification and isolation of genes that lead to adaptation of organisms
is a central challenge of modern evolutionary genetics, yet very few adaptive
genes have been analyzed at the molecular level. A naturally occurring mutation
in the CONSTANS (CO) gene of Arabidopsis thaliana leads to evolutionary
adaptation in flowering time. A major goal of this project is to study the
origins and spread of this regulatory mutation in natural populations of A.
thaliana and to examine the effects of the mutation on CO gene expression. The
second goal is to investigate effects of the CO mutation on naturally-occurring
mutations in a second gene, FRIGIDA, which acts in a parallel pathway to the CO
gene. This research will characterize the functional genetics of an adaptive
trait, and examine the role that regulatory change plays in the evolution of a
life history trait in Arabidopsis thaliana. All data and biological resources
will be made available to the public either through publications or long-term
repositories such as ABRC and Genbank This research will examine how plants
adapt to environmental change as well as advance understanding of flowering
time, a key trait that is also important in crop adaptation. In addition to
training research scientists in molecular genetics and evolution, the project
will enhance training in science journalism. Graduate-level journalism students
at New York University will join the research team as interns. The journalism
students will learn about modern plant genetics while students and postdoctoral
researchers in the laboratory will learn how to interact with media
professionals.