* 0917057
* CIF: SMALL: Information Theoretic Multi-Core Processor Thermal Profile Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Dynamic thermal management is the process of controlling surges in the operating
temperature especially of a multi-core processor during runtime, based on
limited measurements by on-chip thermal sensors. Managing thermal sensors and
processing their measurements presents a rich vein of theoretical and practical
challenges including: deciding on the number, location and type of thermal
sensors; estimating the thermal profile; and characterizing the fundamental
performance tradeoffs between sensor quantity and complexity in guaranteeing
estimate accuracy. In this interdisciplinary project, we propose a new approach
to the problem of thermal profile estimation in multi-core processors which
relies on fundamental information theoretic principles. Our approach rests on
new problems in information theory that capture the salient features of on-chip
thermal profile estimation. Our new formulations are inspired notably by rate
distortion theory and also bear a similarity to compressed sensing. Furthermore,
our approach has wider applicability to general problems of parameter estimation
based on limited sampled and quantized measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has a home in computer architecture, VLSI design as well as one in
information theory and compressed sensing. Its potential impact is twofold: (a)
improvement in the performance and reliability of multi-core processors; and (b)
new models and problem formulations in the fields of information theory and
compressed sensing. The broad reach of this project will provide a valuable
learning environment for the investigators and their graduate and undergraduate
students. The basic elements of the technical approach will be discussed in
Special Topics courses and seminars with the participation of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;