* 0917837
* Collaborative Research:  Major:  Puppet Choreography and Automated Marionettes
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2008,05/31/2013
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2013
* USD 374,410.00

Puppet choreography is a highly-developed language for controlling mechanically
complex marionettes. It has evolved over centuries into a largely standardized
form that allows puppeteers to address issues that arise as a result of the
complex systems with which they are working. The project looks at how puppeteers
address complex tasks in their choreographic descriptions of plays and using
that understanding to solve questions of importance to computer science and
engineering. These goals will be achieved by creating an automated puppet play,
which will use insights about puppet choreography to implement embedded control
of mechanically complex marionettes engaged in complex coordination
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will impact a broad spectrum of
activities, including integrating the choreographic structure of programming
into two innovative classes, introducing puppeteers to technical computer
science and engineering problems, and the introduction of puppetry as
programming to children involved in a local YMCA. Students in these classes will
also be statistically assessed for their ability to transfer the choreographic
techniques to novel problems as well as the puppeteers? ability to apply their
expertise to high-level engineering problems in order to gain insight into
educational aspects of the creative process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;