* 0917755
* SGER: Using CCSM4 to Study Greenland Ice Sheet Response to Anthropogenic Forcings
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Kurt Cuffey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 06/30/2011
* USD 197,358.00

Intellectual Merit: The contribution from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets
to 21st century sea level rise is highly uncertain. Most estimates in the recent
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report (AR4)
were obtained using relatively crude ice sheet models forced with Global Climate
Model (GCM) output, without including climate feedbacks associated with changing
ice sheets. The PI will explore the response of the Greenland ice sheet to
anthropogenic greenhouse forcing by using a dynamic ice sheet model bi-
directionally coupled to the new version of the Community Climate System Model
(CCSM4). With this coupling, ice sheets will be able to modify local and global
climate via changes in surface albedo, topography, and freshwater fluxes to the
ocean. Modifications of local climate could change the ice-sheet mass balance
and need to be taken into account. This study will be the first with a U.S.
Atmosphere-Ocean GCM coupled bi-directionally to an ice sheet model, and its
outcomes will constitute a primary contribution of CCSM to AR5 estimates of sea
level change. The PI and his colleagues will address the following research
questions: the magnitude of changes in surface melting of the Greenland ice
sheet and associated feedbacks, under a variety of forcing scenarios; the
evolution of fast-flowing features, such as outlet glaciers, in similar forcing
scenarios; and the potential impacts of ice sheet changes on local and global
climate. Climate-change projections will be complemented by simulations of the
previous interglacial, when sea level was 3-6 m higher than at present.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is both urgent and high risk. Urgent,
because if not completed and accepted for publication by late 2010 the research
will not be considered for inclusion in the IPCC AR5 of global climate change.
It is high risk because ice sheet processes are both highly complex and operate
at different timescales than climate processes; this will be the first attempt
to simulate and predict ice sheet and climate evolution to anthropogenic
forcings using a fully coupled approach between a sophisticated ice sheet model
and a state-of-the-art earth system model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research will provide valuable insights about the impacts and
trajectory of anthropogenic global climate change, including quantitative
probabilities of sea level changes. It will provide funding for an outstanding
female post-doctoral scientist.