* 0917614
* Communicating Ocean Sciences Informal Education Network: Scientists and Educators Working Together to Promote Ocean Literacy
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Craig Strang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,871,694.00

This proposal is from a coalition of cross disciplinary investigators at the
Lawrence Hall of Science/Center for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence at the
University of California, Berkeley. The investigators intend to create a
communications network for ocean sciences in an informal setting to improve the
communication of ocean science concepts. The network would foster relationships
between ocean and climate scientists in institutions of higher education and
build the capacity for educators to communicate with the public about science.
The network is intended to impact visitors to informal science centers, docents,
educators, and scientists. It would provide experiences with new scientific
knowledge about the oceans and promote climate literacy for the landlocked
states of the country where ocean sciences are not usual topics for educational
programs.

The network includes: 1. Long Beach Aquarium of the Pacific and University of
Southern California; 2. Hatfield Marine Science Center and Oregon Sea Grant at
Oregon State University; 3. Virginia Aquarium and Science Center and the
Minorities in Marine Science Program, Hampton University; 4. Liberty Science
Center and the Institute for Marine Coastal Sciences and Rutgers University; 5.
Lawrence Hall of Science and Earth & Planetary Science and Integrative Biology,
University of California, Berkeley; 6. Birch Aquarium at Scripps and Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego; and 7. Purdue
University.

The goal of the project is to help a new generation of scientists and informal
educators to better understand and more effectively communicate with the public
the essential principles and fundamental concepts of Ocean Literacy, Climate
Literacy, and Earth Science Literacy. The content is integral to understanding
climate science and the science of climate change such as ocean circulation,
causes of sea level rise, the influence of the ocean on weather and climate, the
role of the ocean in Earth's energy, water and carbon systems, and the need for
continued exploration of the ocean system.