* 0917940
* PFI: Technology Innovation Program: Enhancing Biotech Translational Research Among NE Ohio Institutions
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), a NSF PFI graduate (0125703),
and Lorain County Community College (LCCC), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee)--seeks to create
novel biotechnology innovation in a region facing economic change of major
impact by constructing a relationship among a research university, a community
college, and technology-based economic development organizations. Students and
faculty members from each institution will be integrally involved in prospective
and competitive funding for selected Innovation Projects that take ideas from
their origins through successive iterations of a disciplined innovation process,
including market assessment, design, and development, prototyping, and market
readiness. The institutional interactions between CWRU and LCCC will be
facilitated by a Relationship Manager, a novel administrative position that
ensures inter-institutional alignment, student mentoring within CWRU and LCCC,
and a strategic mechanism by which students are assigned to project teams. Each
Innovation Project will be under the leadership of an entrepreneur-in-residence
provided by TechLift, a technology based development organization. The
intellectual merit resides, in part, in the novel links and resulting synergies
of faculties, students, and business people with different complementary skill-
sets. It links the discovery process of universities to the workforce
development missions of community colleges.

The project seeks to align institutional activities with regional economic needs
so the latter are more nationally and internationally competitive, especially in
a regional economy in the throes of change. It is planned that this pilot
partnership will not only be sustained and expanded between Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) and Loraine County Community College (LCCC), but it will also
serve as a test-bed for LCCC's relationships to other higher education
institutions in the region, although each future innovation partnership will
have to be attuned and managed according to its distinct properties.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Case Western
Reserve University (CWRU) (lead institution) and Lorain County Community
College; and Private Sector Organizations: Great Lakes Innovation and
Development Enterprise (GLIDE), and TechLift.