* 0917992
* PFI: Remote Detection of Chemicals Associated with Clandestine Drug Labs
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* John Martyny, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2014
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Montana State University, an NSF PFI graduate (0125429) and University
of Montana, an institution new to the PFI Program (defined as one that has never
been a PFI grantee)--seeks to respond to the problem of the use of
methamphetamine (meth), a highly addictive illicit drug, and to meth-related
crime, which has reached epidemic levels in the U.S. and particularly in the
state of Montana; by developing laser-based remote sensing technologies to
detect clandestine meth labs and also the hazards inside. Advances in the areas
of laser operation, in detection, and knowledge of the detectable chemicals are
all being addressed in the Remote Methamphetamine Detection Initiative (REMEDI)
partnership, and each advance in these areas will contribute to improving the
sensitivity and reducing false positives, which are essential for adoption of
the device by law enforcement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity is
focused on the development of a technology that can assist law enforcement in
uncovering meth labs and also alert first responders as to which hazardous
chemicals are present. The societal impact of this activity is of major
importance, particularly in Native American tribal communities. The technology
can also be directly extended to remotely detecting other airborne chemicals.
Some of these chemicals include other drug manufacturing signature chemicals,
chemical weapons, global warming chemicals, chemicals important to home security
and dangerous or other toxic industrial effluents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners
at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Montana State
University (lead institution), and University of Montana; Research Institution:
National Jewish Medical Center; Private Sector Organizations: Battelle (not-for-
profit)(Richland, WA), AdvR, Inc.; Bridger Photonics, Inc., and Scientific
Materials Corporation/FLIR Systems; State and Local Organizations: Missouri
River Drug Task Force, Montana Department of Justice, Division of Criminal
Investigation; and Montana Governor?s Office; and Other: Montana Meth Project,
Montana-Wyoming Tribal Leaders Council, and MSU TechLink.