* 0917288
* AF: Small: Topological Graph Theory Revisited: With Applications in Computer Graphics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jianer Chen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2013
* USD 402,663.00

Recent research in computer graphics has shown that the classical topological
graph theory provides a solid mathematical foundation and powerful tool for the
development of 3D modeling systems. Despite its initial success, there is still
a significant gap between the theoretical research in topological graph theory
and its direct applications in computer graphics. In particular, the research in
classical topological graph theory has largely neglected geometric issues.
Moreover, very recent research has shown exciting connections between graph
embeddings on non-orientable surfaces and surface weaving, and demonstrated a
need for a refined and extended study in this direction. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposed research, guided by its applications in computer graphics, will refine
and extend the classical topological graph theory in the following two
directions: &lt;br/&gt;1. Graph embeddings on orientable surfaces with geometric
constraints: This project will re-examine the fundamental issues studied in
graph embeddings on orientable surfaces that are related to topologically robust
3D modeling, by considering geometric constraints such as symmetry, planarity
and conical properties. Applications of this research include development of
topologically robust and highly interactive graphics modeling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Graph embeddings on non-orientable surfaces and their
applications in modeling surface weaving: This project will refine and extend
the study on graph embeddings on non-orientable surfaces and the corresponding
graph surgery operations, study their relations to 3D modeling, and build a new
paradigm of modeling surface weaving. Applications of this research include
creating beautiful shapes such as woven basket and topological sculptures.