* 0917078
* NeTs: Small: Interdomain X-ities: Toward Five Nines Availability in Internet Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Arun Venkataramani, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 325,250.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various studies over the past decade
have shown that network availability on the Internet is about 99%, which pales
in comparison to other utility services such as power grids and telephone
networks. The primary cause of network unavailability today is due to problems
related to interdomain routing that are unlikely to go away with technology
trends or further growth as they are due to systemic limitations of the protocol
architecture. This project is developing techniques towards the design of an
interdomain routing architecture that provides high availability under flexible
routing policies, link and node failures, and router misconfiguration.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has the following thrusts. First, it develops
a quantitative foundation for interdomain "X-ities", a term used to describe
metrics desired in an interdomain routing protocol such as availability,
stability, policy flexibility, accountability, predictability, deployability
etc. Second, it develops routing protocols based on insights from the theory of
distributed systems, namely, using redundancy to mask failures, and treating
consistency as a safety property. Specifically, the project builds upon
"multiprocess routing", an approach that runs multiple parallel routing
processes that select primary or backup routes to deliver packets with high
probability under multiple link and node failures; and "consensus routing", a
consistency-first approach to ensure high availability under flexible policies.
The project adapts these approaches to tolerate failures as well as to limit the
impact of misconfiguration. These new proposals will be compared with existing
research proposals for interdomain routing based on the X-ities axes. The
protocol designs will be made available to researchers and practitioners through
open-source implementations. &lt;br/&gt;