* 0917366
* HCC: Small: Supporting Males' and Females' Problem-Solving Strategies in End-User Debugging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2013
* USD 511,999.00

This project will examine two issues related to end-user debugging of computer
programs. First, what strategies do male and female end-user programmers try to
use for debugging, and with which do they succeed? Second, how should end-user
programming environments go about supporting and guiding these debugging
strategies? Most of what is programmed must eventually be debugged. The support
of problem-solving tasks such as debugging must extend all the way to the heart
of problem solving, to strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although once only
professional programmers developed software, today it is common for end users to
create some of their own software. Common examples are spreadsheet systems, in
which end users program by creating and changing formulas, and web application
builders, in which end users program by demonstrating the desired behavior
and/or making dataflow connections among computation tools dragged in from a
palette. Numerous other examples exist. In fact, in the U.S. alone, there are
millions of end users doing such forms of programming every day - many more than
professional programmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, however, evidence
is beginning to accumulate that some females are not benefiting as much as males
from these empowering devices. There have been recent reports of gender
differences in end users' willingness to approach and adopt new software
features related to debugging, differences in attitudes toward software
features, and differences in end-user programmers' playful tinkering with
features. Other results of gender differences in software-based problem solving
are also emerging. These findings suggest that there are factors within the
software itself that may be subtly undermining females' effectiveness in many
software-based problem-solving tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
contributes to the effective use of information technology in evolving,
heterogeneous socio-technical systems, enabling more people to take full
advantage of the power of computing. It will accomplish this by investigating
the underlying strategies males and females use successfully to solve problems
with software, and then investigating how to support these strategies. This work
will also produce new advances in how to guide and encourage computational
thinking to help males and females solve everyday problems that arise in
computing, combining empirical methods with proof-of-concept prototypes. In
addition, it will contribute to education programs, and in particular will
involve talented female high-school students as research interns, to encourage
them in the direction of computer science.&lt;br/&gt;