* 0917810
* Collaborative Research:  Mapping the Galactic Arecibo Sky in the 21-cm Line
* MPS,AST
* 11/20/2008,08/31/2011
* Mary Putman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 08/31/2011
* USD 251,628.00

In this collaborative research project Drs. Snezana Stanimirovic (University of
Wisconsin - Madison), Mary Putman (University of Michigan), and Eric Korpela
(University of California - Berkeley) will survey the Galaxy in neutral hydrogen
(HI) across the entire Arecibo Observatory sky (13,000 square degrees). This
project will reveal the detailed spatial and kinematic structure of Galactic
neutral hydrogen (HI) and allow new studies of the gaseous disk, halo, and the
flow of material between them to be completed. Surveying the entire Arecibo sky
has only recently become possible with the installment of the Arecibo L-band
Feed Array (ALFA), a cluster of seven receivers operating at the wavelength of
21-cm that provide an unsurpassed combination of sensitivity, resolution, and
mapping speed. Topics already being uncovered by the survey are: 1) the
evolution between atomic and molecular clouds, 2) the interplay between the
Galactic disk and halo, and 3) the detailed gas dynamics at work in the Galactic
halo. In the Galactic disk, the high-resolution Arecibo observations, when
compared with other interstellar tracers, probe the nature of the molecular gas
not traced by carbon monoxide, the so called "dark gas". In addition,
statistical investigation of HI datasets will relate properties of interstellar
turbulence with the underlying physical conditions. The transition region
between the Galactic disk and halo, when viewed by Arecibo, consists of a thick
"belt" of numerous cold, discrete HI clouds. The survey will map the extent of
this belt and investigate its possible connection to the local sites of star
formation in the Galactic disk and galactic fountain models. In the Galactic
halo itself, research will focus on the interaction between HI halo clouds known
as high-velocity clouds (HVCs) and the surrounding diffuse halo gas. This will
be done by studying the detailed features of the clouds in the context of models
of the halo and comparing the cloud dynamics directly to simulations. The
initial survey data also show that Arecibo will superbly sample the unexplored
tail-end of the HVC population. At the heart of this project are synergistic
studies of Galactic HI with surveys at other wavelengths and the latest
numerical simulations of the interstellar medium and gaseous halo. This Galactic
HI survey, confronted with theory and numerical simulations, promises
fundamental contributions to our understanding of the cycling of matter in the
Galaxy on scales from a few pc to many kpc.

The data products from this survey will have a true legacy character, as the
observations, data reduction, and final collating of the data cubes have been
successfully developed, and these final data products will be made available to
the public on a timely basis. The dissemination of these data products, will
enhance the infrastructure for Galactic research across the world. This research
will provide topics for Ph.D. theses and undergraduate research projects at the
University of California-Berkeley, the University of Michigan, and the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, fostering the confluence of research and
education. Images of the Galactic HI sky will be displayed at outreach centers
at the three institutions to demonstrate the multi-wavelength character of the
Galaxy to the public.