* 0917015
* CCF (CIF): Small: Recursive Reconstruction of Sparse Signal Sequences
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2013
* USD 291,279.00

Recursive Reconstruction of Sparse Signal Sequences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on recursive algorithms for causally reconstructing a time
sequence of (approximately) sparse signals from a small number of ``incoherent"
linear projections. The algorithms will be useful for real-time dynamic magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) in interventional radiology applications such as image-
guided surgery or in functional-MRI. &lt;br/&gt;MRI is currently not usable for
such real-time applications due to its "relatively slow image acquisition"
(large data acquisition times and/or slow image reconstruction algorithms).
Other potential applications include dynamic tomography for solar imaging or
real-time single-pixel video imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the recent
introduction of compressive sensing (CS), the static version of the above
problem has been thoroughly studied. But most existing algorithms for the
dynamic problem just use CS to jointly reconstruct the entire time sequence in
one go. This is a batch solution and has very high complexity. The alternative -
CS at each time (simple&lt;br/&gt;CS) - requires many more measurements. This
research is the first to develop and analyze recursive algorithms for signal
sequence reconstruction, which have the same complexity as simple CS, but which
(a) achieve exact reconstruction using much fewer noise-free measurements than
those needed by simple CS; (b) achieve provably smaller reconstruction error
than simple CS, when using noisy measurements, especially when the number of
measurements is small; and (c) are provably stable over time (reconstruction
error remains bounded). Fewer measurements means reduced scan times for MRI,
while recursive reconstruction means real-time imaging is possible. By
exploiting the fact that sparsity patterns change slowly over time, the problem
is formulated as one of compressive sensing with partially known
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CS and sequential CS are incorporated into the
graduate/undergraduate curriculum and into senior-design at appropriate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;