* 0917750
* SGER: Development of Field Delivery System of Oxygen Bubbles for Seismic and Geoenvironmental Hazard Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Akram Alshawabkeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2010
* USD 66,250.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitigation of liquefaction-induced damages to the built
environment continues to be an important priority and a major challenge in civil
engineering. Current soil improvement methods to safeguard against liquefaction
are often very expensive and their applications are limited to new sites. There
is an urgent need to develop cost-effective liquefaction mitigation measures
that can be applied to new sites as well as sites where structures exist. The PI
and CO-PI have been conducting research on developing an innovative method for
liquefaction mitigation based on inducing partial degree of saturation in
otherwise fully saturated liquefiable sands. The research to date has
demonstrated the technical feasibility of the method. Laboratory tests have led
to the conclusion that introduction of gas bubbles in sand, thus reducing its
degree of saturation, prevents the occurrence of liquefaction. While the
feasibility of induced partial saturation as a potential liquefaction mitigation
measure has been successfully demonstrated, it is the PI and CO-PI?s ultimate
goal to further advance this mitigation measure, prove its feasibility through
field research tests so that the professional engineering community considers
its application in practice. This will require implementation of a comprehensive
research program with testing under large scale laboratory and field conditions.
However, such a research program can not be embarked nor funding can be secured
unless two distinct and important research goals are first achieved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SGER award focuses on these two research goals. The
first goal of the proposed research is to devise a delivery system that can
generate gas bubbles in fully saturated sands that can be implemented with high
likelihood of success in the field. This gas delivery system should be practical
and be able to reduce the degree of saturation of sands rapidly and uniformly.
The second important goal is to devise a field testing technique that can be
used to assess the effectiveness of the gas delivery system leading to
validation of partial degree of saturation, as well as the uniformity of the
site remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from preliminary investigations
suggest that oxygen bubbles can be generated within sands through the
introduction of chilled water with dissolved ?Efferdent? (primarily sodium
perborate), or through chilled hydrogen peroxide with an added catalyst to
release oxygen when temperature of the fluid rises. Also, it is apparent that
the use of a piezocone and measurement of excess pore pressures developed during
the penetration of the piezocone into the sand can be a practical and rapid way
of validating partial degree of saturation and its uniformity. These exploratory
research activities will be conducted using the SoilBed facility of the Center
for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems (NSF-ERC-CenSSIS)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research can help advance efforts at
developing a cost-effective liquefaction mitigation measure that can have world-
wide impact on safety and protection of property from earthquake hazards.
Development of cost-effective oxygen delivery system can also help in situ
bioremediation method to be more widely implemented in practice. The research is
collaboration between faculty and students in the fields of earthquake
engineering and geoenvironmental engineering. Such interdisciplinary
collaborations have led to innovative ideas and continue benefiting
undergraduate and graduate students engaged in the research&lt;br/&gt;