* 0917791
* 2009 Plant Metabolic Engineering GRC &amp; Graduate Research Seminar, July 11-17,  in Waterville Valley, New Hampshire
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Joseph Chappell, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,000.00

The 2009 Plant Metabolic Engineering Gordon Conference &amp; Graduate Research
Seminar will take place July 11-17, 2009, at the Waterville Valley Resort in
Waterville Valley, New Hampshire. The Gordon Conferences continue to be
considered among the top scientific meetings worldwide, attracting top
researchers in settings that are conducive to developing interactions and
exploring new horizons. This conference will continue to provide a setting for
developing multidisciplinary collaborations essential to unravel the dynamic
complexity of plant metabolic networks and advance basic and applied research in
plant metabolic engineering. The approximately 130-150 speakers and participants
are from the US and abroad, at all career levels, and represent institutions
from academia, industry, private institutes, and federal laboratories. The
conference will consist of nine plenary sessions on leading edge topics
(including organization and evolution of metabolic pathways, systems biology
approaches and metabolic networks, and understanding complex metabolism and
agronomic traits). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Concerted
efforts to recruit women, persons with disabilities, and scientists from
underrepresented groups as speakers and participants have been expanded. In
addition to the standard GRC, a Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) in Plant
Metabolic Engineering will be held immediately before the GRC, which could serve
as a template for future meetings. The GRS provides a unique venue for junior
scientists (Ph.D. students and postdoctoral fellows) to present their research
in a more relaxed setting in front of their peers and is designed to reach out
to under-represented groups of students and pre-professionals. In 2005, graduate
students and postdocs accounted for 11% and 18% of the participants to the GRC,
highlighting the educational impact of this conference on young scientists. In
2007, 21% and 20% of the GRC participants were graduate students and postdocs,
which may be attributable to the Graduate Research Seminar component of the
conference. Greater than 40% of the GRS participants were women, all of who
attended the GRC. Similar to the 2007 GRS, the 2009 GRS will be centered on
"Roundtable Discussions", opportunities for participants to be exposed to and
openly discuss issues related to the fields to be covered as well as the
direction that they expect the school to take, providing the participants with
an opportunity to establish ownership of the meeting. Participants to the GRS
will be encouraged and expected to stay for the GRC, further enhancing the
educational component of this conference. It is expected that the GRS will have
a significant impact in attracting high caliber students and postdocs to the
field of metabolic engineering, and provide significant mentoring and
professional development opportunities for these aspiring, junior scientists.