* 0917328
* HCC: Small: PedWorkflow: Workflows for Assessing Student Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Yolanda Gil, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 08/31/2012
* USD 467,531.00

This pedagogical qorkflow research project will create a novel hybrid-workflow
framework that supports efficient assessment of student learning through
interactive generation and execution of various assessment workflows. Unlike in
many existing workflow systems, the task of student assessment includes steps
that cannot be fully automated, such as obtaining grade, background and student
survey information. The system will provide assistance in executing and
integrating the results of the manual steps. Research steps will include (a)
knowledge-based modeling of computational and non-computational assessment tools
as workflow components; (b) interactive generation of assessment workflows while
propagating and combining constraints from both computational and non-
computational components; and (c) interactive execution of hybrid workflows that
incorporates new constraints that are inferred from execution of non-
computational components. Evaluations will focus on the effects of Pedagogical
Workflow technology on learning assessment performance, especially the
assessment of pedagogical discourse in undergraduate engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational technology to support online learning
is now centrally supported by many colleges and universities. The perceived
mandate to use technology for instruction, in addition to the enormous amount of
information available for consumption on the Web, places a considerable burden
on instructors who must learn to integrate appropriate student practices and
learning assessment via the new media. Pedagogical workflows will allow
instructors with little or no training in educational assessment to perform
large-scale complex diagnosis and assessment of student learning in ongoing
lessons. Facilitating the integration of personal student information into
assessment will point to directions to improve STEM participation, learning, and
retention. The finding will provide benefits to society by sharing results and
technology with instructors and educational experts. The proposed work also has
the potential to lead to a new research field on e-Learning workflows, similar
to the way in which workflow technology transformed e-Science research with
e-Science workflows. &lt;br/&gt;