* 0917994
* PFI: An Integrated Framework for Creation and Assessment of Sustainable Construction Processes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2015
* Luke Snell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 02/28/2015
* USD 599,938.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Arizona State University (ASU), an NSF PFI graduate 0090559, and two
institutions that are new to the PFI Program (defined as ones that have never
been PFI grantees), San Diego State University and Cleveland State University.
Building upon a previous housing partnership effort, the project seeks to
develop sustainability metrics related to construction operations which can be
used by construction companies throughout the nation and beyond. While the
transformation focused upon sustainability in the built environment has
certainly touched the construction industry; paradoxically, the construction
industry itself has been left out of efforts to encourage green practices.
Metrics for construction operations do not currently exist in any form and
construction companies are left to measure their sustainability in their own
way. For the most part, they do no measuring at all. Through discovery and
applied research, this project will provide a base upon which sustainable
construction operations can be built, measured, weighed, and improved, thereby
stimulating significant new research and
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in the environmental performance of
construction operations are high on the agenda of many national and global
organizations. The long-term goal of this project is to provide the construction
industry with a standard protocol that will enable measurement and improvement
of the environmental performance of onsite construction processes. Conserving
material and energy resources will engender economic benefits to the U.S. The
project will also contribute toward a fundamental understanding of just how our
efforts to build the things we build affect the environment in which we live.
Partnership products will enable participation in the discovery process for
education groups at all levels, K-12 through university, and for industry
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: Arizona State University (lead institution), San Diego
State University, and Cleveland State University; Private Sector Companies:
Pulte Building Systems, SCP Concrete, LLC, DR Wastchak, LLC, and Baker Concrete;
and Professional and Trade Organizations: American Concrete Institute
(including, specifically, the Concrete Research Council, the ACI Committee 130
Sustainability in Concrete Construction, and the Strategic Development Council),
American Coal Ash Association, American Concrete Pavement Association, American
Society of Concrete Contractors, National Concrete Pavement Technology Center,
and National Ready Mixed Concrete Association.