* 0917566
* Enabling TV Meteorologists to Provide Viewers with Climate Change-related Science Education Based on ISE 'Best Practices'
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Edward Maibach, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,060,432.00

This project identifies TV meteorologists as a potentially important source of
informal science education on the topic of climate change. These professionals
are a well-respected source of scientific information in their local
communities, yet rarely address climate change in their weather broadcasts.
Proposers will conduct a series of studies that explore both mechanisms and
obstacles to using TV broadcasts as effective informal communication vehicles
for scientific information about climate change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In Study
1, they will identify methods already in use by "early adopters," compare them
to best explanatory practices in informal science education, and make
recommendations to improve practice. In Study 2, they will survey meteorologists
and their news directors to determine their motivations and needs for
information and materials regarding climate change. Based on their findings, and
informed by prior work, they will develop a set of educational materials,
principally a set of 30-second segments that can serve as a resource for TV
meteorologists nation-wide. In Study 3, they will conduct a quasi-experimental
evaluation of the materials with a TV station in Columbia, South Carolina to
determine their impact on viewers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The core project team
includes experts in science communication and education, physical oceanography,
broadcast meteorology, and media effects evaluation, and the advisory board
includes the Vice President of Programs at the National Environmental Education
Foundation and the Chief Meteorologist at The Weather Channel.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination mechanisms will include a range of publications and
presentations for the research findings, and a website for the sharing of
materials used by the early adopters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project
will advance the informal science education field's understanding of both
effective explanatory practices in broadcast media and the motivations and
practices of an understudied group of professionals. It will investigate an
innovative means of increasing public awareness and understanding of important
topics in climate change, and as well as creating a set of video-clips and
related materials based on careful study and best practices.