* 0917475
* Science Friday Radio Program &amp; Social Community
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Ira Flatow, ScienceFriday, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2011
* USD 998,554.00

Award #: 0917475&lt;br/&gt;Title: Science Friday Radio Program and Social
Community&lt;br/&gt;Start/end dates: August 2009-July 2011&lt;br/&gt;Program
Officer: Sandra Welch&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ira Flatow&lt;br/&gt;Program: Informal
Science Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend the
impact of the nationally broadcast weekly radio program, Science Friday to a
new, young audience through the various new cyber-space platforms and
interactive tools such as Facebook, Twitter, and Second Life as well as new
emerging social networking tools. The STEM content over the course of the two
year project will include a wide variety of topics in all disciplines. The
relationship between art and science will also be a focus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NPR radio broadcasts currently reach 1.3 million
listeners every week, and that audience is expected to increase. In addition to
that audience, this project will target a new audience of adults under the age
of 35 using various cyber platforms and new social networking tools such as
Second Life, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. Audiences will also be reached
through remote broadcasts from science centers and art centers around the
country. Over 30 science centers will use this project's web content on their
own web sites, reaching their audiences as well. The web content will be
translated into Spanish and widely disseminated to Hispanic audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each Friday afternoon, Ira Flatow, the PI will produce and
host the nationally broadcast Science Friday radio program interviewing
scientists and engineers in a lively engaging format. In addition, the Science
Friday digital media team will be producing and inviting others to create and
post digital content and commentary on the Science Friday web site for further
dissemination through Second Life, Facebook, as well as other emerging
networking platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation will use a quasi-
experimental design to study the appeal of both the radio broadcasts and the
cyber-platforms with both older and younger audiences. Proposed audience impacts
include increased STEM knowledge, interest, and
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partner organizations include the Self Reliance
Foundation, the New York Hall of Science, LA Theatreworks, and Tribeca Film
Festival.