* 0917468
* Collaborative Research: The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)-Mediterranean Teleconnection: Observations and Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2012
* USD 120,562.00

Numerous studies have demonstrated statistical associations between the El Nino-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and precipitation in the Mediterranean basin
(southern Europe, North Africa, Anatolia, and the Middle East). The dynamical
bases for these teleconnections have yet to be identified. The North African-
Asian (NAA) jet extends from the subtropical Atlantic Ocean across North Africa,
the Mediterranean, South Asia and Japan to the North Pacific Ocean. Atmospheric
jets, such as the NAA jet, have been shown to act as waveguides to atmospheric
Rossby wave disturbances and, therefore, to create teleconnections between
widely separated regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mediterranean basin lies in
the path of the NAA jet. In their previous work, these investigators showed that
the NAA jet is modulated throughout the year by conditions in the equatorial
Pacific associated with ENSO. This teleconnection between ENSO and the NAA jet
appears to be mediated by stationary barotropic Rossby
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the hypothesis that the
ENSO-Mediterranean teleconnection is the result of changes in the NAA jet caused
by ENSO. Observations and a hierarchy of models will be used to investigate the
dynamics of the ENSO-NAA jet teleconnection and to determine the extent to which
precipitation in the Mediterranean region is controlled by ENSO-modulated
changes to the NAA jet.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts and the
societal relevance of this research are in the economic, social and
epidemiological importance of climate, and especially precipitation, variability
in the Mediterranean region.