* 0917067
* NeTS:Small:Dynamic Coupling and Flow-Level Performance in Data Networks: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gustavo de Veciana, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 07/31/2013
* USD 399,971.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of network
users' best effort flows, e.g., file transfer delays and web browsing
responsiveness, depends on the resources they are allocated over time. When
varying traffic loads share these resources and/or wireless nodes' transmission
capacities depend on each other through interference, the allocated resources
and thus flows' performance are coupled through the traffic and interference
dynamics. This project investigates such performance coupling in data networks
and, in turn, how it affects protocol and network design. This is a significant
problem, as most data networks share these characteristics, and we currently
have no robust tools to effectively predict and thus optimize performance.
Expected results include new theory, approximations and performance bounds
enabling the analysis of such systems which are also applicable to other
domains. Expected results also include using these tools to investigate: (1) the
benefits of, and capacity allocation, in networks supporting multipath transport
and/or shared wireless access networks; and (2), the development of improved
protocols and algorithms that are sensitive to such performance coupling, e.g.,
preliminary work suggests the state-of-the-art base station association policies
can be substantially improved by factoring the performance coupling resulting
form interference. The work's impact will be assured through broad dissemination
in the research community, and by leveraging industry partners in evaluating
practical applications and technology transfer opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;