* 0917948
* PFI: Oregon State University Oregon Commercialization Initiative
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Melissa Appleyard, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (C:A) partnership
between Oregon State University (OSU), an institution new to the PFI Program
(defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee), and Portland State
University, an NSF PFI graduate (0438736--seeks to build upon the Oregon
Commercialization Initiative (OCI), a pilot program which is underway, in order
to catalyze commercialization efforts in Oregon by leveraging lessons learned
and existing assets such as the Oregon Nanoscience and Microtechnologies
Institute (ONAMI) so as to create a broader program with greater impact. ONAMI
and OTRADI are resources for the "physical" and "technical" aspects of
commercializing an invention; they enable the building and testing of
prototypes. The development and implementation of a plan that brings an
invention to market needs an additional resource, the intervention of
experienced business entrepreneurs. OSUs model for screening and incubating new
business opportunities from laboratory concepts addresses many of the roadblocks
associated with university commercialization. One of the features of the model
is the early direct involvement of seasoned entrepreneurs. Indeed, the full
panoply of pertinent non-academic players are to be brought onto the university
campus and protocols for interaction with, and education of researchers,
students, and administrators will be implemented, studied, and further
developed. So far, more startups have been created in the two years of the pilot
program than had been created in the history of OSU. OCI will accelerate the
development of an entrepreneurial culture at several research universities. The
research team and business students will study the impact of OCI and publish
their findings. Thus OCI will advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training, and learning. OCI will enhance the infrastructure
for research and education by supporting the efforts of researchers to
commercialize their discoveries. In so doing, it will enable the Oregon
universities to recruit and retain better students and better professors. The
proposed activity will benefit society by generating jobs, creating wealth, and
improving both the standard of living and the quality of life in the Pacific
Northwest. OCI will create tool kits which will enable universities to replicate
its achievements in other regions.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Oregon State
University (OSU) (lead institution), Portland State University (PSU), Willamette
University, University of Oregon, Arizona State University, University of
Washington, and University of Utah; Private Sector Organizations: Bend Research
Inc.; Buerk Dale Victor LLC; Hewlett-Packard; Intel; Marger, Johnson & McCollom,
P.C.; Northwest Technology Ventures, LP; Oregon Entrepreneurs Network (OEN); and
The Partners Group; Preston, Gates & Ellis LLP; and Public Sector Organizations:
Oregon Nanoscience and Microtechnologies Institute (ONAMI), and Oregon
Translation Research and Drug Development Institute (OTRADI).