* 0917261
* III: Small: An Architecture and Platform for Frictionless Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Kristian Hammond, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 504,400.00

This project designs and implements tools for frictionless information systems
that work behind the applications that people use in their work and everyday
lives, automatically finding and presenting contextually relevant, useful, and
interesting information. To be relevant to a user's information needs in a given
context, information must add something new: it must be similar in certain
respects to the context, but dissimilar in certain other respects. The
technology utilized in this project explicitly and specifically searches or
filters for interestingly different information, dissimilar in systematic ways
that reflect information attributes relevant to a user's
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops useful information attributes
and dimensions of dissimilarity as well as technologies that can utilize these
attributes and dimensions to find useful and relevant information based on the
user?s current context. The particular dimensions that matter in a given context
will depend upon the user, task, and domain at hand. To address this
variability, the project is aimed at a general architecture and a set of tools
and libraries that will support the rapid development of frictionless
information systems for a wide range of application
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results are expected to lead to development
of information systems that can provide people with information that is
contextually relevant, genuinely interesting, and diverse, resulting in broader
and deeper understanding. The results will be disseminated in academic venues as
well as through public release of prototype systems via the project Web site
(http://infolab.northwestern.edu/). The project is well integrated with
educational activities. Relevance Engine platform will be utilized in class
projects for advanced undergraduates and graduate students, and some of these
systems may be aimed at educational settings. Students will be involved in
development of corpora for testing prototypes, informal assessment of prototypes
using web resources, and gain valuable experience in research, design and
implementation, and validation.