* 0917732
* Collaborative Research: the Kalavasos and Maroni Built Environments Project. Investigating Social Transformation in Late Bronze Age Cyprus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Fisher, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 107,570.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Kalavasos and Maroni Built Environments Project is an interdisciplinary and
collaborative effort by Cornell University and Ithaca College to investigate the
relationships between architecture, social interaction and social change in Late
Bronze Age (c. 1650-1100 BCE) Cyprus. This important period saw the island of
Cyprus shift from a relatively insular and egalitarian, village-based society to
an urbanized, cosmopolitan civilization. Previous research indicates that the
new cities played a vital role in this profound social transformation by
promoting social interactions that favored the interests of emerging elites and
underpinned their political power. The dynamics of this process, however, are
not well understood and have not been systematically investigated. The major
problem is that, while a number of Late Bronze Age sites on Cyprus have been
partially excavated, there is still no clear picture of the anatomy of a Late
Bronze Age city, i.e., how individual buildings were integrated into an overall
urban landscape that structured social interaction. With advancements in
archaeological geophysics, one now has the ability to investigate these
processes by detecting buried walls, streets and other architectural features
without the tremendous expense of large-scale excavation.

Using equipment obtained by Ithaca College from a previous NSF grant, this
collaborative project will conduct three, four-week seasons of geophysical
survey at two important Late Bronze Age urban centers in south-central Cyprus:
Kalavasos-Ayios Dhimitrios and Maroni. Combined with digital mapping and 3D
modeling of previously excavated architecture, this work will allow the
researchers to assemble complete urban plans of these sites. This will
significantly expand the dataset of Late Bronze Age architecture and, by
applying analytical methods such as access and visibility analyses, provide
unprecedented new insights into how the new urban environments organized social
interactions that supported or undermined broader social structures. In
addition, the project will develop a geographic information system-based
database of architectural and archaeological data that will be made available to
any interested parties on our project website. The project will aslo further the
development of collaborative training opportunities in archaeological geophysics
for students from Cornell University, Ithaca College and the University of
Cyprus.



The results of this research will be broadly applicable as its methods and
objectives are interdisciplinary in design and scope, combining social
archaeology with physics, environmental psychology, architecture, planning and
urban geography. The work will be widely disseminated in a variety of media,
including peer-reviewed journals, major conferences, public lectures and a
project website which will serve as an important research tool. In addition, the
project will forge international collaboration with research institutions on
Cyprus, including the Cyprus Institute and the University of Cyprus. Given the
current importance of understanding the dynamic effects of cities on ever-
growing urban populations, the research brings some much-needed time depth and
historical perspective to this issue. Ultimately, this project has the potential
to shed new light on a transformative period in the Cypriot past, while at the
same time enhancing the infrastructure for scientific research and providing
several students with exciting opportunities in experiential learning.