* 0917381
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Multi-Resolution Analysis &amp; Measurement of Large-scale, Dynamic Networked Systems with Applications to Online Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 05/31/2014
* USD 362,999.00

Many large-scale networked systems such as Online Social Networks (OSNs)are
often represented as annotated graphs with various node or link attributes. Such
a representation is usually derived from a snapshot that is obtained through
measurements. These graph representations enable researchers to characterize the
connectivity of these systems using graph analysis. However, captured snapshots
of large networked systems are likely to be distorted. Furthermore, commonly-
used graph analysis characterizes the connectivity of a graph in an indirect
fashion and generally ignores graph dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-
disciplinary research program designs, develops and rigorously evaluates
theoretically grounded techniques to accurately measure and properly
characterize the connectivity structure of large-scale and dynamic networked
systems. More specifically, the project examines various graph sampling
techniques for collecting representative samples from large and evolving graphs.
It also investigates how multiscale analysis can be used as a powerful technique
to characterize the key features of the connectivity structure of large dynamic
networked systems at different scales in space and time. The developed
techniques will be used to characterize fundamental properties of the friendship
and various interaction connectivity structures in different
OSNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises to identify the underlying
technical and social factors that primarily drive the structural properties and
dynamic nature of OSN-specific connectivity structures. It will produce new
models for friendship and interactions in OSNs, a large archive of anonymized
datasets and new tools for OSN measurement, simulation and analysis. The latter
will be incorporated into newly-developed courses in Computer Science and
Sociology, and will be freely distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;