* 0917916
* Collaborative Research:   Cytokinetic Furrow Specification in Sea Urchin Embryos
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* William Bement, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2013
* USD 326,267.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Animal cells
divide themselves by assembling a contractile ring of actin and myosin around
the cell equator, which constricts the cell surface between duplicated
chromosome sets at the end of mitosis. Classical experiments suggest that cells
"know" where to build the contractile ring because microtubules of the mitotic
apparatus, the cellular machine that sorts chromosomes, convey spatial cues to
the cell surface. The nature of the relevant spatial cues, and the mechanism
that conveys them to the cell surface, have been elusive and controversial.
Recent research shows that the signaling protein Rho is a key physiological link
between the mitotic apparatus and recruitment of contractile proteins to the
cell equator during division. Molecular genetic studies implicate microtubule-
associated Rho regulators in the control of cell division, supporting a widely-
favored hypothesis: that molecular motors traveling along microtubules bring
information about events deep in the cytoplasm to the cell surface, thereby
somehow creating a spatial pattern of Rho activity that favors actin and myosin
recruitment at the right place and time to form the contractile ring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the causal relationship between
distinct subsets of cellular microtubules and Rho activity, elucidate how
microtubule geometry and behavior collaborate with Rho regulators to identify
the division plane on the cell surface, and will seek to explain how cells
rapidly respond to perturbations during division. The working hypothesis is that
one population of microtubules -- the asters, which radiate toward the cell
surface from each pole of the mitotic apparatus -- confine a diffusible signal
that is released, after chromosome segregation, from another population of
microtubules -- the midzone of the mitotic apparatus -- deep in the cell. The
project will test the hypothesis that either population suffices to localize Rho
activation, but that synergy between them makes cell division accurate and
precise. Accuracy and precision in cell division are fundamentally important to
the lives of cells and the organisms they compose. Even small errors in genome
partitioning can be irrevocably disastrous. This project relies on sea urchin
embryos as a model system, using fluorescent imaging of live cells at high
spatial and temporal resolution to measure intracellular dynamics in normal and
experimentally-perturbed cells. In so doing, the studies will resolve long-
standing debates about the mechanism of cell division. Many classical results on
cell division derive from studies of sea urchin eggs and similar embryonic
cells, but several significant conclusions from classical work seem to disagree
with recent work on the molecular genetics of cell division. By re-examining
cell division in the sea urchin embryo using molecular probes, this research
will show whether large embryonic cells follow different rules than small
somatic cells, or whether animal cells of all types adapt a common mechanism to
the diverse demands of their biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts.
This project will train graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art
live-cell imaging and high-resolution confocal microscopy. At the same time the
research will advance technique development in this area by developing widely-
applicable fluorescent protein probes for visualizing subcellular organization
and dynamics. The project also includes a major educational component. The
research group, which includes an active public high school science teacher,
will prepare high-resolution time-lapse films of normal cell behavior in embryos
expressing fluorescent probes for key cellular constituents such as
microtubules, actin filaments, and chromosomes. Such films will be annotated and
disseminated along with didactic materials appropriate for classroom use in
high-school and undergraduate cell biology curriculum. In addition, the
principal investigators are actively involved in bringing scientific research
into the public sphere through websites, public lectures and school outreach,
and museum exhibitions.