* 0917840
* PFI: PIIT:  Partners for Innovation in Information Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Cen Li, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2013
* USD 599,962.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type III (A: C) partnership
between Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU), an NSF PFI graduate (0227754),
and two institutions new to the PFI Program (defined as ones that have never
been PFI grantees): Alabama A&amp;M University and Nashville State Community
College (NSCC). The Bureau of Labor Statistics projected the total number of IT
job openings in the U.S. to be 1.6 million between 2006 and 2016. Only half of
that number will be filled due to decreased enrollment and low retention rates
in IT related majors, and this shortfall situation is mirrored in Tennessee.
Currently, the estimated demand for IT professionals in the Nashville area is as
high as 1,200 per month. However, the universities in middle Tennessee are
graduating a maximum of 380 graduates per year with an IT related baccalaureate
degree. In order to address the need to increase the numbers of qualified IT
professionals in the region, the project seeks to develop a national recruitment
and retention model for IT workforce development by building an infrastructure
to bring together all the stakeholders in the pipeline--academic (a PhD granting
university, a community college, an HBCU in a nearby county in Alabama, and
public high schools in both Tennessee and Alabama) and local business (through
IT business associations) in the Tennessee and Alabama region. What is proposed
to address both the recruitment and retention of IT students at the college
level is a set of interrelated set of activities (including student summer camp
topics such as Alice animation, robotics, and multimedia design) intended to
motivate, challenge, and intrigue as well as to provide learning experiences
which make the students? studies more relevant and their resumes more
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct involvement of local IT business
and academic institutions with high school students/teachers/parents will have a
positive impact on the number of IT majors and IT graduates. The database of
real-world problems and projects and resulting case studies will be widely
distributed providing examples for other IT educators to use. The model created
by Partners for Innovation in Information Technology (PIIT) will result in a
greater number of better trained IT professionals helping address the national
IT workforce crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project are Academic Institutions: Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU)
(lead institution) , Alabama A&amp;M University, Nashville State Technical
Community College (NSTCC), Rutherford County Schools (TN), Davidson County
Schools (TN); and Madison County Schools (AL); Private Sector (Corporate)
Organizations: Mind2Marketplace (AL and TN); and Governmental Organizations:
Tennessee State Government.