* 0917343
* CIF: Small: Cognitive Femtocells: Breaking the Spatial Reuse Limits of Cellular Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2014
* USD 449,999.00

Cognitive femtocells: Breaking the spatial reuse limits of cellular
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation
of wireless cellular systems will be data traffic driven, providing seamless
connectivity to the Internet and its services. In the areas of information and
communication technologies, cellular systems and the Internet have proven to be
the most transformative technologies for society. This research endeavors to
optimally marry these two technologies with the goal of dramatically increasing
achievable data rates and coverage. The proposed solution is to deploy very
small cellular access points in residential homes and offices. These
``femtocells" are connected to the network via existing DSL/Cable and do not
require additional deployment of costly wired infrastructure. Several
theoretical challenges are posed by the femtocell concept. In particular, due to
lack of coordination with the rest of the network, femtocells interfere with the
network itself. This research develops novel solutions for femtocell technology
by exploiting ideas from cognitive radio, based on intelligent opportunistic
usage of the shared radio resource. Femtocell base stations will be deployed
without careful frequency planning and will react to the interference
environment by adapting their signaling strategy, thus, in the vernacular of
cognitive radio, the cellular system plays the role of the ?primary? user.
Unlike the classical cognitive radio scenario, the cellular signaling protocols
and coding schemes are known. In this research we build on recent results on the
Gaussian &lt;br/&gt;interference channel and exploit the signal strength
imbalances due to path-loss typical of cellular networks. Thus, the system is
designed so that it operates predominantly in the regime of either weak or
strong interference. Advanced signal processing and channel coding are exploited
to utilize the fine structure of primary (cellular) signals, to explore the
fundamental costs of cognitive radio and to develop coordination strategies to
minimize this overhead. The goal of this novel design is to achieve a dramatic
improvement in spatial reuse, allowing future cellular systems to achieve data
rates comparable to wireless local area network while retaining the seamless
connectivity and mobility of cellular networks.&lt;br/&gt;