* 0917212
* CIF:  Small:  Power Consumption in Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Anant Sahai, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2013
* USD 296,566.00

Power consumption is an increasingly important issue across
society.&lt;br/&gt;For communication, as the ranges of links in wireless
networks&lt;br/&gt;continue to shrink, the power consumed in the encoding and
decoding&lt;br/&gt;becomes a decidedly nontrivial factor in the choice of
system&lt;br/&gt;architecture. This is particularly important in settings such
as&lt;br/&gt;wireless patient monitoring, personal area networks, sensor
networks,&lt;br/&gt;etc. Shannon's classical information theory only established
the&lt;br/&gt;tradeoff between rate and transmit power as the probability of
error&lt;br/&gt;goes to zero and the block-length goes to infinity. This
research is&lt;br/&gt;about giving new conceptual tools for reasoning about the
power&lt;br/&gt;consumption in encoding and decoding as well. The core idea is
that in&lt;br/&gt;the age of billion transistor chips, the proper metric for
complexity&lt;br/&gt;is the power consumed by the
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as simplified channel models have
enabled sophisticated analysis&lt;br/&gt;that has revealed deep insights into
error correction and transmit&lt;br/&gt;power, this research develops simplified
implementation models that&lt;br/&gt;are amenable to analysis. This reveals the
fundamental tradeoffs&lt;br/&gt;underlying the interplay between transmission
and processing&lt;br/&gt;powers. Crucially, the models developed are compatible
with modern&lt;br/&gt;approaches to iterative and "turbo" decoding by massively
parallel&lt;br/&gt;ASICs, while also not being limited to just the currently
known&lt;br/&gt;families of sparse-graph codes. By developing a unified
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;framework, this research allows us to understand the
total power cost&lt;br/&gt;of meeting performance objectives like high rate, low
distortion, low&lt;br/&gt;delay and low probability of error. This in turn leads
to an&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how to better engineer wireless systems as a
whole:&lt;br/&gt;opening up avenues for collaboration between circuit
designers,&lt;br/&gt;communication theorists, and networking researchers working
at higher&lt;br/&gt;layers.&lt;br/&gt;