* 0917062
* III:Small:Integrated Problem Diagnosis and Repair in Databases and Storage Area Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Shivnath Babu, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 423,865.00

&lt;br/&gt;Databases are typically used as a subsystem in a larger system
that&lt;br/&gt;contains Web servers, application servers, and network-
attached&lt;br/&gt;storage servers. Such complex systems experience some form of
change&lt;br/&gt;all the time, e.g., an update to a Java module in the
application&lt;br/&gt;server, a statistics update in the database, or a RAID
rebuild in a&lt;br/&gt;storage volume. Such changes in different subsystems can
cause an&lt;br/&gt;overall performance degradation whose cause is hard to
diagnose. The&lt;br/&gt;diagnosis task is all the more daunting because
enterprise&lt;br/&gt;environments have isolated administration teams and tools
for each&lt;br/&gt;subsystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing an
integrated tool called DIADS that&lt;br/&gt;automates complex administrative
tasks like problem diagnosis, what-if&lt;br/&gt;analysis, orchestrating disaster
recovery, and online tuning when a&lt;br/&gt;database is used as a subsystem in
a larger system. DIADS contains two&lt;br/&gt;technical innovations. Problem
diagnosis involves reconstructing&lt;br/&gt;system behavior at various points of
time using historic and current&lt;br/&gt;monitoring data collected from the
system. However, the amount and&lt;br/&gt;quality of monitoring data available
from production systems is&lt;br/&gt;constrained by the need to keep monitoring
overhead low. DIADS uses an&lt;br/&gt;abstraction called Annotated Plan Graph to
represent and reason about&lt;br/&gt;database behavior in the context of a
larger system. Annotated Plan&lt;br/&gt;Graphs are generated from light-weight
monitoring data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The other innovation in DIADS is a suite
of workflows for&lt;br/&gt;administrative tasks that combine machine-learning
techniques with&lt;br/&gt;domain knowledge from system experts. For example, for
problem&lt;br/&gt;diagnosis, the machine-learning part of the workflow provides
core&lt;br/&gt;techniques to handle large and noisy streams of monitoring data,
while&lt;br/&gt;the domain-knowledge part acts as checks-and-balances to guide
the&lt;br/&gt;diagnosis in the right direction. This unique design enables DIADS
to&lt;br/&gt;function effectively even in the presence of multiple
concurrent&lt;br/&gt;problems as well as noisy monitoring data prevalent in
production&lt;br/&gt;environments. DIADS is being prototyped for research and
educational&lt;br/&gt;purposes in a datacenter setting with PostgreSQL databases
and an&lt;br/&gt;enterprise-level storage area network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web page at
&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cs.duke.edu/~shivnath/diads.html&lt;br/&gt;