* 0917379
* III: Small: Do-It-Yourself forms-driven workflow web applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alin Deutsch, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* nan zhang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 531,444.00

Emerging Do-It-Yourself database-driven web application&lt;br/&gt;projoect aims
to (1) enable non-programmers to rapidly build custom&lt;br/&gt;data management
and workflow applications and (2) to promote&lt;br/&gt;a novel pattern of
interaction between application owners and&lt;br/&gt;programmers. Their
beneficiaries are organizations, in need of long tail&lt;br/&gt;web
applications, that cannot afford the time and money needed to&lt;br/&gt;engage
into the conventional code development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do-It-
Yourself platforms must maximize two metrics that present&lt;br/&gt;an inherent
trade-off: the simplicity of specification and the&lt;br/&gt;application scope,
which characterizes the class of applications&lt;br/&gt;that can be built using
the platform?s specification mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal introduces two
scopes with interesting trade-off&lt;br/&gt;features. Namely, in the "All-SQL"
scope and the (more limited)&lt;br/&gt;"forms-driven workflows" scope each
application page consists&lt;br/&gt;of a report (modeled by a nested query) and
forms and actions in the&lt;br/&gt;report's context, leading to updates. The
limitations have practically&lt;br/&gt;minor effects on the scope but they
enable simple specification and&lt;br/&gt;automatic optimizations, studied in
the proposal, such as:&lt;br/&gt;1. automatic creation of reports by choosing
between the candidates&lt;br/&gt;using information theoretic criteria relying on
constraints captured in&lt;br/&gt;the limited models.&lt;br/&gt;2. summarization
of applications as workflow specifications by&lt;br/&gt;analyzing the
dependencies between updates and queries. Vice versa,&lt;br/&gt;the proposal
shows how simple workflow primitives translate to queries&lt;br/&gt;(reports)
and updates (forms and actions).&lt;br/&gt;The proposal also provides an
unlimited model of web applications,&lt;br/&gt;where programmers introduce code
components and interface them&lt;br/&gt;with the "limited" part via queries and
updates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed models of database-driven web
applications will impact&lt;br/&gt;the education of both Computer Science (CS)
and non-CS students&lt;br/&gt;that need to comprehend web applications at a high
conceptual level.&lt;br/&gt;For further information see the project web page
at&lt;br/&gt;http://www.db.ucsd.edu/forward