* 0917410
* NetSE: Small: Cooperation and Incentives in Communication and Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2014
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Crowston
* 05/31/2014
* USD 442,528.00

A vision of the next-generation wireless networks includes deployment of highly
capable intelligent devices that connect to form high-quality high-speed wide-
area wireless networks. This necessitates advances on several fronts: more
efficient spectrum use by sharing among cognitive devices, more sophisticated
communication schemes and new "socially-aware" network architectures. In this
project, we seek to increase wireless network capacity and capabilities by a
factor of 10 or more by developing mechanisms and algorithms for enhancing
cooperation among users in networks by using ideas from mathematical game theory
and taking advantage of social aspects of networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will solve well-known hard problems in communication networks from a
novel perspective, combining ideas from mathematical economics, game theory and
information theory to propose incentive-informed schemes that will enable user
cooperation in networks thereby paving the way for ubiquitous wireless
connectivity. The project will solve long-standing unsolved problems in
information theory and develop a mathematical theory of social communication
networks. The project will potentially transform existing wireless and
communication networks by laying foundations for a systematic study of
incentives and cooperation in networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
have substantial broader impact on the development of science, education, and
technology: It will contribute to a novel synthesis of ideas from various
disciplines. Conducted research shall be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate classroom teaching to better prepare the next generation of engineers.
In the long run, the project will enable substantial increase in network
capacity and technological development of "socially" smart network
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;