* 0917809
* Late Tertiary Climatic Changes and the Evolutionary Success of Tribe Senecioneae (Asteraceae): A Phylogenetic Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 11/21/2008,03/31/2011
* Linda Watson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 03/31/2011
* USD 116,663.00

The plant tribe Senecioneae is a large group of plants in the Asteraceae
(Sunflower) family, with approximately 3000 described species worldwide. It has
an almost cosmopolitan distribution and harbors enormous diversity in
morphological adaptations. Yet there has been no attempt to reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships within this enormous plant group despite the numerous
and detailed studies on the Asteraceae as a whole and for all other tribes in
this family, thereby creating a large gap in our understanding of one of the
largest families of vascular plants. The aim of the proposed research is to
improve our understanding of the evolutionary success of Senecioneae by
reconstructing its evolutionary history and by examining the origin of summer-
dry / winter-wet habitats (mediterranean climates) in which so many members of
this group live; such climates appeared between 2 and 6 million years ago and
resulted in regions with specialized floras on five continents. Utilizing
biogeographic and molecular dating methods, the time and place of origin for the
Senecioneae will be estimated, and dispersal pathways leading from ancestral
area(s) into regions with Mediterranean climates will be reconstructed and
dated. The patterns of diversification that subsequently followed colonization
into Mediterranean regions will be further examined and routes of migration into
areas with other climates will be inferred. Thus, it will be determined if the
descendents of Mediterranean lineages remained confined to these summer-dry
areas, or alternatively, became main elements of other contemporary floras. A
final goal is to use the reconstructed relationships of Senecioneae as a basis
for a new classification for the tribe that reflects evolutionary history. The
merits of this proposal will be a better understanding of the evolution of
Mediterranean-climate plants, in general, by providing insight into the
relationship between climate change and diversification. Furthermore, this
project will contribute to a better understanding of the evolution of one of the
largest, most diverse, and successful families of flowering
plants.&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of this research include contributions to the
education of students and teachers through research training, to the general
public through the increased availability of information on the Internet, as
well as to the scientific community through publication in journals and
presentations. The proposed research will give opportunities for Miami
University of Ohio students to complete their research requirements for
graduation, and opportunities for graduate students to serve as research
mentors. In addition, the proposed research will be available to students who
apply to the University's Summer Scholars Program and to in-service primary and
secondary school teachers in the Masters of Teaching Program. Photographs,
descriptions, phylogenies, and nomenclatural information will be incorporated
into the Tree of Life website for access by the general public with links to
important databases. Similarly, information will be provided for the website of
The International Compositae Alliance, an international consortium of scientists
studying the evolution of the sunflower family. &lt;br/&gt;