* 0917401
* HCC: Small: From Local Ties to Transnational Connections: The Role of Computer-mediated Communication in Relational Maintenance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Irina Shklovski, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2014
* USD 499,999.00

The United States is a multi-cultural society, where uses of communication
technology have become ubiquitous and routine. Although there has been a
substantial amount of research on computer-mediated communication, very little
has been said on the issue of cultural differences in assessing the uses and
interpretations of current technologies. The very ubiquity of social computing
applications makes the study of cultural differences in their use for relational
maintenance difficult. Focusing on environments where social relationships are
paramount for survival and where computer-mediated communication applications
are relatively limited in number can help us examine how cultural preferences,
social needs and constraints of available infrastructure shape the use of
computer-mediated communication for relational maintenance. The goal of this
research is to make empirical and theoretical contributions to ongoing research
on cultural differences in the use of computer-mediated communication through
the investigations of the role of social media in transnational contexts. This
research will also contribute to the development of theory of the basic
processes underlying social relationships through empirical investigations of
non-western relational maintenance practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research will address how cultural differences can shape future
development and design of human-centered computing applications and will enhance
ongoing efforts to promote design and deployment of computer-mediated
communication technologies in digitally nascent societies. By turning attention
to the cultural contexts of technology use for relational maintenance, we also
seek to engage with people whose perspectives are often unheard, including
transnational migrants. Contextual study of Internet and social network site use
is especially valuable in a culture that differs from the predominantly Western
perspective that developed or provided templates for the development of the
majority of current social computing applications.