* 0917191
* CSR:  Small: Scalable Applications Start with Scalable Virtual Machine Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kathryn McKinley, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2012
* USD 499,996.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to devise
and implement a scalable virtual machine that includes scalable garbage
collectors, profilers and just-in-time (JIT) compilers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
hardware vendors deliver chip multiprocessors (CMPs) as the next-generation
general-purpose computing substrate, programmers are increasingly choosing
managed languages for their next generation applications. The virtual machine
(VM) stands between the two, integrating them together. However, VMs are not yet
capable of providing scalable performance to applications on parallel systems
composed of CMPs. VMs are limited in part because key features, such as dynamic
profiling, compilation, and garbage collection, are often not themselves
scalable. This VM scalability bottleneck is an impediment to application
scaling. For example, because VMs are oblivious to application data
partitioning, they can introduce unnecessary communication such as false
sharing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to solve this problem by
designing and implementing scalable virtual machine (SVM) services. SVM includes
novel dynamic profilers, just-in-time (JIT) compilers, and garbage collectors
that are themselves scalable and support parallel applications. The project
explores how to design and build a framework for parallel dynamic analysis, JIT
compilation, and garbage collection that uses novel cost models of the
application, analysis, JIT, and collector work to optimize for scalable high-
performance. In particular, analysis, JIT, and garbage collector work is divided
and scheduled in novel ways to mirror application partitions and
threads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SVM will be developed within a Java Virtual
Machine, but the algorithms will apply to other managed languages such as C\#,
JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. The investigators will make both SVM and parallel
applications publicly available, adding to the national research infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;