* 0917021
* CNS:CSR:Small: Leakage-Aware Temperature-Constrained Real-Time Scheduling
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Gang Quan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2014
* USD 265,357.00

Leakage-Aware Temperature-Constrained Real-Time Scheduling

This project is motivated by two recently emerged challenges in design of
computer systems---the escalating temperature and the dramatically increased
leakage power consumption in IC circuits---that threaten to handicap future
generations of computing systems. The temperature of a computer chip increases
in tandem with rapidly growing power consumption. At the same time, high chip
temperature drastically increases leakage power, which is becoming a major
component in the overall power consumption in today?s sub-micron IC circuits.
This positive feedback loop between temperature and leakage exacerbates the
design challenge, not only the power/energy minimization problem but also the
temperature-constrained design problem.

This research seeks to address the temperature and power/energy consumption
problem using real-time scheduling techniques, with a focus on the interplay
between temperature and leakage power consumption. This project studies system-
level thermal models that can capture the temperature-leakage interdependency
with high accuracy while remaining simple enough for formal system level
analysis. The research seeks to develop and validate novel and effective real-
time scheduling techniques under both single and multiple processor platforms.

This research has the potential for significant societal impact, mitigating a
critical barrier to the evolution of real-time embedded computing systems to
sub-micron scales. This research yields techniques for reducing energy
consumption and enhancing reliability and lifetime of computer systems (hence
reducing cost and increasing dependability). The system-level models and
techniques developed in this project will not only benefit computer scientists
and researchers but those from many other disciplines and research domains as
well. Furthermore, this project provides abundant research topics and learning
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. The project seeks to
broaden opportunities for participation in research through outreach to recruit
students from groups currently underrepresented in this field.