* 0917827
* Thermal Adaptation in Animals in the Temperate Zone - A Response to Rapid Climate Warming in Nature?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 584,551.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The rate at which populations adapt to environmental change, and particularly to
the rapid changes in temperature predicted from global warming, is a critical
question across the environmental sciences. The investigator's previous research
suggests that the primary evolutionary response to climate warming in the
temperate zone involves seasonal or photoperiodic adaptations; thermal
adaptation appears to be secondary and to require a much longer time (thousands
of years) to develop. In this project, the researcher proposes a clever and
robust test of the ability of the pitcher-plant mosquito to adapt to recent,
rapid temperature changes on a decadal time frame. Mosquito populations were
first tested in 1999 for their responses to experimentally controlled thermal
environments. The PI will now re-sample these same populations and rear them
under the same experimental conditions to determine whether mosquitoes have
responded adaptively to temperature increases experienced over the past decade.

Results from this research will reveal basic mechanisms that enable some
organisms to adapt to climate change while others cannot. Organisms may first
adapt to climate change by shifting their seasonal activity in response to
photoperiod. The inability of an organism to adapt to rapid thermal changes
could quickly limit the resilience that photoperiod adjustment alone permits.
Undergraduate students will participate actively in this research. In addition,
the project will continue to serve as a 'poster child' for the consequences of
rapid environmental change. Results to date have been highlighted in over 30
national and international interviews, in popular magazine articles, on TV and
radio broadcases, and in public lectures.