* 0917056
* CSR: Small: Efficient and Reciprocal File Replication and Consistency Maintenance in Pervasive Distributed Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 386,778.00

Advancements in technology over the past decade are leading to a promising
future for pervasive distributed computing (PDC), where access to information
and services is provided anytime and anywhere around the world. The
proliferation of Internet-scale applications poses new challenges for how future
file systems are designed and managed to enable this future. The difficulty of
these challenges grows with the number of users and the intensity of the data,
and is further compounded by the need to support replication and consistency.
However, previous file replication and consistency maintenance approaches are
not efficient enough to be scalable for PDC. These two issues are typically
addressed separately, despite the significant interdependencies between them.
This research addresses this issue through the development of a file management
system with Efficient and Reciprocal file Replication and Consistency
maintenance (ERRC). The ERRC system will incorporate swarm intelligence based
file replication and coordinated multi-factor-oriented file replication
algorithms to achieve high efficiency in both file replication and consistency
maintenance. The system also contains self-adaptive file replication and
consistency maintenance mechanism that allows each node to determine the need of
file replication and consistency maintenance in a decentralized manner.
Understanding and insight gained as a result of this project will be
disseminated through technology transfer to industry partners, in addition to
publication and software release channels. The multi-disciplinary nature of this
research also lends itself to cross-disciplinary education and well-rounded
training of students.

