* 0917625
* Quest: Exploring Our Natural World
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Saul Rockman, KQED Inc
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 01/31/2012
* USD 2,250,000.00

Quest, produced by KQED, is a multimedia initiative designed to raise the
profile of STEM issues throughout the Northern California region and activate
citizens to discuss and investigate them. Led by KQED, Quest is created and
maintained by an active consortium of 16 participating informal science
education organizations. Based on the successful Quest model, KQED will build on
its prior collaborative work to develop regional partnerships with other public
broadcasting stations and community-based organizations around the country,
making possible a new and innovative partnership in science media production and
informal science education. This grant will support a) a growing collaborative
of science centers, museums, research institutes, and community-based
organizations for editorial development, education outreach, and content
creation; b) the production of at least 10 hours of television, weekly radio
science news reports, and a dynamic online website that supports and extends the
broadcast material; and c) educational resources and professional development
workshops.

STEM content will encompass research drawn from the physical sciences, life
sciences, and earth sciences. Most of the stories will also incorporate content
about the technology and engineering used to support scientific endeavors. The
KQED Educational Network (EdNet) will administer the community and educational
outreach initiatives, including creating viewer/listener guides, developing and
delivering workshops, and providing information built around Quest media.
Project collaborators include the Bay Institute, California Academy of Sciences,
Chabot Space and Science Center, East Bay Regional Park District, Exploratorium,
Girl Scouts, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Lawrence Hall of Science,
Museum of Paleontology, Oakland Zoo, and The Tech Museum of Innovation. In
expanding the model to regional hubs, Quest will also involve the Coalition for
Public Understanding of Science (COPUS), the Encyclopedia of Life, and an array
of peer public broadcasting organizations.

This project offers a useful and exciting model for public television and radio
stations nationally in building community collaborations that advance informal
science education. The detailed and informed ways in which the team works with
its community partners via multiple platforms are innovative. This proposal
builds on prior work in Northern California to explore additional regional
partnerships with other public broadcasting stations and community-based
organizations, making possible a unique partnership in science media production
and informal science education. This project extends reach by developing up to
ten regional "hubs" across the country. Evaluation will be conducted by Rockman
et al.