* 0917936
* PFI: Partnerships for Innovation in Laser-based Manufacturing and Materials Processing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Yung Shin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2011
* USD 599,995.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type II (A:B) partnership
between Purdue University, an NSF PFI graduated grantee (0538786)in
collaboration with participants from another NSF partnership supported program,
graduated I/UCRC Center for Surface Engineering and Tribology (9214605/9909226),
at Northwestern University--focuses on developing systematic and scientific
models of laser-based manufacturing processes through combined analytical and
experimental investigations so as to facilitate industrial innovations and
commercialization. One of the more rapidly emerging and innovative technological
arenas in the global economy is laser-based manufacturing and materials
processing. Recent years have seen a steady erosion of manufacturing industries
at an alarming rate. Many traditional manufacturing processes are now performed
in less developed countries where costs are low. Thus, in order to maintain or
regain the competitiveness in manufacturing, advanced manufacturing techniques
must be developed. The research will provide useful understanding of laser-
material interaction, which is a common problem for other laser processes. The
projects proposed, involving laser-assisted machining, laser shock peening,
laser cladding and laser surface texturing, constitute an opportunity to test
the assertion that fundamental mathematical modeling is an effective component
of technology development and can make progress more quickly and cost
effectively than empirical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
result in a broader use of laser-based manufacturing and materials processing
technologies in the key U.S. manufacturing companies and commercialization
activities. The project will also provide education and training of a diverse
workforce, including graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
teachers. The principles and results of laser-based manufacturing processes will
be incorporated in various undergraduate and graduate classes. Involvement of
underrepresented students will be pursued through existing programs such as the
Women in Engineering Program (WIEP) and the Minority Engineering Program (MEP).
The development of K-12 outreach materials will be embedded into the
undergraduate curriculum through the highly acclaimed Engineering Projects in
Community Service (EPICS) Program investigations so as to facilitate industrial
innovations and commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Purdue University (lead
institution), and Northwestern University; Private Sector Organizations
(Industrial): Baker Hughes (The Woodlands, TX); Ford Motors (Detroit, MI);
General Electric Aviation (Cincinnati, OH), Nanohmics (Austin, TX), and Optomec
(Albuquerque, NM); Also Additional Industrial Collaborators (providing cash and
in-kind support): LSP Technologies, Adiabatics, Chrysler, Lockheed Martin, Rolls
Royce, and Weir Minerals. Also as collaborator, Academic Institutions: Florida
International University and Bethune Community College