* 0917115
* CSR: Small:  Collaborative Research: FastStor: Data-Mining-Based Multilayer Prefetching for Hybrid Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Mais Nijim, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 08/31/2010
* USD 99,994.00

CSR proposal #0917137&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSR:Small:Collaborative Research:
FastStor: Data-Mining-Based&lt;br/&gt;Multilayer Prefetching for Hybrid Storage
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large
number of existing parallel storage systems consist of hybrid storage
components, including solid-state drives (SSD), hard disks (HDD), and tapes.
Compared with high-speed storage components (e.g. SSD and HDD), tapes inevitably
become an I/O performance bottleneck. Prefetching and caching are commonly
employed techniques to boost I/O performance by increasing the data hitting rate
of high-end storage components. However, prefetching in the context of hybrid
storage systems is technically challenging due to an interesting dilemma:
aggressive prefetching schemes can efficiently reduce I/O latency, whereas
overaggressive schemes may waste I/O bandwidth by transferring useless data from
HDDs to SSDs or from tapes to HDDs. In this research project, called FastStor,
we investigate new data-mining-based multilayer prefetching techniques to
improve performance of hybrid storage systems. The goals of this research are to
(1) design data-mining algorithms for multilayer prefetching; (2) develop
predictive parallel prefetching mechanism for SSD-based storage systems; (3)
implement parallel data transfer among SSDs, HDDs, and tapes; (4) develop meta-
data management schemes; and (5) implement a simulation framework named
FastStor-SIM. The developed toolkit can be used to improve the I/O performance
of data centers with hybrid storage systems. The research findings of this
project are published in conferences or journals for public knowledge. Through
the collaboration of Auburn University, South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology, and the University of Southern Mississippi, PIs promote learning and
training by exposing graduate and undergraduate students to technological
underpinnings in the fields of storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;