* 0917052
* NeTS: Small: Automated Design of Medium Access Control Protocols
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Volkan Rodoplu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* wenjing lou
* 08/31/2013
* USD 278,770.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The performance of wireless networks critically depends upon the careful design
of networking protocols. Networking protocols are traditionally designed based
only on intuition, and through a complex design process that is particular to
the network at hand. The disadvantage of the traditional approach is that
protocol design cycles are long, costly, and prone to human error. The lack of a
general methodology also means that either the protocols are general-purpose and
hence low-performance, or are specialized and hence inflexible and require
complete re-design when the application specifications change. The major
research contribution of this project is the establishment of a general
methodology for the automation of networking protocols, taking the Medium Access
Control (MAC) protocols as a first prototype. The MAC protocol performance is
critical in high-performance wireless networks. The following design process
chain is created to generate a MAC protocol based on resource constraints and
application-specific goals: (1) Optimization Program: Formulation of the network
protocol problem that models the effects of control information exchanges, (2)
Solvers: Optimal waveform generation, which specifies the optimal exchange of
both control information and data, (3) Protocol Extraction: The extraction of
the optimal protocol as a minimal description of the optimal waveforms. This
technology opens the way to the design of networking protocols that will be
based on automation design tools in the future. This project also integrates the
development of prototype tools into graduate-level coursework.

