* 0917385
* SHF:Small: A CAD Framework for Coupled Electrical-Thermal Modeling of Interconnects  in 3D Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Kaustav Banerjee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

The semiconductor industry is at an interesting crossroads, where traditional
scaling of CMOS devices is beginning to confront significant challenges that are
threatening to derail the more than four-decades old Moore?s law. 3D integrated
circuits (3D ICs) offer an exciting alternative, where in lieu of scaling,
continuous increase in functionality, performance and integration density can be
sustained indefinitely by stacking semiconductor layers on top of each other in
a ?monolithic? manner. A 3D IC is comprised of two or more active
(semiconducting) layers that have been thinned, bonded and interconnected using
special vertical wires drilled through the active layers known as ?Through
Silicon Vias (TSV)?. When TSVs (10-100 micrometer long) are used to replace the
longest (several millimeters) on-chip horizontal wires as well as some chip-to-
chip connections (on printed circuit boards), significant reduction in wire
delay and chip power dissipation can be achieved. Moreover, 3D ICs also offer
the most promising platform to implement ?More-than-Moore? technologies,
bringing heterogeneous materials (Silicon, III-V semiconductors, Graphene, etc)
and technologies (memory, logic, RF, mixed-signal, MEMS, optoelectronics, etc)
on a single chip. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, modeling and analysis of
interconnects in 3D ICs present new and significantly more complex problems. In
contrast with traditional interconnects, the modeling of high aspect-ratio TSVs
embedded in a semiconducting material with non-uniform currents in the third
dimension, and electromagnetic coupling of interconnects with multiple
conductive substrates at high-frequencies, constitute new challenges for design
and design-automation methods. Furthermore, the high power-density in 3D ICs due
to multiple active layers and their limited heat removal options give rise to
large three-dimensional thermal gradients, making it important to consider the
coupling between thermal and electromagnetic properties of interconnects and the
surrounding media. Finally, the need for accuracy is accompanied by the
computational challenge of handling a large number of coupled interconnects at
the system level, as 3D integration further exacerbates the size of the
interconnect problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the
necessary foundations for coupled electrical-thermal modeling and analysis of
interconnects and passives in 3D ICs, considering the electromagnetic coupling
of general 3D interconnects with multiple substrates at ultra-high frequencies
as well as the physical attributes of high aspect-ratio TSVs (including
geometry, material and density), using thermally-aware and inherently efficient
techniques to enable full-chip modeling of the large system of interconnects.
The overall program also ties research to education at all levels besides
focusing on recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups in nanoscience
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;