* 0917959
* PFI: 3DHub: A Geometric Kernel and Infrastructure for Community-based Rapid Application Development and Deployment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Mark Lundstrom, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2012
* USD 599,809.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type II (A:B) partnership
within Purdue University, between the PFI graduated grantee (0227828) and
participants from another NSF partnership supported program, Network for
Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) (0228390/0634750)--seeks to change the way
the knowledge supply chain for 3D algorithms, infrastructure development for 3D
applications, and corresponding business models work. New and emerging
technologies for creating digital data representation of objects such as 3D
laser scanners, 3D cameras, computer-aided design systems, and cryo-microscopy
have resulted in the creation of large amounts of "unstructured 2D and 3D
geometric data." This project will enable knowledge that is embedded in the data
to be extracted and made usable. This project will develop basic algorithms
needed as well as the computing infrastructure to support
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the 3DHub(TM)has the ability to influence the
creation, distribution, and maintenance of the applications through shared
resources, it can transform businesses fundamentally. Technology, once a tool
for business strategy, now has become a driver of business strategy. A 3D
Geometric Kernel supported by an easy to use Grid Infrastructure will provide a
competitive advantage for companies to conceive, create, as well as develop and
distribute, products and services in new ways. This will transform the way
geometry-dependent business models will be conceptualized and how they operate
in many sectors including surgery, proteomics, manufacturing, and education.
Additional research in geometry dependent fields will also progress much faster
through the affected business communities. In this project, a technology push
designed to increase access and use by industry in ways that might open up new
markets and opportunities might also in turn feedback into discovery
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are an
Academic Institution: Purdue University (lead institution), including
participation of members in Mechanical Engineering and the School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering; Private Sector Organizations: Peyton Manning
Children's Hospital, Redding Industries, VCom3D, and Imaginestics; Federal
Government Laboratory: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).