* 0917971
* PFI: Polymeric Membranes for Energy and the Environment
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2012
* James McGrath, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Virginia Tech University (VT) an NSF PFI graduated grantee(0650277), and
two institutions new to the PFI Program (defined as ones that have never been
PFI grantees), University of South Carolina Upstate (USCU) (Spartansburg, SC)
and St. Paul's College (Lawrenceville, VA)--is driven by the potential for
membrane separations to dramatically improve the global availability of clean
water and clean natural gas. The knowledge gained in the course of the project
will be transferred to large and small companies through broad-based national
and international workshops and collaborations. Current reverse osmosis (RO)
systems utilize submicron-thick aromatic polyamide membranes which are lightly
crosslinked. They lack chemical resistance to chlorine disinfectants. This
project is developing amphiphilic, ductile, oxidatively and hydrolytically
stable polymeric membranes from poly(arylene ether) ion-containing systems which
provide good salt rejection and water flux. The new membranes have greatly
enhanced stability against disinfecting chlorinated compounds and resistance to
fouling. The materials are amenable to scale-up (by one of the partners, Akron
Polymer Systems) and processing into a variety of useful products (by Dow Water
Solutions) including asymmetric films, thin supported membranes and asymmetric
hollow fibers. Ultrahigh performance natural gas separation membranes based on
polyamides and polybenzoxazoles have been discovered in conjunction with Korean
and Australian colleagues. Multidisciplinary research at VT/UT, partnering with
ConocoPhillips, will accelerate successful development of practical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes will include a fundamental body of
knowledge regarding structures, materials and property relations for water and
natural gas purification membranes. The project provides an important
opportunity for students to be educated as part of a multi-disciplinary global
research team. A major feature of the project will be
undergraduate/graduate/faculty exchanges from the participating U.S. academic
institutions (Virginia Tech, University of Texas at Austin, University of South
Carolina Upstate, and St. Paul's College that will provide talented diverse
scientists and engineers to the industrial partners. Internships will broaden
students' perspectives well beyond their research and instill in them the value
of team approaches to problem-solving that are so critical to progress in
interdisciplinary fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the
project are Academic Institutions: Virginia Tech (lead institution), University
of Texas at Austin, University of South Carolina Upstate, St. Paul's College,
and Hanyang University (Seoul, Korea); Private Sector Organizations: Akron
Polymer Systems, Dow Water Solutions, ConocoPhillips, and Polymer Solutions; and
Government Laboratories: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO) (Clayton, Victoria, Australia).