* 0917824
* Collaborative Research:  A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Identity Development During Napatan State Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 132,748.00

An international team, led by Dr. Michele Buzon and Dr. Stuart Tyson Smith will
conduct a bioarchaeological research project to examine the identities of those
involved during the critical origin period of the Napatan state during the Third
Intermediate Period (1050-750 BC) and Late Period (750-332 BC) in Nubia.
Although less known than its Egyptian counterpart, indigenous Nubians were
colonized by Egypt, later gained independence and formed a state which then
conquered Egypt itself. The site of Tombos, the focus of this project, documents
the rise of this Napatan state. The study of state formation processes in the
Nile Valley has generally centered on the impact that Egypt had on the
developments of indigenous cultures. However, recent studies suggest that, in
fact, the reverse may have taken place - Egypt lost power as a result of the
influential indigenous states in Nubia. Research at this key site of Tombos will
shed light on this 'dark age' of Nubian history and provide crucial information
necessary to clarify the nature of the social processes. Using a multi-
disciplinary bioarchaeological approach, this project will identify the players
involved in Napatan state formation through new excavation, and the assessment
of ethnic identity, biological relationships, and geographic origins in order to
determine if there is evidence for indigenous activities and local social forces
leading up to the formation of this Nubian polity. This research project will
address these questions through two seasons of archaeological fieldwork of Third
Intermediate Period and Napatan Period burials at the site of Tombos, located at
the 3rd Cataract of the Nile in Upper Nubia, with additional museum collection
sampling and laboratory and statistical analyses at Purdue University and the
University of California, Santa Barbara. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research rests on its contribution to larger archaeological and anthropological
research questions regarding the process of identity development and
transformation; it will provide new information regarding the historical,
biocultural and geographic influences on the origins of a state. Tombos' unique
historical context offers significant potential to shed light on the process of
Napatan state formation, providing important data on the non-royal people who
played a role in the development of this strong Nubian polity. This project will
assist in the expansion of migration studies using strontium and oxygen isotope
analysis in the Nile Valley. Also, the proposed excavation and analysis will
offer crucial data to assess cultural and ethnic dynamics. Further broader
impacts of this research project include the training of students and
researchers as well as promotion of international research collaboration. The
excavation and curation of human skeletal remains from the site of Tombos will
provide secure storage of important bioarchaeological data and collections as
well as ensure the opportunity for future research on the Tombos material. The
data produced from the proposed research will be widely disseminated in order to
provide access for other researchers.