* 0917506
* Local, National and International research field experiences in the atmospheric sciences for underrepresented groups
* GEO,GEO
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Belay Demoz, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 09/30/2013
* USD 263,070.00

A program directed by faculty at Howard University aims to inspire undergraduate
and graduate students with an emphasis on those from underrepresented groups
through local, national and international research experiences through
measurement workshops/short-courses and field campaigns (ground and aircraft)
for three years. This is done locally through research opportunities at the
Howard University Atmospheric Observatory (HUAO) and NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center (GFSC). Nationally, students will participate in field experiences with
the University of Wyoming, the NASA Opportunity for Student Airborne Research
that is sponsored by NSERC (U of North Dakota), the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and NOAA's Hurricane Research Division (HRD). During
the second year (2010), students will participate both nationally and
internationally in a planned hurricane field campaign (GRIP) that is expected to
operate from Florida and potentially other Caribbean countries. Moreover,
students are expected to help with upstream measurements during this field
campaign in Senegal and Guinea. Each student will be assigned a mentor with the
research experience expected to motivate undergraduate students for pursuing
graduate studies and also serving as a source of research ideas and data for
graduate student thesis and dissertation research topics. Measurements in
Senegal will continue to focus on rainfall variability with potential
applications for societal needs.