* 0917466
* PFI: Overcoming Cultural Barriers: An Innovation Model for Smaller University/Industry Partnerships
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Walter Chromiak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III: (C: A) partnership
between Pennsylvania State University-Harrisburg (PSH), an institution new to
the PFI Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee) and
Pennsylvania State University-University Park (PSUP), an NSF PFI graduate
(0090393) seeks to overcome the industry/university cultural chasm by forging
new partnerships for innovation between universities and businesses in South
Central Pennsylvania. Newly formed partnerships will advance innovative
technologies as a result of breadth and depth of expertise, sharing of
intellectual and physical resources, and rigorous internal and external
evaluation procedures. The project builds on prior knowledge about partnerships
for innovation from relevant research literature and in lessons learned from the
efforts of the PSUP graduated PFI. The proposed model is based on the literature
on links between innovation and technology-based economic development for the
types of institutions involved. The project goals are based on a three-phase
approach of awareness, skill training, and implementation presented. The project
will advance discovery via teaching and training in the region, in multiple,
targeted business sectors and related academic disciplines.

The broader impacts of the project include removing regional industry/university
collaboration barriers; outreach to thousands of faculty and tens of thousands
of students, multiple dissemination strategies; and broad participation by
smaller academic institutions, small businesses, and underrepresented groups.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Pennsylvania
State University-Harrisburg (PSH) (lead institution), Pennsylvania State
University-University Park (PSUP), Dickinson College, Franklin and Marshall
College, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Elizabethtown College, Harrisburg
Area Community College, Harrisburg University of Science and Technology, Messiah
College, Millersville University, and Shippensburg University; Private Sector
Partners: Gannett Fleming, Mission Research, Die Tech, Keystone BioFuels,
Material Sensing and Instrumentation; and Economic Development Partners:
Lancaster Keystone Innovation Zone, Ben Franklin Technology Partners of Central
and Northern PA, Ben Franklin Venture Investment Forum, Capital Region Economic
Development Corporation (CREDC), Life Sciences Greenhouse of Central PA,
Technology Council of Central PA/Tech Quest, Innovation Transfer Network (ITN).