* 0917702
* Expanding Opportunities for Collaborative Archaeometry Research at IIRMES, CSULB
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gregory Holk, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2013
* USD 295,226.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A team of archaeologists and geologists at the Institute for Integrated Research
in Materials, Environments, and Societies (IIRMES), California State University
- Long Beach (CSULB) will use NSF funding to support research on ancient
technology, economic interaction, ancient diets, and past environments. These
investigations will be implemented through an outreach program that makes IIRMES
instruments and expertise available on a collaborative basis to researchers from
the US and abroad. IIRMES instruments used to study the human past include a
scanning-electron microscope, three inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometers (ICP-MS), a laser ablation system for solid sample analysis via
ICP-MS, a stable-isotope ratio mass spectrometer, and luminescence dating
equipment. The current grant will fund purchase of a portable x-ray fluorescence
(XRF) spectrometer and an elemental analyzer for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,
oxygen, and sulfur. The latter instrument will serve as a front-end for the
stable-isotope ratio mass spectrometer, so that stable-isotope ratios can be
determined in a variety of organic materials. Collaborating researchers
participate in the IIRMES Archaeometry Program in two ways. First, submission
and acceptance of a short proposal gains eligibility for subsidized analyses on
one or more of IIRMES analytical instruments. The NSF subsidy pays for most of
the costs of analysis, and the collaborating researchers pay a small per-sample
cost for consumable supplies. For researchers who desire or need a more hands-on
role in the analytical work, a fully subsidized short-term visiting researcher
program is available. Participants in this program spend one to three weeks in
Long Beach, during which they work closely with the project PIs in the
generation and interpretation of analytical results. In the past, the visiting
researcher program has been especially valuable for graduate students working on
MA and Ph.D. theses, since they gain practical experience that they can take
with them into their future professional careers. One major way in which
analytical work at IIRMES promotes understanding of prehistory and history is
through the determination of sources of stone-tool raw material, clays for
ceramics, and metal ores. Once sources are identified, patterns of human-
population movement and economic interaction can be reconstructed by comparing
locations of discovery with the location of production determined via analysis.
Although trace-element analysis via ICP-MS or XRF is the standard approach to
such source-determination studies, stable isotopes can be useful for turquoise,
marine-shell, bone, and ivory. Stable-isotope ratios are also useful in
environmental reconstruction and dietary studies. For instance, enrichment of
carbon-13 in a sediment core can be used as an indication of increasing maize
and weedy species in a watershed, thus providing evidence to check the results
of pollen studies. Oxygen-18 enrichment, meanwhile, can be a marker for rainfall
variation in carbonates, such as speleothems and shells. And carbon and nitrogen
isotopes are widely used in paleodietary studies of human bone and faunal
remains. This project builds on a model of shared analytical resources that has
served archaeology well during the past two decades. In this model, the NSF
Archaeometry Program partially funds labs with demonstrated long-term
commitments to collaborative archaeological research. With the NSF subsidy,
analysis costs are much more affordable for academic researchers, so that it
becomes practical to plan analytical efforts involving sample sizes large enough
to address significant archaeological questions. The project will also have
important impacts locally on the research and education environment at CSULB, a
designated Hispanic-serving institution in the heart of the largest urban area
on the west coast. Diverse CSULB students from departments in several colleges
benefit from the opportunity to use state-of-the-art analytical instruments in
geology, biology, chemistry, and archaeology, and in research projects that join
one or more of these fields. Support for CSULB students and visiting researchers
requested here helps populate the lab with committed researchers from a range of
disciplines, which furthers IIRMES' interdisciplinary mission. This environment
encourages students to ignore disciplinary boundaries that may restrict their
scientific creativity.