* 0917775
* CSR---AES: Collaborative Research: Intelligent Optimization of Parallel and Distributed Applications (WP2)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2008,01/31/2010
* Joel Saltz, Emory University
* Continuing grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 01/31/2010
* USD 124,541.00

CSR-AES: Intelligent Optimization of Parallel and Distributed Applications

ABSTRACT This project derives a systematic solution for performance optimization
and adaptive application mapping to obtain scalable performance on parallel and
distributed systems consisting of tens of thousands of processing nodes. With
expert domain scientists in molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, we expect to
achieve performance levels on MD codes even better than what has been derived
manually after years of development and many ports to a variety of
architectures. The application components are viewed as dynamically adaptive
algorithms for which there exist a set of variants and parameters that can be
searched to develop an optimized implementation. A workflow is an instance of
the application where nodes represent application components and dependences
between the nodes represent execution ordering constraints. By encoding an
application in this way, we capture a large set of possible application mappings
with a very compact representation. The system layers explore the large space of
possible implementations to derive the most appropriate solution. Because the
space of mappings is prohibitively large, the system captures and utilizes
domain knowledge from the domain scientists and designers of the compiler, run-
time and performance models to prune most of the possible implementations.
Knowledge representation and machine learning utilize this domain knowledge and
past experience to navigate the search space efficiently. This multidisciplinary
approach impacts the state-of-the-art in the sub-fields of compilers, run-time
systems, machine learning, knowledge representation, and accelerates advances in
MD simulation with far more productive software development and porting. More
broadly, this research enables systematic performance optimization in other
sciences.

