* 0917743
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Observed Low Frequency Variability of Sea-Surface Temperature (SST) in the North Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2009,04/30/2011
* Zhaohua Wu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2011
* USD 90,026.00

Sea-surface temperatures (SST) in the North Atlantic fluctuate on interannual
and on decadal timescales, with different characteristic spatial structures. The
mechanisms responsible for these modes of variability remain poorly understood.
Theories differ in the roles they ascribe to gyre and overturning circulations
in the ocean, and, most importantly, in whether or not they involve feedbacks
from the SST onto the circulation of the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
issues will be addressed using a novel method; the interactive ensemble coupled
global climate model (GCM), in which an ensemble of atmospheric models is
coupled to a single realization of the oceanic model. Given a sufficiently large
ensemble of atmospheric models, essentially all intrinsic atmospheric noise is
removed by averaging, and the ocean is then driven by atmospheric forcing that
includes only the deterministic response of the atmosphere to the SST. Intrinsic
atmospheric variability denoted "weather noise" can then be reintroduced to the
coupled simulations in a controlled way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ensemble
coupled version of the NCAR Community Climate System Model 3 (CCSM3) will be
implemented, and a set of six hypothesis-testing experiments will be carried
out. "Weather noise" will be evaluated using both observations and model output.
The latter case is a so-called "perfect model" study, which will serve to
evaluate the role of observational and model errors in using observationally
derived weather noise. Similarly, the importance of model differences from
observations can be evaluated by using weather noise derived from one GCM in the
ensemble coupled version of a second GCM. Model-only studies will be valuable in
studying modes of variability involving the meridional overturning circulation;
as such modes occur on long timescales not readily captured by the extant
observational record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are in making the
ensemble coupled CCSM3 available to the community for application to climate
prediction and to verifying and improving coupled models. Two graduate students
will be trained in the application of coupled climate models.&lt;br/&gt;