* 0917648
* Collaborative Research: What is the Nenana Complex? New Excavations at the Late-Pleistocene Owl Ridge Site, Central Alaska
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michael Waters, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 191,093.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists have long looked to
Beringia, the region encompassing Alaska and far northeastern Siberia, for clues
about the origins of the first Americans and spread of humans into the Arctic.
The traditional view holds that humans first migrated from Siberia to Alaska
across the Bering Land Bridge, a land mass that connected Asia to America during
glacial episodes of the Ice Age. Beringia, however, has not yet revealed a clear
archaeological predecessor to Clovis, the earliest indisputable archaeological
culture in North America dating to about 13,000 years ago. Instead Beringian
sites contain an altogether different and highly varied set of stone-artifact
assemblages. Explaining this archaeological variability is a topic of much
debate in Beringian archaeology today. The archaeological differences either
resulted from the presence of at least two distinct early Beringian populations
or from one population that used site locations differently. Another issue has
been tying human settlement in Beringia to dramatically fluctuating climatic
conditions that characterized the region at the end of the Ice Age.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kelly Graf
and her colleagues will conduct archaeological excavations of the Owl Ridge
site, located near Denali National Park, central Alaska. Their work in 2009-2010
will provide evidence needed to explain early Beringian archaeological
variability and tie human adaptation to fluctuating climatic conditions. Test
excavations at Owl Ridge have already yielded three separate archaeological
components that date to terminal Ice Age times, between 13,500 and 8,000 years
ago. Full-scale excavations of the Owl Ridge site will be conducted during
2009-2010 to determine the character of each of the site's artifact assemblages,
investigate aspects of human technological and settlement change, and consider
how these past human behaviors relate to climate and environmental change at the
end of the Ice Age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will help to
answer some of the most compelling questions in peopling of the Americas studies
today. What is the meaning of artifact variability in early Beringia? How did
Ice Age environments condition human settlement of Beringia's landscapes? When
and how did humans spread from the Bering Land Bridge area to the Americas? The
project will provide invaluable learning experiences for both graduate and
undergraduate students and further our understanding of the behavioral evolution
of humans in the far north, specifically in the context of significant climatic
and environmental fluctuation at the end of the Ice Age, 14,000-7,000 years ago.
Therefore, the proposed study will lead to greater appreciation of the human
experience in harsh arctic environments and the impacts of global climate change
on small-scale human societies.