* 0917904
* Incipient Social Complexity in The Ubaid Horizon (5800-4000 BC)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Gil Stein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 348,037.00

Excavations at Tell Zeidan in the Euphrates river valley of Syria investigate
the roots of the world's earliest known urban civilizations 6000 years ago in
"Greater Mesopotamia" (modern Iraq, Syria, and southeast Turkey). The first
cities all have their roots in earlier "temple towns" that first arose in the
Ubaid period ca. 5500-4000 BC. Understanding the Ubaid culture is thus crucial
for any investigation of how complex societies first developed. Unfortunately,
most Ubaid temple towns remain extremely difficult to investigate, because the
archaeological levels of this period lie buried beneath deep deposits of
alluvial silts from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, or beneath millennia of
later occupations. However, excavations at Zeidan give a unique opportunity to
investigate political and economic organization in the Ubaid period, because
this town was not deeply buried by river silts, and its prehistoric levels are
immediately accessible beneath the present ground
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ubaid period saw the development of the first
complex societies in southern Mesopotamia, with the earliest evidence for towns
with temples, economic differentiation, irrigation, and centralized leadership.
Ca. 5000 BC, Ubaid influence expanded out of southern Mesopotamia to form a
widespread style extending over 1500 km from Syria to the Persian Gulf. However,
we still know frustratingly little about 3 key aspects of Ubaid society: a) how
did political leadership and social stratification actually function in these
polities; b) did Ubaid styles spread through colonization, trade, or the
influence of some ideology; and c) what processes linked the diverse local
groups across this area within the broader Ubaid horizon?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until now, our information on the Ubaid in Syria has
derived entirely from the excavation of small village sites. However, broad
horizontal excavation at Zeidan can provide the first representative view of
community organization at a large Ubaid regional center. 2008 test excavations
found a continuous stratigraphic sequence from 6000-4000 BC, allowing the
project to trace the ways that Ubaid culture spread into this region, and how it
functioned as a complex society. The absence of post 5th millennium occupations
permits broad horizontal exposures of the Ubaid period town at Zeidan. No other
known site in upper Mesopotamia can provide this type of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excavations at Zeidan have significant broader impact
for scholarship, international collaboration, and cultural heritage protection.
The project will contribute to both archaeological theory and to our empirical
knowledge by providing the first opportunity to expose broad areas of an Ubaid
regional center. This will permit researchers to document how complex societies
first developed and functioned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has major
impacts on international research collaboration. As a jointly directed program
with the Syrian Antiquities Department, the project will improve interaction
with Middle Eastern archaeologists by training local university students and by
publishing its results in both English and Arabic. Finally, the project will
educate the local community to value and protect its rich cultural heritage.
Project staff will develop site tours, public lectures and written guides in
Arabic for free distribution at the Raqqa provincial museum and local schools.