* 0917536
* Studying and Improving Networks for Disseminating STEM Educational Materials in After-School Programs
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Barbara Means, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 2,476,861.00

DRL - 0917536 Studying and Improving Networks for Disseminating STEM Education
Means, Barbara M. SRI International PROJECT SUMMARY

The intent of this project is to use social network methods to study networks of
afterschool and informal science stakeholders. It would attempt to create
knowledge that improves afterschool programs access to informal science learning
materials. This is an applied research study that applies research methods to
improving access to and enactment of informal science education programs across
a range of settings.

The investigators plan to collect data from 600 community- and afterschool
programs in California, conduct case studies of 10 of these programs, and
conduct surveys of supporting intermediary organizations. The analysis of the
data will provide descriptions of the duration, intensity, and nature of the
networks among afterschool programs and intermediary agencies, and the diffusion
patterns of science learning materials in afterschool programs. The project will
yield actionable knowledge that will be disseminated among afterschool programs,
intermediary organizations, funding agencies, and policymakers to improve the
dissemination and support of afterschool science learning opportunities.

The project is focused on free-choice settings where every day the largest
numbers of children attend afterschool programs at schools and in other
community settings. It seeks information about what conditions are necessary for
informal science programs to significantly impact the largest possible number of
children in these settings.

