* 0917658
* Planning Visit to Israel to Develop a Comprehensive Survey of Youth in Intractable Conflict
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Phillip Hammack, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,758.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
OISE-0917658&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Phillip
Hammack&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California-Santa Cruz
(UCSC)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Planning Visit to Israel to Develop a
Comprehensive Survey of Youth in Intractable Conflict&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI plans to travel to Israel for two weeks to develop a collaborative project
with Israeli scientists to collaboratively develop a comprehensive survey of
youth in intractable conflict zones that focuses on the social psychological
concept of delegitimization. The planning visit will include a faculty member
and graduate student from UCSC, and three psychological scientists in Israel.
Developing a&lt;br/&gt;collaborative relationship between American and Israeli
social scientists will enhance the knowledge of the impact of political conflict
on the psychological development of youth.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed visit to plan
a collaborative project seeks to expand our knowledge in this critical area of
social and developmental psychology by examining the psychological processes of
youth in the context of longstanding conflict in Israel. The development of this
collaboration possesses broad impacts for psychological science, responding to
recent calls for attention to psychological processes in diverse global
contexts. The proposed study will address the unique context of conflict and its
impact on individual lives, thereby contributing to the movement within
psychology to identify the impact of diverse contexts on human development. In
addition, the survey to be developed through this collaboration will possess
important implications for conflict resolution by specifying&lt;br/&gt;factors
associated with delegitimization among youth. The project thus will
provide&lt;br/&gt;valuable information to practitioners and scholars of peace
and reconciliation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;