* 0917808
* PFI: Manufacturing Innovation and Revitalization Partnerships: Universities, Manufacturers, Government and K-12 Teachers (MIRP)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2014
* Arun Tilak, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2014
* USD 599,996.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A: C) partnership
between Oklahoma State University (OSU), an NSF PFI graduate (0332723), and
Cameron University (Lawton, OK), an institution new to the PFI Program (defined
as one that has never been a PFI grantee)--builds upon the previous PFI award
which enabled the creation of the New Product Development Center (NPDC) at OSU.
This proposal provides a multidisciplinary approach to the integration of three
education programs with the aim of building innovation activities in small- and
medium-sized U.S. manufacturing firms (SMMs). These three programs are 1) the
Manufacturers Innovation Leadership Program (MILP), designed for manufacturers
who have leadership potential within SMMs; 2) the Presidential Innovation and
Creativity Scholars (PICS), which will create multidisciplinary teams of senior
college students and faculty, who will produce and process innovation projects
with small manufacturers participating in MILP; and 3) the Innovation Program
for Teachers (IPT) which provides K-12 teachers an opportunity to take an
internet-delivered class on manufacturing innovation. MILP will embrace a
combination of experiential, problem-based, and research-based learning. Project
participants will study innovation successes, learn about innovation processes,
perform research to evaluate alternative solutions to problems, and be mentored
by, and interact with, leaders in innovation from SMMs as well as by university
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future global competitiveness of U.S.
manufacturing depends on the innovation capacity of SMMs. Societal and economic
impacts include job creation and retention, wealth creation, student education,
minority manufacturing capabilities, and K-12 education for innovation. By
targeting manufacturing capability in the state, the project will have a direct
impact on the diverse, lower income populations of Oklahoma. Moreover, an
explicit effort is made to include underrepresented groups, including military
veterans, in the state of Oklahoma in all facets of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: Oklahoma State University (OSU) (lead institution) and
Cameron University; Private Sector Organizations: Charles Machine Works, Lucas
Metal Works, Oklahoma Manufacturing Alliance, and Stolhand Heating and Air
Conditioning; and State and Local Governments: Oklahoma EPSCoR and Oklahoma
Center for Advancement of Science and Technology (Oklahoma City).