* 0917906
* PFI: Partnerships for Biomarker Research and Innovation Enabled by a Flow Cytometry Center
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* T. Dewey, Keck Graduate Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI)project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences (KGI), a NSF PFI
graduate (0332749), and Harvey Mudd College (HMC), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee)--seeks to establish a
Center for Biomarkers Research at KGI, with a state-of-the-art flow cytometry
facility in order to accelerate discovery and commercialization of new disease-
specific biomarkers for rare human diseases. The focus on rare diseases is
important because routine commercialization pathways neglect this area. The
Center will help take risk out of the development of drugs that treat rare
diseases by working with patient advocacy groups and disease foundations to
identify biomarkers in affected patient populations. Partnering with the
National Organizations for Rare Diseases (NORD), rare disease organizations that
have access to patient samples will be identified and collaborative operations
will be explored. Human samples obtained from rare disease populations will be
processed in the flow cytometry facility. Proteins involved in signaling
pathways will be identified by flow cytometry using fluorescent antibodies.
Cytometry results will be analyzed with a Bayesian network approach to identify
central molecules in signal transduction that might be determinative disease
biomarkers. These activities will facilitate biomarker discovery and provide a
means of classifying and stratifying disease populations
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the choice of rare diseases as a focus for
biomarker discovery, the project will achieve a broader impact on the
development of needed treatments. The Center will create a database of rare
disease biomarkers and assist disease organizations in their venture
philanthropic efforts to help remove risk, based on biomarker applications.
Biomarkers highly discriminating for specific conditions will be identified for
patenting and subsequent licensing activity. The entire database of biomarkers
will also be accessible to the academic and corporate communities for subsequent
data mining. Ideally, companies interested in further developing these data sets
will initiate new projects. Also, the project will meet a critical work need:
the education of translational scientists, individuals who can translate a
discovery into commercial products. The Center will educate Master of Bioscience
(MBS) students at KGI and undergraduate engineering students at HMC in the
development of diagnostic tools from biomarkers
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the inception of the project are
Academic Institutions: Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences (KGI)
(lead institution), and Harvey Mudd College (HMC); and Private Sector
Organizations: Beckman Coulter, Inc (BCI) and The National Organization for Rare
Disorders (NORD).