* 0917803
* 2009 CSHL Conference on Mechanisms of Eukaryotic Transcription, August 25 - 29, 2009
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the 2009 Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Conference on Mechanisms of Eukaryotic Transcription to be
held Aug 25-29, 2009. The regulation of gene transcription is a prominent
mechanism for the control of cellular processes and development. This has led a
large but diverse group of scientists towards the study of transcription in
numerous systems. The aim of the conference on Mechanisms of Eukaryotic
Transcription is to provide a forum to bring together the diverse group of
scientists working in different areas of this field. This meeting allows each of
them to hear, discuss, and critically evaluate the latest results from different
experimental systems and to form a global picture of mechanisms of gene
regulation. The conference will be an open international meeting devoted to the
most recent advances in the rapidly evolving field of eukaryotic transcription.
Oral presentations will consist of a combination of invited presentations and
selected presentations from submitted abstracts. The oral presentations will be
complemented by poster presentations in three poster sessions, also selected
from submitted abstracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
meeting format is designed to attract participation by a combination of junior
and senior leaders in the field, including minority, graduate student, and
international participants. The meeting will provide an outstanding venue for
these scientists to share recent developments and emerging ideas in this
exciting field of molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt;