* 0917668
* Precipitation Controls of Carbon and Nitrogen Cycles in Arid-Semiarid Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Debra Peters, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2013
* USD 799,440.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Although precipitation is assumed to be the major control of the production of
plants in arid and semiarid regions, annual precipitation explains only 20-40%
of grass and shrub production variability among years. This failure suggests
that researchers are not accounting for key mechanisms that control the ability
of arid ecosystems to track fluctuations in precipitation. Yet increased
fluctuations are a prominent feature of climate predictions in arid regions.
This project puts forward four hypotheses to explain observed lags in ecosystem
response to changing precipitation, and tests them by altering patterns of total
precipitation and precipitation variability, with and without nitrogen
manipulation. These manipulations, together with the model analysis, will help
determine the cause and magnitude of lags in the ecosystem response to
precipitation.

Results from this project will contribute to understanding the effect of climate
change on carbon sequestration, forage production and the process of shrub
encroachment, which are very important for stakeholders of the southwestern
U.S., ranging from cattle ranchers to city authorities worrying about water
supplies and ecosystem services. A demonstration project will be established in
partnership with a nonprofit organization that provides award-winning science
education to more than 12,000 children and 4,500 adults annually in southern New
Mexico and western Texas. In addition, the project will develop web sites and
outreach materials to transmit findings beyond the university.