* 0917956
* PFI: Consortium for Spectroscopic Sensor Systems (CoS3): An Integrated Systematic and Entrepreneurial Approach to Engineering Education
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Yacov Shamash, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2013
* USD 599,936.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type II (A: B) partnership
involving two universities, SUNY at Stony Brook, an NSF PFI graduate (0332605)
and the site of the Center for Advanced Technology in Diagnostic Tools and
Sensor Systems (Sensor CAT), and Princeton University, which is participating in
another NSF partnership program: Engineering Research Center (ERC) on Mid-
Infrared Technologies for Health and Environment (MIRTHE) (0540832). This
project addresses the need to stimulate interest in the field of sensor
technology. Sensor technology engineering is a field ready for rapid growth and
innovation, but the high level of specialization needed for a student to get
into the field means that there are few students in the pipeline. Sensor-related
technology provides an exciting platform for developing an entrepreneurial-
learning environment, and can have far reaching multidisciplinary implications.
Combining students from both Stony Brook and Princeton in E-Teams, the approach
taken in this project to entrepreneurial learning builds on both institutions'
technical strengths in sensing and detection in general, their and in
spectroscopic sensing in particular, and will support expansion of the sensor
research community drawing, recruitment of undergraduate students into
engineering, and enrichment of undergraduate training with multidisciplinary
team-work experience and entrepreneurial skills. The project seeks to provide an
educational model that will produce well-rounded engineers who are adaptable to
the business world and who are capable of thriving in the face of new
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor technologies have been undergoing rapid
transitions as is a result of a convergence of forces in along several
dimensions, including miniaturization, intelligence and mobility. Sensor
technologies are poised to be applied in the real world in various applications
such as environment and civil, industry and commerce, health, safety, and
security. Moreover, the area of sensor systems can provide a far-reaching,
multidisciplinary technology "pull" that can fascinate and inspire engineering
students. The project seeks to contribute to the sensor revolution by building a
technology workforce, a pipeline of engineering graduates with entrepreneurial
and business skills. At the same time, it will serve to revitalize engineering
education with an integrated, systematic and multidisciplinary approach. The
coursework developed in this project is applicable elsewhere in the U.S., where
sensor technology is important, e.g.,especially, Florida and California. The
methodology (e-teams, web based courses, entrepreneurship training) is widely
useful in other engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners at the
inception of the project are Academic Institutions: SUNY at Stony Brook (lead
institution) and Princeton University; and Private Sector Organizations:
Lockheed Martin; Veeco; Servo Corporation of America; MTI Instruments; Princeton
Technology Advisers Company; GHO Ventures, LLC; and LaserMax.