* 0917739
* Improvements to Soil Micromorphology Laboratory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Francesco Berna, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2013
* USD 331,738.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Micromorphology Laboratory in the Archaeology Department at Boston
University is a unique facility in the United States and focuses on the
microscopic analysis of intact sediments, soils, and archaeological materials
(e.g. ceramic, plaster, and concrete). Principally, these techniques make use of
petrographic thin sections, which are prepared from intact blocks of soil or
sediment that are impregnated with polyester resin. The blocks are trimmed to
size (typically 50 by 75 mm), mounted on glass slides, and ground to a thickness
of 30 Âµm, close to the thickness of a human hair.

Micromorphology has made significant contributions to archaeological analysis
and interpretation over the past two decades. Since undisturbed sediments and
soils are used, the context of the objects is preserved within the thin section
and within the site's stratigraphy. Thus, the technique has been successful in
isolating depositional and post-depositional processes at the site and regional
level, whether they are of geological or human origin. Thus, it furnishes a
holistic view of site formation processes, and robust insights into past human
activities and behaviors. Its application has illuminated a wide range of key
archaeological issues, such as the putative early use of fire at Zhoukoudian in
China, evidence of early agriculture in Europe, the analysis of occupational
space and activity areas, and more realistic interpretations of cultural
deposits than have been provided in the past. It has been increasingly realized
that micromorphology is an essential method for identifying precise
archaeological contexts and for the understanding the use of space in
archaeological sites. The Laboratory uses petrographic microscopes, ultra violet
epi-fluorescence, and infra red spectrometry (Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectrometry - FTIR) attached to a petrographic microscope. This equipment
(purchased mostly with funds from the National Science Foundation) has enabled
us to make careful measurements of bones and sediments within thin sections, for
example, enabling the determination of the mineralogy of objects and to make
estimates of temperature achieved in prehistoric and historic archaeological
settings. The Laboratory is investigating issues that include refinement of
dating in early hominid sites, such as Dmanisi in Georgia; Neanderthal vs.
modern human pyrotechnology in France, Israel, and Spain as high resolution
indicators of hominin behavior; the analysis of cultural deposits from Near
Eastern tells; analysis of putative earliest human coprolites in the New World;
household archaeology during the Early Bronze in Southern Italy; and pottery
making and table salt production during Pre-classic and classic Maya in Belize.
Numerous PhD students from Boston University and elsewhere (e.g., Harvard,
Universities of Connecticut, Arizona, Tennessee, and Toronto) have been or are
being trained in the laboratory. The intellectual merit of the Micromorphology
Laboratory is to improve and enhance the development of micromorphological
techniques and strategies in archaeology. The ultimate goal is to make more
effective and efficient inroads to understanding past human activities,
behavior, and social interactions through detailed analysis of the deposits that
past occupants left or modified at an archaeological site. In addition to
scientific analyses, the broad impacts of the laboratory include the training of
students in this unique facility and attracting researchers from various
disciplines (e.g., earth sciences, archaeology, archaeological conservation, or
chemistry) and locations, as both short- and long-term visitors. Both in-house
training and interaction with external researchers serve to advance the
technique and provide a deeper understanding of archaeological sediments.