* 0917017
* III: Small: Query Mesh - A Novel Paradigm for Query Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Elke Rundensteiner, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2014
* USD 496,556.00

Technological advances in positioning, sensor and
monitoring&lt;br/&gt;technology drive data acquisition devices to generate
massive streams&lt;br/&gt;of data. The goal of this research is to develop a new
class of&lt;br/&gt;high-performance stream data management systems capable of
coping with&lt;br/&gt;scenarios with infinite data arriving in large volumes,
and with&lt;br/&gt;near-real time response requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed query processing paradigm, &lt;br/&gt;termed
the multi-route query mesh model (QM), overcomes a&lt;br/&gt;major limitation in
current query optimizers, both static and stream&lt;br/&gt;ones alike, namely
the assignment of a single `best' query execution&lt;br/&gt;plan for all input
data. This approach, being based on the strong&lt;br/&gt;assumption of data
uniformity, results in substandard performance for&lt;br/&gt;possibly all data
items. Instead, query mesh adopts a processing&lt;br/&gt;structure composed of a
data classifier and a multiple route plan&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. Different
learning models can be plugged as&lt;br/&gt;classifier logic into the QM model.
Given the complexity of the QM&lt;br/&gt;solution space, cost-based search
heuristics are designed to&lt;br/&gt;efficiently find high-quality query meshes.
QM is adaptive supporting&lt;br/&gt;the detection and incremental modification
of the QM classifier and&lt;br/&gt;its routes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the design, development
and&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of a novel multi-route paradigm for stream
query&lt;br/&gt;processing, -- a perfect middle ground between the two
current&lt;br/&gt;extremes of single-plan versus route-less solutions.
Experimental&lt;br/&gt;studies compare query mesh to state-of-the-art solutions.
QM impacts&lt;br/&gt;society by facilitating a wide range of stream-centric
applications,&lt;br/&gt;including medical out-patient monitoring, emergency
management, and&lt;br/&gt;business intelligence processing, and by integrating
project&lt;br/&gt;activities with education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further
information on this project can be found at the project&lt;br/&gt;web page:
http://dsrgweb.cs.wpi.edu:8180/DSRG/