* 0917492
* Computational Analysis of Morphogensis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Qing Nie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 251,057.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many recent experimental and
theoretical studies have shown that most morphogen systems are far more complex
than had been expected: Feedback loops, secreted inhibitors, cooperative
interactions among morphogens, and high spatial dimensions with complex boundary
conditions act together to produce robust and complex patterns of morphogens.
This project is concerned with a mathematical and computational investigation of
such complex interactions in two systems during Drosophila embryonic
development. The first part of the project is to investigate roles of the Dally-
like protein, a membrane bound and non-diffusive protein, on Wingless morphogen
distribution and signaling in the imaginal wing disc. The second part of the
project is to investigate roles of certain feedback loops in sharpening
morphogen gradients and noise reduction during dorsal-ventral patterning in
early development. In addition, the investigator will develop efficient and
accurate numerical methods with adaptive mesh refinement for stiff reaction-
diffusion equations in complex geometries, in order to meet the computational
challenges arising in the mathematical models of such complex biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many patterns of cell and tissue organization are
specified during development by gradients of morphogens, substances that
instruct cells to adopt different fates at different spatial locations. The work
seeks to provide better understanding on embryonic tissue patterning and
formation of morphogen gradients through mathematical modeling and computational
analysis. The models are based on known experimental observations, and they
explicitly incorporate the key morphogens, their regulators, and the important
processes that are known from experiments to influence morphogen-mediated
patterning. The project addresses how robust embryonic tissue patterns arise
from complex interactions of many components and processes, and how the embryo
shape affects morphogen-mediated patterning as embryonic development usually
occurs in three-dimensional spatial geometries. The study requires development
of new computational tools that can efficiently handle complex systems of
equations arising from modeling embryonic development. The developed framework
and models will be applicable broadly to various morphogen systems in different
animal models. Quantitative theories of morphogenesis, based on mechanistic
models with close integration with experiments, will advance our understanding
of embryonic development. Such studies may lead to better understanding and
treatment of birth defects and other human diseases related to abnormal
embryonic development. The research project is interdisciplinary and hence will
enhance interdisciplinary training at the interface between mathematics and
biology for the students associated with the project.