* 0917408
* NetSE:  Small:  Collaborative Research: The Health Guardian- A Gateway to Networked Wellness
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The Health Guardian project provides medical care through
Wireless Health: remote monitoring, wearable body area sensors and wireless
communications. The goal is to promote independent living by improving home
patient care quality (and reduce costs) while enabling the care of mobile
individuals. Today, doctors and nurses manually record and track patients?
status. This manual process cannot guarantee accuracy and efficiency in the face
of increasing complexity of sensed data and measurement procedures. However,
remote, automated monitoring has become technically feasible. This program
introduces a BodyLAN interconnecting body sensors to a data collection gateway,
the ?Health Guardian?. In turn, the Health Guardian connects to external
networks to propagate the data for further processing. Leveraging the growing
popularity of P2P personal networks, this project enables new patient care
models based on P2P networking among patients and care providers. Broader
Impact: Wireless health will reach into homes, workplace environments and rural
communities. The foundation for emerging new applications and business
opportunities that range from networking of individuals interacting in health,
wellness and safety to rehabilitation and disease management of clinical
patients. On the education front, creation of cross cutting project-oriented
undergraduate and graduate courses. Intellectual merits: Innovative research in
delay tolerant, reliable networking between Body LAN, Guardian and Internet
overcoming intermittent wireless connectivity; cooperation among peers to share
critical resources and discover ?useful? neighbors with the help of Social
Network techniques; concept validation via clinical trials.