* 0917786
* U.S.-Chinese Cooperation on Electricity from Renewable Resources
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Proctor Reid, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 11/30/2010
* USD 50,000.00

0917786&lt;br/&gt;Reid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issue: The U.S. National Academies,
in collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and Chinese Academy
of Engineering (CAE), will conduct a joint study to assist their countries in
developing strategies to meet renewable energy goals, to identify prospects and
recommend priorities for research and technology cooperation between countries,
and to identify related areas, such as storage and systems approaches, ripe for
future cooperation. The study is intended to aid the national governments, their
relevant agencies/ministries, and private industries in assigning priorities for
substantial and meaningful cooperation in developing and utilizing electricity
from renewable energy. The study will pursue three separate but related goals:
1) Comparatively assessing resource potential in China and the U.S. for grid-
scale electricity generation; 2) Exploring near-term market opportunities for
mature technologies; and 3) Recommending priorities for enhanced collaboration,
with a focus on cost reduction, improved efficiency and grid connectivity, and
storage. Approach: National Academy of Sciences President Ralph J. Cicerone will
appoint a committee that will include experts in renewable energy technologies;
electricity generation, transmission, and distribution; energy policy; and
energy economics. The committee will work with a similarly appointed Chinese
committee, to outline the study, organize meetings, and prepare the consensus
report. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed study will assess
the technology risks and tradeoffs for various energy technologies. Much of this
technological information will be applicable and adaptable to China, and so an
understanding of the geographic, technical, and economic constraints will
provide the context for Chinese decision makers to develop appropriate
strategies to sustainably meet their energy needs. In some areas, notably
biomass utilization, China is among the world leaders, and certain technologies
may be applicable in the U.S. context as well. Similarly, China's manufacturing
prowess, combined with its growing domestic market, provide opportunities to
accelerate progress along the learning curve and reduce costs for renewable
energy technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Having a credible,
authoritative, bilateral report highlighting the opportunities for substantial
engagement, cooperation, and further investment should catalyze future
U.S.-Chinese collaboration among government agencies, industries, and other
relevant stakeholders. As part of the study process, the committees will hold
several information-gathering meetings which are open to the public. In addition
to engaging both countries at an institutional level, this study will engage
relevant research universities, government laboratories and agencies, and
industries in their public meetings. This will serve several purposes: 1) it
will inform the committee about ongoing and planned activities being carried out
in each country, 2) it will help the committee develop a report that speaks to
the particular informational needs of these diverse stakeholders, and 3) it will
facilitate connections between these stakeholders and some of the leading
experts in various aspects of renewable energy. Following its completion, the
report will be translated into Chinese and made publicly available
electronically and in print form. A separately published Executive Summary,
geared towards decision makers, will be widely disseminated in both countries.
The committees will also consider holding a public event to formally release the
reports and discuss its main findings and recommendations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Energy for Sustainability (CBET);
Power, Controls and Adaptive Networks (ECCS); and NanoManufacturing (CMMI)
programs from the Engineering Directorate and the Synthesis (CHEM) program from
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.