* 0917818
* HCC:Small:Collaborative Research: Exploring the Use of Immersive Virtual Reality Technologies for Scientific Research, Communication, and Outreach
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Piet Hut, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2012
* USD 23,412.00

Abstract The goals of this study are to explore the utility of the emerging
immersive virtual reality (VR) technologies and virtual worlds (VWs) for
scientific and educational uses in the framework of astrophysics and related
fields. This work will be done under the auspices of the Meta Institute for
Computational Astrophysics (MICA), the first professional scientific
organization based exclusively in VWs, representing an experiment in scientific
organization and communication by itself. However, the results should be more
broadly applicable to most other fields of science and scholarship.
Demonstrating the potential and the utility of these emerging technologies to
the academic community at large will help engage and facilitate a broader
participation of scientists and educators in these developments.

Specifically, the research will explore the following topics: (1) The uses of
VWs as scientific collaboration and communication environments, ranging from
individual and group discussions, to seminars and scientific conferences and
workshops. (2) Novel ways of user interaction and interfacing with numerical
simulations, in terms of the setup, adjustments, and interpretation of results,
especially in an interactive/collaborative setting. (3) Immersive and
interactive visualization of highly complex, multi-dimensional data sets, for a
direct visual exploration, data mining, and as publishable presentations in
electronic media. (4) Uses of WVs as a novel, interactive educational and public
outreach platform. (5) An initial exploration of the data architectures and
structures for the next generation of the Web with a VR user interface, and
interaction of human avatars and intelligent software agents. (6) Investigate VW
developments in the non-proprietary Opensim/Opengrid environments.

This effort will develop new modalities of scientific research and communication
using new VR and VWs technologies in the domain of astrophysics but having
positive impacts for comparable fields of science as well. It can open
qualitatively new ways in which scientists interact among themselves, with their
data, and with their numerical simulations, and thus foster some genuine new
"computational thinking" approaches to science and scholarship. Virtual worlds
will become a platform to conduct rigorous research activities in the fields of
computational astrophysics and data-intensive astronomy, seeking to determine
the potential of these new technologies, as well as to develop a new set of best
practices for scholarly and research activities enabled by them, and by a
combination of the existing Web-based and the new VR technologies.

The central idea behind this project is that immersive VR and VWs are
potentially transformative technologies on par with the Web itself, which can
and should be used for serious purposes, including science and scholarship. By
conveying this idea to professional scientists and scholars, and by leading by
example, the project aims to engage a much broader segment of the academic
community in utilizing, and developing further these technologies. The work will
include an active and multi-facetted program of education and public outreach,
which will foster the public understanding of both science and information
technology.