* 0917934
* Integrating Multiple Methods to Understand the Atmospheric Chemistry of Mercury and Mercury Dry Deposition from the Pacific to the Basin and Range
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Mae Gustin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2012
* USD 250,582.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies a multifaceted
approach focused to address the following questions: What is reactive gaseous
mercury (RGM)? Does the chemical form of RGM vary over space and time? What are
the processes responsible for RGM formation? How does dry deposition of RGM vary
across environmental settings? All of these questions address significant
uncertainties in the global biogeochemical cycle of Hg. A working hypothesis is
that the form of RGM in the air at a site will be a function of the atmospheric
oxidants in the air masses interacting with that location. RGM is hypothesized
to be formed by reactions with ozone, hydroxyl radical and halogen containing
compounds. RGM associated with marine air masses may be predominantly HgCl2,
while HgBr2 may be the dominant form in air masses derived from the free
troposphere and in the air at high elevation sites, and HgO the form associated
with urban areas where ozone and hydroxyl radical will be abundant. Field sites
for this project have been chosen to include all of the above areas with 2
coastal sites, 3 high elevation sites, 1 urban site and 3 continental sites. RGM
concentrations and deposition will be quantified using a standard automated
analytical method and a dry deposition model, as well as using newly developed
passive samplers and surrogate surfaces, respectively. The form of RGM will be
identified using a method designed to identify specific compounds based on the
temperature at which they are released from surrogate surfaces. Back trajectory
analyses will be applied to understand the source of the air associated with
specific forms of RGM collected at each site; and the Community Multiscale Air
Quality model with the mercury module will be used to understand the atmospheric
chemistry responsible for the observed air Hg concentrations and deposition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students from five high schools, as well as four
undergraduate students from several institutions will help collect, analyze and
interpret data each year of this project making them an integral component of
the research team.