* 0917984
* PFI: Kansas Bioprocessing Science and Engineering Center
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2014
* Daniel Richardson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2014
* USD 599,967.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between Kansas State University, an NSF PFI graduate (0438691), and Pittsburg
State University (PSU), an institution new to the PFI Program (defined as one
that has never been a PFI grantee)--seeks to simultaneously develop and
formalize a process to accelerate the commercial development of bioscience
products, processes and technologies and provide meaningful Early-Stage
Technology Development (ESTD) experience to Kansas's future technology engineers
and entrepreneurs. This project will accelerate the movement of bioscience
discoveries to commercialization for a leading agricultural biotechnology state
and region, Kansas. In particular, there is merit in designing ways to produce
more value from current bio-based waste streams, including those from ethanol
production processing streams. This project represents a new approach to linking
world class agriculture and bioscience investments in the state to new
innovation methods, particularly scale-up methods for bio-processing.

The project will enhance general economic well being in Kansas. It will increase
the transfer of technologies to Kansas companies; stimulate the formation and
assist the development of technology-based businesses in Kansas; increase new
products brought to market; and provide access to a coordinated Early-Stage
Technology Development (ESTD) resource that significantly accelerates the
development and hardening of new bioscience-based products, processes, and
technologies in Kansas. The major societal impact will be the creation of wealth
and high-paying jobs for the citizens of Kansas. In addition, creating a model
process that benefits both the technology creator/inventor and the recipient
will stimulate transformation of intellectual property created in both company
and university laboratories into commercial products. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in education about commercialization
activities and thus, Kansas's future technology entrepreneurs will learn to
define and conduct successful bioscience ESTD projects.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: Kansas State
University (lead institutions), Pittsburgh State University (PSU), and Kansas
State Olathe-Innovation Campus; Private Sector Organizations: Kansas
Environmental Management Associates (KEMA) LLC.; Lifeline Foods (St. Joseph,
MO); MGP Ingredients, Inc. (Atchison, KS); and State and Local Government:
Kansas Bioscience Authority (KBA) and Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation
(KTEC).