* 0917767
* NeTS:Small: Mapping, Attacking and Defending the BitTorrent Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Keith Ross, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 08/31/2014
* USD 349,915.00

The BitTorrent Ecosystem includes millions of BitTorrent peers, hundreds of
active trackers, and dozens of independently-operated torrent discovery sites.
The Ecosystem is further fueled with distributed trackers using Distributed Hash
Table (DHT) and Peer Exchange (PEX) functionality. The Ecosystem also includes
?interdiction companies," which attempt to curtail the distribution of targeted
content.

Despite its importance, both in terms of its footprint in the Internet and the
influence it has on emerging P2P applications, the BitTorrent Ecosystem is only
partially understood today. Many communities (including P2P researchers and
developers, ISP researchers and engineers, copyright holders, and law
enforcement agencies) would like to have a comprehensive and in-depth
understanding of the BitTorrent Ecosystem, as well as tools for mapping the
Ecosystem in the future.

In this context, the PI and his graduate students are exploring two inter-
related research directions. First, they are developing tools and methodologies
for comprehensive exploration and mapping of the entire BitTorrent Ecosystem.
Second, they are examining of how the Ecosystem can be attacked and defended.

The expected results for the mapping research include: new public-domain tools
and methodologies for mapping and analyzing the Ecosystem; a comprehensive
mapping data set, which will be more than an order of magnitude larger than any
existing data set and will essentially cover all trackers and peers in the
public Ecosystem; novel estimation methodologies based on importance sampling,
incorporating measurement samples from both centralized and distributed
trackers.

The expected results for the BitTorrent attack/defense research include:
measurement and evaluation methodologies of ongoing attacks from ?interdiction
companies"; an in-depth study of the seed attack, whereby the attackers attempt
to prevent the initial seed from distributing the file into the Ecosystem;
machine learning algorithms for defending against the pollution attack in
BitTorrent; and tractable deterministic and stochastic models for the dynamics
of BitTorrent attacks, providing critical insight into BitTorrent
vulnerabilities.

