* 0917615
* Beyond Earth : Weaving Science and Indigenous Culture
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2009,11/30/2010
* Timothy Young, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 11/30/2010
* USD 100,000.00

This planning grant is designed to engage urban and rural families in science
learning while piloting curriculum development and implementation that
incorporates both Native and Western epistemologies. Physical, earth, and space
science content is juxtaposed with indigenous culture, stories, language and
epistemology in after-school programs and teacher training. Project partners
include the Dakota Science Center, Fort Berthold Community College, and Sitting
Bull College. The Native American tribes represented in this initiative involve
partnerships between the Dakota, Lakota, Nakota, Hidatsa, Mandan, and
Arikara.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary project deliverables include a
culturally responsive Beyond Earth Moon Module, teacher training workshops, and
a project website. The curriculum module introduces students to the moon's
appearance, phases, and positions in the sky using the Night Sky Planetarium
Experience Station during programs at the Boys and Girls Club (Ft. Berthold
Community College), Night Lights Afterschool program (Sitting Bull Community
College), and Valley Middle School (UND and Dakota Science Center). Students
also explore core concepts underlying the moon's phases and eclipses using the
interactive Nature Experience Station before engaging in the culminating Mission
Challenge activity in which they apply their knowledge to problem solving
situations and projects. Fifteen pre-service and in-service teachers participate
in professional development workshops, while approximately 300 urban and rural
Native youth and family members participate in community
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed-methods evaluation examines the impact of
Western and Native science on the learning of youth and families and their
understanding of core concepts of science in a culturally responsive
environment. The formative evaluation addresses collaboration, development, and
implementation of the project using surveys and interviews to document
participant progress and obtain input. The summative evaluation examines
learning outcomes and partnerships through interviews and observations.
Presentations at national conferences, journal publications, and outreach to
teachers in the North Dakota Public School System are elements of the project's
comprehensive dissemination plan. The project findings may reveal impacts on
participants' interest and understanding of connections between Native and
Western science, while also assessing the potential for model replication in
similar locales around the country.