* 0917922
* Early Sharks:   The basal branching pattern and time-scale of chondrichthyan phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Michael Coates, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2012
* USD 462,558.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project takes a fresh
look at the evolutionary origin of cartilaginous fishes: sharks, rays, and the
less well-known chimaeras. Sharks and their relatives tend to be presented as
primitive and/or supremely adapted predators, although popular attention has
shifted more recently towards their ecological vulnerability and uniqueness as
an apparent reservoir of ancient genetic heritage. This project addresses the
question of what, if anything, is primitive about living shark-like fishes, and
aims to place today's molecular genetic discoveries and conservation targets
within a clear and precise evolutionary context. Fossils are central to this
research. While fossils are rare, remarkable examples are known. This research
will employ the latest analytical methods and imaging techniques to investigate
these early fishes to fill an outstanding gap in knowledge of early vertebrate
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute directly to the
ongoing effort to provide a robust foundation of the tree of vertebrate life.
The project will deliver training and employment opportunities for young
scientists at undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels, with high
potential for further interdisciplinary research. Sharks grab attention, and
thereby provide a superb vehicle for promoting the public understanding of
science through outreach programs, museum talks and displays, school visits, and
broadcast media. Finally, this project will build upon and extend networks of
inter-institutional research and education at national and international levels.