* 0917540
* An Investigation of the Impact of Strengthening the "T" and "E" Components of STEM in High School Biology and Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Cary Sneider, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,390,368.00

Stevens Institute of Technology and the New Jersey Department of Education are
addressing the DR-K12 challenge of assuring that all students have appropriate
opportunities to learn significant STEM content. The project is developing high
school biology and chemistry instructional materials that incorporate
engineering design and inquiry activities closely linked to the content, while
simultaneously introducing students to cutting-edge research in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to strengthen the
technology and engineering components in high school STEM courses taken by a
majority of students. The hypothesis is that increasing the presence of
engineering and technological design at the high school level, specifically by
integrating activities in bioengineering and chemical engineering into high
school biology and chemistry classes, improves student understanding of science
concepts and strengthens students? 21st Century skills more than traditional
instructional methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study employs an experimental
design with matched pairs of classrooms randomly assigned to treatment or
control conditions. Instruction in the treatment group includes an engineering
design activity in addition to the existing curriculum, while instruction in the
control group consists of the existing curriculum and an additional activity
presented via traditional methods. Changes in performance on achievement and
skills tests for the matched pairs are then
compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The study is intended to
contribute to the body of research on the effectiveness of engineering design
activities in improving student understanding of science concepts as compared to
other teaching methods. An experienced, multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional
research team and project advisors utilize rigorous methodologies to investigate
the impact of engineering design activities on the learning of science content
and 21st Century skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study
contributes new knowledge to both state and national efforts to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education at all levels for all students. By incorporating
engineering design in high school science, students are exposed to engineering
concepts and the interdisciplinary connections among science, technology, and
engineering. Introducing engineering design concepts in courses with larger and
more diverse enrollments helps to align public perceptions with reality,
increases student enrollments in STEM courses, and enhances the diversity of
students considering post-secondary engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;