* 0917458
* SGER: Biophotonics: Study of Transcorneal Electrical Stimulation in Subjects with Retinitis Pigmentosa
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2009,06/30/2009
* Stephen Tsang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 46,945.00

0917458 Tsang

The eye captures light but the brain is where vision is experienced. The
capacity of retinal prostheses to restore some vision in blind individuals has
been demonstrated at the retinal level, but it is unknown how the brain will be
receptive to the new neural message after a prolonged period of visual
deprivation resulting from retinal degenerative diseases. Neural remodeling that
occurs in retinal degenerative diseases can have an impact on the usefulness of
retinal prostheses in visual restoration. Mammalian retinal degenerations,
initiated by gene defects in rods, cones or the retinal pigmented epithelium,
often trigger loss of the photoreceptors; thus, effectively leaving the neural
retina without sensory input. The neural retina responds to this challenge by
remodeling, first by subtle changes in neuronal structure and later by large-
scale reorganization. This type of retinal remodeling can alter normal light
transmission pathway in the retina and result in activation of different
ganglion cell groups between light and electrical stimulation. In this proposal,
the PI proposes to use transcorneal electrical stimulation (TcES) to probe the
neural connection between the retina and the visual cortex via direct
stimulation of the retinal ganglion cells from a current passing through the
cornea. By using positron emission tomography (PET) and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) to compare brain activation between light stimulation and electrical
stimulation of the retina in patients with RP, we will be increase our
understanding how retinal remodeling is reflected in the visual cortex. The
study can then help us gain insight into cortical reorganization resulting from
the retinal degenerative process.