* 0917087
* NeTS: Small: The Impact of Message Passing Complexity on QoS Provisioning in Stochastic Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 09/30/2013
* USD 339,574.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111- 5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract (NSF
0917087):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless networks operate under hostile
conditions and often exhibit multi-scale stochastic dynamics. In such dynamic
environments, network algorithms for quality of services (QoS) provisioning
hinge heavily on state information exchange, and network functions are
intimately tied with the complexity of message passing. This project aims to
pursue a systematic characterization of the impact of message passing
complexity, a fundamental yet under explored area. Under such a common theme,
the proposed research is organized into two coordinated
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Thrust I focuses on the impact of message
passing complexity on effective throughput and delay performance of wireless
scheduling. Novel vacation models are developed to account for signaling
complexity, and effective throughput is studied using the fluid approach and
delay analysis is carried out by diffusion approximation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) In Thrust II, noisy feedback models are devised to
account for message passing complexity in distributed rate control algorithms
using various optimization methods, and stochastic stability is characterized
accordingly. The framework here provides a platform to compare different rate
control algorithms in terms of complexity and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly advance the understanding of the
impact of message passing complexity on QoS provisioning in stochastic wireless
networks. The study on open problems, such as delay performance of wireless
scheduling, will open up new research directions in this area. Undergraduate
students will get involved to carry out network performance measurements in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;