* 0917333
* III:   Small: Information Systems Under Schema Evolution:  Analyzing Change Histories and Management Tools
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Carlo Zaniolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2013
* USD 475,453.00

The significant progress made by database research on schema mapping (e.g.,
omposition, invertibility), data exchange, and query rewriting, can provide
breakthrough solutions for the Database Schema Evolution problem. But as of
today, information systems are sorely lacking the methods and tools needed to
cope with the problem, and to reduce the cost of data migration, rework of
queries, application rewriting, and downtime created by schema changes. In fact,
this old problem has been made worse by the success of scientific databases
(e.g., Ensembl) and web information systems (e.g., Wikipedia)---where the fast
evolution of applications and requirements characterizing the web and the
scientific discovery process is exacerbated by the number and diversity of users
and organizations cooperating on these endeavors.. Fortunately, the openness of
these public-domain information systems (vs. corporate ones), and the abundance
of their interesting evolution histories make it possible to built a
comprehensive testbed to determine the strengths, limitations, and potentials of
candidate methods and tools proposed for the problem. Thus, this project is
building: (i) an open-source curated repository containing evolution histories
from key information systems, (ii) benchmarks for a comprehensive set of tools
tested therein, and (iii) instruments to collect and analyze evolution
histories. These are then used to (a) compare and evaluate existing approaches,
methods and tools, and (b) entice researchers to evaluate and improve their
techniques and add their test cases to the benchmark. A transformative impact
can be expected upon schema mapping research and applications, inasmuch as
theoretical solutions are now validated and improved on real-life case-studies.
These in turn are expected to transform and improve significantly scientific
databases and web information systems. For further information see the project
web page: http://www.cs.ucla.edu/~zaniolo/nsf0917333.html

