* 0917720
* Conference: Plant Cell Walls Gordon Research Conference and Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research Seminar; August 2009; Smithfied, RI
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Debra Mohnen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2010
* USD 14,000.00

The Fifth Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Plant Cell Walls will be held
August 2-7,2009, at Bryant University in Smithfield, Rhode Island. This year,
for the first time, the Plant Cell Walls GRC will be immediately preceded, on
August 1-2, by a Plant Cell Walls Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research Seminar program
(GRS) offering an exceptional opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers entering this growing and increasingly important field. Plant cell
walls are a complex cellular compartment essential for plant growth, development
and response to biotic and abiotic stresses, and are a resource for renewable
bioenergy and natural products. The 2009 Plant Cell Walls GRC will bring
together an international mix of researchers from academic, industrial, research
center and government labs to summarize and critically evaluate our current
level of understanding of the plant cell wall. Specifically, the structure,
synthesis and function of the whole plant cell wall, including the
polysaccharides, proteins, lignin and waxes, and the enzymes and regulatory
proteins that drive wall synthesis and modification will be discussed.
Innovative techniques to study how both primary and secondary wall polymers are
formed and modified throughout plant growth and the use of mutants and natural
variants to understand and identify wall structure-function relationships will
be emphasized. The research advances needed to work toward a systems biology
level understanding of wall formation and remodeling will be highlighted. The
critical biochemical foundations of wall structure and biology will be
highlighted to enable use and modification of plant cell walls as a major
resource to fill the void left by dwindling supplies of fossil fuels and to meet
the associated growing need for alternative energy and industrial bioproducts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to gather
both leading researchers and younger scientists entering the field in an effort
to seed new research goals and ideas. The requested NSF funds will be used to
encourage and support the participation of young scientists, minorities and
underrepresented scientists at the meeting. In accordance with GRC philosophy, a
retreat-like atmosphere is designed for the meeting and its principal product is
the summary and dispersal of ideas across the community. For the first time, the
GRC will have an accompanying Plant Cell Walls Gordon-Kenan Graduate Research
Seminar program (GRS), which will provide an opportunity for graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers with an interest in plant walls to interact,
exchange ideas, and share cutting-edge research in the area of plant cell wall
structure and function. The GRS will include two science sessions, presented and
attended primarily by graduate students and postdoctoral scholars. A small
selected panel of established researchers will also participate and contribute
to the discussions. The GRS discussion leaders and speakers will be selected
from graduate students, post docs and senior researchers to facilitate and drive
active discussions. The topics for the GRS include plant cell wall biosynthesis,
structure and function, lignocellulosic biofuel production, and natural products
derived from plant cell walls.