* 0917543
* LIGO Science Education Center Partnership (SUBR)
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Stephen McGuire, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,370,000.00

This award is one component of a collaborative effort to fund the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) Science Education Center
Partnership between Southern University in Baton Rouge (SUBR), LA, and the LIGO
Livingston site in Livingston, La, through the Baton Rouge Area Foundation
(BRAF). The managing institution for LIGO itself is California Institute of
technology. The entire partnership includes the LIGO Laboratory, SUBR's College
of Education and Physics, Mathematics, and Science/Mathematics Education
Departments, the Louisiana Systemic Initiatives Program (LaSIP) and Louisiana
Gaining Early Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate Programs (LA GEAR UP),
under the LA Board of Regents, and the San Francisco Exploratorium. The LIGO
Science Education Partnership is a project that combines the efforts of a
cutting-edge research laboratory, a university, a State educational reform
agency, and a leading museum that specializes in informal science education. The
focus of the project is the creation of an effective center for teacher training
and teacher education centered on LIGO activities in Louisiana. A previous award
helped create the SEC building, with a classroom and a large exhibit hall, with
exhibits developed by the Exploratorium and staffed by SUBR student docents and
a (separately funded) professional staff. This new award will extend and
strengthen this success, and begin several new activities, including studies of
the way children learn in both informal and formal settings supported by this
award, and the effectiveness of the teacher professional development supported
by this award. These new activities will both provide scholarly work on informal
and formal science education but will also provide feedback to the project which
can be used to increase the effectiveness of the activities.