* 0917127
* Student Travel Support for the 2009 North American Membrane Society Annual Meeting in Charleston, SC June 20-24, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 03/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

0917127 Wickramasinghe

Funding is requested to increase the participation of U.S. students in the North
American Membrane Society (NAMS) 2009 national meeting, to be held in
Charleston, SC, 20-24 June 2009. The funding will be used to provide partial
support of travel and related expenses to students attending the conference. The
objective is to encourage student participation in the largest American meeting
focused on this subject and, thereby, provide opportunities for them to present
their work, meet other scientists and engineers from around the world with
similar interests, and attend presentations and poster sessions to learn about
the latest research in membrane science and engineering. Membrane processes are
used widely in the chemical, petrochemical, food processing, food packaging,
medical, energy and biotechnology industries. Funding from this grant would
bring students to NAMS 2009 to gain knowledge about the latest research
discoveries in membrane science and engineering from around the world.

The proposed meeting sponsorship would increase the number of U.S. students who
are able to attend NAMS 2009. In addition to 26 technical sessions and a poster
session, an extensive student program are planned. Four workshops will provide
students with intensive training in fundamental and developing areas of membrane
science and engineering.

The NSF funding will provide partial travel support for 10 students to attend
this meeting, and will be available to students of all genders, ethnicity, and
geographic region of the U.S. Applications received from students with
disabilities will be encouraged. Student participation in NAMS 2009 will enhance
the infrastructure for research by giving students access to leading scientists
and engineers from around the world in the technical sessions and in the
workshops. Students will have extensive opportunities to network with potential
employers and with students and faculty from other research groups with similar
interests. Society would benefit from this activity, as participation in NAMS
2009 will educate students who in turn will advance membranes and membrane
processes as enabling technologies in a broad range of practical applications
vital to the U.S. economy.