* 0917391
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Invariant Inference, Enhanced
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Michal Young, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2012
* USD 183,000.00

In just a decade, dynamic invariant inference has emerged as one of the most
promising directions in program analysis, with a variety of applications. An
invariant inference system observes a program during test execution and filters
a large number of candidate invariants (i.e., suspected relations between
program data), finally reporting only those that hold with high confidence.
However, inferred invariants are not always true (they depend on the quality of
a test suite), and the few really useful invariants discovered are often
accompanied by many more true but trivial and irrelevant facts. This work
improves the quality of discovered invariants by ensuring their consistency with
facts that are known statically. For instance, even though the invariants
describing the behavior of two functions f1 and f2 may be unknown, we may know
that any valid input for f1 is also valid for f2. This fact can be incorporated
in the inference process to eliminate inconsistent invariants. More generally,
the work explores techniques for expressing, discovering, and employing such
consistency constraints to improve the quality of produced invariants, from type
information and other sources including static analysis and user-supplied
annotation.

The work will impact many aspects of software engineering, including scientific
and industrial uses. Concrete benefits will be in the form of publications,
usable software (released under an academic open-source license), software
prototypes, and educational activities and resources (enhancement of a textbook
and current courses, internships for high school students).