* 0917945
* PFI: Medical Technology Commercialization Clinic
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Dennis Matthews, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2013
* USD 599,907.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (C:A) partnership
between University of California-Davis (UC Davis), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee) and Fisk University
(Nashville, TN), an NSF PFI graduate (0090526, )is focused on developing
innovative medical technologies so as to bring them closer to market by
assembling multidisciplinary teams that include faculty, STEM students
(including those from underrepresented groups), MBA students, and experienced
entrepreneurs. In the Medical Technology Commercialization Clinic (MTCC), the
teams will assess technical feasibility, market potential and commercialization
strategies for technologies of interest, under the leadership of Entrepreneurs-
in-Residence (highly experienced, serial entrepreneurs) and with mentorship from
the members of the partnership

The broader impacts of the MTCC Partnership will provide an engine for
transforming knowledge at the intersection of engineering, life sciences and
medicine into innovations that contribute to the Sacramento region's economic
development, while also educating STEM students (including underrepresented
groups) and clinicians in technology transfer and entrepreneurship and giving
them hands-on opportunities to assess the commercialization potential of the
technologies they are developing. The proposed activities will: 1) develop a
process that enables innovation and multidisciplinary team formation; 2) educate
STEM students, medical researchers and faculty in technology transfer,
entrepreneurship and commercialization; 3) promote the development of highly
commercializable technologies to bring them closer to market; and 4) contribute
to the Sacramento region's economic development by feeding its pipeline with
trained workforce and startups. The collaboration with Fisk University will also
make possible the exchange of innovation knowledge and skills between the
Sacramento and Nashville regions.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: University
of California at David (lead institution), Fisk University, California State
University, Sacramento, Los Rios Community College District; Private Sector
Organizations: PRIDE Industries, T2 Venture Capital, and Wavepoint Ventures; and
Public Sector Organizations: City of Sacramento, CA; City of West Sacramento,
CA; Sacramento Area Region Technology Alliance (SARTA) MedStart Initiative, and
Sacramento Area Region Technology Alliance (SARTA).