* 0917919
* PFI: A Consortium for Fulldome and Immersive Technology Development
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2010,08/31/2012
* Pradeep Sen, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2012
* USD 597,220.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project--a Type III (A:C) partnership
between the University of New Mexico (UNM), an NSF PFI graduate (0227806), and
the Institute for American Indian Arts (IAIA), an institution new to the PFI
Program (defined as one that has never been a PFI grantee)--seeks to apply UNM's
experience in fulldome technology to formalize already existing informal
partnerships and efforts into a consortium that will move fulldome to multi-
surface immersive environments through a coordinated set of activities that
include research, development, and applications over a range of problems driven
by partner expertise, from scientific and information visualization to
simulation to the use of novel interactive devices. The proposed integrated
program has three main thrusts: 1) tool development: hardware and software for
fulldomes and core research into how these spaces can be used as interactive
theaters and extended to multi-surface environments, as visualization tools and
as educational and experiential venues; 2) integration and content development:
development of key applications areas including visualization, simulation,
complex systems, security, and education; and 3) education and workforce
development: building an educated workforce for the new industry and bringing in
new communities through new ways to communicate science, enhance learning, and
expand the missions and services of these new technologies.

One of the broader impacts of the proposed research is that the consortium will
create a new high tech industry within the state of New Mexico, a majority-
minority state. Although New Mexico is home to the national laboratories and
other DOD/DOE facilities, it ranks at the bottom of most economic indicators.
The University of New Mexico (a Hispanic-serving institution) will join the
Institute of American Indian Arts (IAIA) (one of three congressionally chartered
institutions of higher education and an accredited tribal institution) to share
the facilities and expertise developed through this project. The proposed
project will leverage the experience with the NSF PFI sponsored 'Digital Pueblo
Project' (0227806) which helped to lay the foundation for the growing digital
media industry in the state of New Mexico. Finally, this work will broaden the
usability of fulldome technologies to a wider range of spaces that can be used
to educate the general population in STEM-related areas. Partners at the
inception of the project are Academic Institutions: University of New Mexico
(UNM) (lead institution), Institute of American Indian Arts (IAIA); Research
Institute: Santa Fe Institute; and Private Sector Organizations: Institute for
the Study and Integration of Graphical Heritage Techniques, Santa Fe Complex
(Redfish Group and Los Alamos Visual Analytics), and Sky Scan.