* 0917955
* SGER: A Seafloor Camera System for Flow Rate Measurements in Black Smoker Vents
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2009,04/30/2011
* Timothy Crone, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 04/30/2011
* USD 142,371.00

The PI has requested funding to develop and test a seafloor camera system that
can measure fluid flow through black smoker hydrothermal vents using video image
analysis. Fluid flow through black smoker vents plays a significant role in the
exchange of heat and chemicals between the oceanic crust and the ocean. This
flow delivers energy to a diverse subseafloor ecosystem and serves to link
tectonic and magmatic processes to chemical and biological processes.
Measurements of fluid flow in these systems are essential for measuring fluxes
and understanding complex systematic linkages. Despite the importance of
measuring fluid flow rates, there is currently no instrument capable of
obtaining long term flow measurements in black smoker vents. High temperatures,
low pH, and mineral precipitation make invasive techniques infeasible. To
address this problem, The PI proposes to develop a non-invasive image-based
instrument to obtain flow rates in black smoker vents. This camera system will
employ a new technique for measuring black smoker flow, called Optical Plume
Velocimetry (OPV), which has been developed in the laboratory and has been shown
to work well on simulated black smoker flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop an instrument that will
increase our ability to understand the hydrology of marine hydrothermal systems
and a variety of related processes, including the interactions between
geomechanical processes and other processes such as heat and chemical transport
and biological productivity. The development and field test of this technology
will open up a wide range of possible experiments at many vent fields on the
mid-ocean ridge. This work will also support the work of a young scientist.
Crone has a strong record of public outreach through the media, and
communicating his results to scientific and general audiences. &lt;br/&gt;