* 0917569
* Bio-inspired Sensing and Actuation Technologies for Civil and Mechanical Systems- A  Bilateral US-Taiwan Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2011
* Ming-Liang Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 03/31/2011
* USD 43,692.00

OISE-0917569 (Wang, Northeastern University), ?Bio-inspired Sensing and
Actuation Technologies for Civil and Mechanical Systems: A Bilateral US-Taiwan
Workshop?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
a U.S.-Taiwan workshop that aims to develop a comprehensive research agenda for
collaboration on the advancement of smart structure technology for the
protection of civil and mechanical infrastructure systems based on the
adaptation of biologically inspired sensing and actuation concepts. Jointly
organized by the PI and Professor Chin-Hsiung Loh of National Taiwan University
Department of Civil Engineering, the workshop will formulate a framework for
integrated research frontier on emerging areas serving pressing societal needs.
Complementary expertise will enable important research advances and training of
students and junior researchers. The meeting, scheduled to take place in Taiwan
in April 2009, will adopt an interdisciplinary approach, including field leaders
in engineering, natural sciences, and medicine from both the U.S. and Taiwan to
address key questions in the emerging fields of bio-inspired sensing and
actuation fields, examining opportunities and technical challenges for
infrastructure systems and mechanical systems. Young researchers and students
will be targeted to participate in both the presentations and workshop
discussions to define a collective future vision for joint research. Workshop
results will be disseminated in the research community and to funding agencies
to encourage collaborative research in this area. The workshop is cofunded by
the Sensor Innovation and Systems program and the Structural Systems and Hazard
Mitigation of Structures program, both in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;