* 0917981
* PFI: An Innovative Model for a New Advanced Energy Workforce
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Marcia King-Blandford, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2014
* USD 599,901.00

This Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) project is a Type III (A:C) partnership
between University of Toledo, an NSF PFI graduate (0227899), and several
institutions new to the PFI Program (defined as ones that have never been PFI
grantees): Central State University, Hocking College, Lakeland Community
College, Owens Community College, and Terra Community College. The project seeks
to create a model for developing courses, certification programs, stackable
certificates, and associate degree programs throughout the State of Ohio in
advanced energy. Ohio universities, under the leadership of the Governor?s
Energy Advisor, banded together to form the University Clean Energy Alliance of
Ohio in 2007 to promote advanced energy research. In addition, the state has
leading alternative energy companies and a renewable energy portfolio standard
that promise job opportunities for the future. A ready and trained workforce is
needed to support renewable energy companies as well as trained and ready trades
people to install solar, wind, and other systems. The project involves
university research and incubation centers to provide guidance for the
development of new courses and programs in anticipation of the development and
commercialization of new energy systems (e.g., rooftop building integrated PV
systems. The project will bring new knowledge on advanced energy technologies to
community and technical colleges so that new courses and programs can be
developed. It will develop a statewide model for university engagement to
transform an "old industrial region" into a leader in a new technology intensive
industry. The project draws upon the experience of a previously successful PFI
project as well as the statewide support of the primary organizational partner,
University Clean Energy Alliance of Ohio.

The project aims to take Ohio universities toward a more "developmental role" in
transforming the statewide economy and creating high paying job opportunities.
The project involves Central State University, an HBCU, and gives special
attention to developing opportunities for participation of underrepresented
groups. The results of the project will be broadly disseminated in Ohio and
nationally through presentations, press releases, involvement of state leaders,
and professional and technical publications.

Partners at the inception of the project are Academic Institutions: University
of Toledo (lead institution), Central State University, Hocking College,
Lakeland Community College, Owens Community College, Terra Community College,
and Bowling Green State University; Private Sector (Industry) : Advanced Energy
Generation, Engineered Process Systems, FirstEnergy, First Solar, North Coast
Wind and Power, Solar Fields (Calyxo), WIRE-Net (Great Lakes Wind Network) and
Xunlight; Private Sector (Non Profit): University Clean Energy Alliance of Ohio;
and State Government: Ohio Board of Regents.