* 0917998
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Support: The Moral Public: Moral Judgment and Political Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Stanley Feldman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moral judgment has always been a
central component of social and political inquiry. Political philosophers have
argued that attitudes guided by moral principles are intrinsically good and
obligatory. But despite the vast literature on morality, empirical political
scientists have shied away from studying the extent to which people use moral
judgment in forming political attitudes. This project?s contribution is to
develop a theory and methodology for identifying moral issues, observing moral
judgments, and connecting moral judgment to political attitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general question of the moral public is addressed by
answering three more specific questions: First, what criteria make political
issues moral and to whom? Second, what underlies moral judgment and how does the
moral mindset affect political attitudes? Third, what is the role of moral
judgment in the formation of political attitudes? This study uses diverse
samples, a matching-based nationally representative sample, alternative measures
for moral judgment, and experimental as well as correlational designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief intellectual merit of this project lies in
applying seminal theories from political philosophy as well as up-to-date
theories in the social and life sciences to establish the theoretical and
methodological foundations upon which morality can be integrated in subsequent
political behavior research. The study has implications for key contemporary
questions in political behavior and public opinion research, such as voting
behavior, public opinion mobilization, campaign efficacy, and the functioning of
democracies. For instance, if people use intuitive or emotions-based moral
judgment, then they may form reasonable and efficient morally based political
attitudes despite being ideologically unsophisticated and politically
unknowledgeable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has broader implications as
well. First, the measures validated in this research program are applicable
across various branches of political science, psychology, and empirical
philosophy. By building on interdisciplinary research, this study advances a key
scientific goal of increasing the consistency of that knowledge across
scientific fields. Second, the validated scales and data will be made available
on the co-PI's website for other researchers to further research into the
important role played by morality and values in the American society. Finally,
this project benefits society by identifying differences in the understanding of
morality, and offering ways to a more productive and tolerant public discussion
of politics.