* 0917763
* Keystone Symposia meeting on The Future of Biofuels in Snowbird Resort, UT: April 4-8, 2009
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Jay Keasling, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Rorrer
* 04/30/2010
* USD 5,000.00

0917763&lt;br/&gt;Robertson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this meeting is to
share a broad perspective defining the critical needs for biofuels and to
highlight cutting edge research and development efforts that are defining the
next generation of biofuel product and process advances. One major deficiency in
the advancement of biofuels is the need to do more integrated and cross-
disciplinary research. This conference brings together a broad spectrum of core
experts to bridge this gap and help to better enable and advance biofuel
research efforts globally. The specific objectives of Keystone Symposia's The
Future of Biofuels meeting (organized by Drs. William D. Provine, Chris R.
Somerville, Doug Cameron and Jay D. Keasling) are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Address critical barriers to progress in biofuel technology development and
innovation,&lt;br/&gt;2. Forge interdisciplinary understanding and collaboration
among scientists working in this field,&lt;br/&gt;3. Compare competing ideas,
approaches, and strategies in order to address regional challenges for biofuel
choices and applications, and&lt;br/&gt;4. Provide an interactive forum to
involve new investigators and highlight their
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The Future of Biofuels
meeting aims to advance knowledge and understanding within the field of biofuels
research by presenting a more scientific view of the leading edge of knowledge
in this area. In contrast, most meetings in the field of biofuels are industry
meetings in which companies outline their goals and technologies. Keystone
Symposia provides an internationally recognized platform as well as resources to
ensure the success of this meeting and the organizers are well-recognized
leaders in the field of biofuels research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The field of biofuels is very dynamic and complex. There are many parallel ideas
converging on the core issues in the field, and a large number of disciplines,
ranging from social sciences and economics to chemical engineering and agronomy.
There is a need to bring these disciplines together in a common format to
facilitate interdisciplinary contacts and collaborations. Keystone Symposia's
The Future of Biofuels meeting will provide a venue in which the various kinds
of approaches can be critically considered within one intellectual framework.
Additionally, this meeting will enhance infrastructure by fostering networking
and initiation of collaborations. We anticipate the following educational
benefits: acquaint trainees and investigators new to field with the state-of-
the-art; critical scientific feedback; and career development for trainees and
new investigators, including opportunities both to see successful scientists
presenting cutting-edge science and to network with prospective mentors and
others who might contribute to their scientific and professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Energy for
Sustainability, Catalysis and Biocatalysis and Environmental Sustainability
programs of the CBET Division of the Engineering Directorate.