* 0917286
* HCC: Small: Rethinking Simulation in Computer Graphics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* John Keyser, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2013
* USD 469,010.00

Abstract ? Keyser (0917286)&lt;br/&gt;Simulations play an important role in many
graphical applications, ranging from entertainment to virtual environments used
for training. These applications demand greater and greater realism, and this in
turn creates a need for more believable and more efficient simulations. While
there have been major improvements in simulation technology, many of these
techniques can be quite slow, and simply applying greater computing power is not
sufficient to meet the demands of real-time systems. The focus of this research
is on finding ways to create real-time simulations by taking different
approaches to the simulation framework used in computer graphics. The
researchers explore ways to replace simulation by statistical data, simplify the
theory of effects-based simulations, and incorporate these approaches into a
system that trades off accuracy and speed to meet the requirements of a given
problem. This work can change the manner in which simulation is performed in
graphics and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with developing
methods for real-time simulation by taking fundamentally different approaches to
the simulation problem. First, the researchers investigate ways of replacing
full physics-based simulations with statistically-based capture of simulation
effects. Rather than simulating at run-time, statistics are gathered regarding
simulation behavior across several samples, from either full simulations or
other sources. At run-time, the simulation is replaced by a result generated
according to the statistical distribution. Second, the researchers develop ways
of simplifying the theory of certain simulation systems to allow simplified
simulations that still capture the important effects, while leaving the less
important details to be handled by other (less computationally-involved) means.
Third, the researchers investigate ways to develop level-of-detail simulations
that allow a tradeoff between fidelity and efficiency, supporting both a highly
accurate simulation and a faster simulation with guaranteed performance. The
statistical and simplified approaches are incorporated into this level-of-detail
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;