* 0917251
* NeTS: Small:  Beyond Listen-Before-Talk: Advanced Cognitive Radio Access Control in Distributed Multiuser Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,186.00

The award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Cognitive radio (CR) has the potential to improve spectrum utilization and
expand wireless communication services by opportunistically utilizing
underutilized spectrum bands. This project designs advanced cognitive radio
access and power control algorithms that can achieve better spectrum efficiency
while limiting interference to primary communications. Moving beyond the more
traditional access strategies that rely only on secondary user (SU) spectral
sensing to avoid collision with primary users (PUs), this research exploits
various levels of primary network?s data link control (DLC) signaling and
feedback information. Such DLC information is available in many practical
wireless systems, such as transmission profile, receiver ACK/NACK, channel
quality indicator, and power control information. Utilizing such information
elevates the level of SU cognition. It provides more efficient spectrum sharing,
better PU protection (especially in the presence of multiple distributed SUs),
and multiple levels of SU and PU interaction. The major outcomes include: 1)
Distributed multi-SU cognitive access and power control based on PU receiver
feedback information; 2) Optimal algorithms for distributed multi-SU access
control in multi-channel cognitive environments; 3) Cognitive radio access
robust to PU behavioral changes and incomplete PU feedback information; and 4)
Hierarchical cognitive radio networks of users with varying degrees of
cognition. This significantly broadens the future applications of wireless
services in areas with limited open spectrum. The plan recruits students,
especially from under-represented groups, and integrates the results into the
classes for computer science and electrical engineering majors.