* 0917244
* Small:CIF:Exact Thresholds for Quantum Information Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Willem van Dam, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 06/30/2013
* USD 443,880.00

Computation and communication are physical processes with limits set by the laws
of physics. This project investigates which bounds the laws of quantum mechanics
impose on processing quantum information in a reliable manner. Two questions are
specifically addressed, one concerning the amount of noise that can be tolerated
in a quantum computer, and the other about the minimal physical resources
required to store quantum information.

Noise Thresholds: When talking about circuits to implement quantum algorithms
one has to take into account the fact that it is impossible to implement the
gates perfectly. In the case of quantum computation this realization is
especially relevant as the experimental challenges for implementing quantum
gates are significantly greater than those for implementing classical gates. It
is the theory of fault tolerant quantum computation that investigates the many
aspects of this issue. The current project looks at exactly which noise levels
the ability to perform quantum computation disappears and how such threshold
values depend on the kind of quantum gate and the kind of noise.

Information Storage: It seems obvious that to store a bit of information one
needs to expend physical resources and that there is a trade-off between these
resources such as space and energy. The research of this project looks at making
this intuition rigorous and more quantitative by deriving physical laws that
give exact lower bounds on the necessary combined resources to store quantum
information reliably, taking into account how much information for how long has
to be stored.