* 0917738
* Collaborative Research:Hierarchical Testing and Yield Enhancement of High End Integrated RF Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2008,09/30/2009
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2009
* USD 6,803.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0545456&lt;br/&gt;Ozev, Sule&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Hierarchical Process Variability
Analysis of Analog Circutis Geared for Test and
Diganosis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic systems are proliferating into the
fabric of the society with an ever increasing speed. Even before one new device
technology goes into mass manufacturing, scientists start working on next
generation technologies. Unfortunately, the ability to control the processing
environment nears its natural limits. One direct result of this diminishing
process control capability is the increasing variability in component
parameters. The performance of analog electronic circuits is especially
susceptible to such process variations. As the control over the process
diminishes, testing the manufactured parts effectively and efficiently becomes
increasingly more important. The testing process becomes all the more essential
to ensure product quality and eventual success of the products in the global
marketplace. The conflict resulting from the push towards higher performance
while the process variability is increasing indicates a dire need for new
approaches for the test automation of analog circuits that will be eventually
adopted by the industry. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
hierarchical methods for process variability analysis that are geared towards
test and diagnosis automation. By determining the variance of each intermediate
parameter for the fault-free circuit and for many distinct faults, efficient
fault-based test and diagnosis approaches can be developed. During fault
injection, only a subset of the system building blocks will change. Through the
hierarchical analysis approach, the changes in the circuit will prompt
reprocessing of only the information that needs to be updated to ensure
efficiency. While digital fault-based test and diagnosis methods have enjoyed
widespread acceptance from the industry, there has been a resistance in the
analog domain mostly due to the discrepancy between the design goals and the
definition of what constitutes a fault. With the help of efficient process
variability analysis, this project aims at breaking through this barrier by
disassociating the fault injection from the pass/fail criteria. Aligning the
pass/fail criteria with the specifications of the circuit will initiate a wider
acceptance of automated fault-based test and diagnosis in the analog domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;