* 0917204
* SHF: Small: System-Theoretic Analysis and Design for Dynamic Stability of Memory Devices in Nanoscale CMOS and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Peng Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal ID: 0917204 &lt;br/&gt;Pi name: Li Peng &lt;br/&gt;Inst: Texas
Engineering Experiment Station &lt;br/&gt;Title: System-Theoretic Analysis and
Design for Dynamic Stability of Memory Devices in Nanoscale CMOS and
Beyond&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
storage is essential to a broad range of electronic and biological systems.
Static random access memories (SRAMs) provide essential on-chip data storage for
many electronic applications including microprocessors, ASICs, DSPs and SoCs.
There also exists a growing effort in developing engineered genetic memory
circuits to facilitate new understanding of cellular phenomena in natural
organisms, cellular control and biocomputing. This work intends to facilitate
the understanding, analysis and enhancement of dynamic stability, a key system
property, for semiconductor SRAMs, emerging memristor and biological memories.
Conventional static SRAM stability metrics are unable to capture intrinsic
dynamic circuit operations and hence inherently limited in their applications.
This work addresses the need for a rigorous understanding of dynamic stability
in semiconductor and genetic memories via a system-theoretic approach. Nonlinear
system theory will be exploited to construct new dynamic noise margin concepts
and design metrics with theoretic rigor and design insights. Novel system
theoretically motivated numerical algorithms will be developed to facilitate
analysis and optimization with significantly improved efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work will facilitate the design of nanoscale
computing systems as well as the development of synthetic gene-regulatory
networks. Interdisciplinary explorations will provide new opportunities for
solving research problems of practical significance and offer educational
opportunities to students. The PIs will promote the research participation from
undergraduate students and students from underrepresented groups and engage in
high-school teacher enrichment programs. The research outcomes will be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate curriculum and disseminated in the
research community and major semiconductor companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;