* 0917741
* The ecological consequences of hybridization of asexual microbial symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Stanley Faeth, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 615,971.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Many new plant and animal species arise from hybridization between different
species. Although less well-studied, microbial species also hybridize and create
new genetic species and variants. All plants species harbor microbial partners,
and these partners often dramatically alter plant growth and performance. For
example, microbial partners in the roots of agricultural crop plants increase
growth and yields. This project will examine the ecological consequences of
hybridization among fungal endophytes that are microbial partners living inside
grasses and that dramatically alter plant performance and resistance to drought
and herbivores. This partnership or symbiosis has been manipulated to improve
growth, competitiveness, and resistance to insects in the forage and turf grass
industry. In native grasses, fungal endophytes appear to hybridize frequently to
create new strains that can become common in nature. These new, hybrid strains
of endophytes may affect growth and seed production and competitive abilities in
ways very different than non-hybrid strains. This project will experimentally
examine the role of hybridization of endophytes on growth and competitive
abilities of two native grasses: sleepy grass (Achnatherum robustum) and Arizona
fescue (Festuca arizonica). Soil water and nutrient conditions will be
manipulated in greenhouse and field experiments to test the hypothesis that
hybridization of endophytes increases the ability of the host grass to survive
and compete better in harsh environmental conditions.

This project has broad implications for efforts to conserve and restore native
grasslands, and for rangeland management, since both study grasses are native
species that are important to livestock grazing in the southwest USA. The
research will also provide for collegiate and K-12 educational opportunities.
This project will support undergraduate and graduate students to receive
research training in plant and microbial ecology. Undergraduate students will be
recruited from the University of North Carolina - Greensboro, with an emphasis
on involving women and minorities. As part of this project, a summer internship
for local K-12 teachers will be established in partnership with The Science
Nature Center of Greensboro and North Carolina State Parks.