* 0918248
* Collaborative Research:  SYMMETRY, AMBIGUITY AND FREQUENCIES
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kyoungwon Seo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,097.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project models
decision-making and learning in complex environments. One would expect most
decision makers to be aware of such complexity and to realize that they have at
best a limited understanding of the factors that determine the outcomes of any
chosen course of action. Such awareness leads an individual to be modest is her
ambitions about what can be learned and it also influences her actions. Our
focus is on understanding and modeling formally these effects on learning and
choice behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The settings considered are those of
repeated experiments, where experiment is defined as the realtization of some
chance event, such as the observation of an economic variable such as the rate
of return to a financial asset or the annual growth rate for a particular
country. An experiment can be thought of as part of a statistical model of the
observations of interest. It is common in such settings that there is symmetry
of evidence about the experiments; that is no information is given that would
imply a distinction between them. However, there may be little information about
any of the experiments, in which case there is little evidence of symmetry. A
thoughtful and cautious individual would admit the possibility that the
experiments may differ in some way, even if she cannot specify how. This will
influence her behavior. After formulating this distinction in a precise way
through a mathematical model, we show that the dominant model of choice in
economics and Bayesian statistics (expected utility theory) cannot accommodate
the distinction. Then we develop an alternative axiomatically-based model that
can. The modeling of learning centers on the question of how to use the outcomes
of past experiments to predict those of future experiments when these may differ
in ways that are only poorly understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous decision
making problems fit into this framework. For example, consider a medical
decision-maker who must prescribe treatment for patients that have similar
histories, but who may nevertheless differ since histories are invariably
incomplete. Our model can serve as a normative guide as well as suggesting
experiments to test the descriptive validity of the axioms. Of particular
promise are applications to statistical decision-making. Invariably in
statistical analysis symmetry is assumed at some level, perhaps after correcting
for perceived differences. Standard methods presume that, after such
corrections, the identical statistical model applies to all other observations
in he data set. This presumption is particularly problematic when analyzing
open-ended theories, where it is impossible to account for all possible
differences. A prime example is the empirical literature attempting to explain
cross-country differences in growth rates, in which case an experiment
corresponds to a country, and where open-endedness is widely recognized. Thus we
pursue statistical procedures that permit the analyst to express a judgement of
similarity but also a concern that the relevant experiments may differ, even if
she cannot specify how. In addition, by providing solid decision-theoretic
foundations for statistical methods, we render them well-suited to policy
analysis.