* 0918446
* Asymmetric Regulation of Gene Expression in S. Cerevisiae through RNA Localization
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Roy Long, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 345,572.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Development of a multi-cellular organism requires
that a mother cell divide into two daughter cells with different cell-fates. The
ability of the two daughter cells to assume different developmental potentials
is determined by the asymmetric regulation of gene expression. The asymmetric
sorting of a cell-fate determinant between the daughter cells leads to
differences in gene expression. RNA localization is one mechanism for
asymmetrically sorting a cell-fate determinant between daughter cells. The yeast
S. cerevisiae serves as a model system to investigate the asymmetric sorting of
a cell-fate determinant through mRNA localization. ASH1 mRNA localizes to the
distal tip of the bud resulting in the asymmetric regulation of gene expression
by the transcriptional repressor Ash1p. The localization of ASH1 mRNA is
achieved through the interplay of four cis-acting localization elements located
in ASH1 mRNA and at least three (Myo4p, She2p and She3p) trans-acting
localization factors. The various protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions
between the cis- and trans-acting factors have led to a very basic model for
ASH1 mRNA localization which does not completely account for all aspects of the
ASH1 mRNA localization pathway. There is increasing evidence indicating that
phosphorylation plays a role in the mechanism of RNA localization. She3p is
phosphorylated in vivo, and phosphorylation of this protein negatively regulates
a novel activity required for ASH1 mRNA localization. Consequently, one aim of
this project is to identify and characterize this novel She3p activity and
determine how phosphorylation of She3p negatively regulates this activity. The
functions of Myo4p and She3p in the yeast cell are not limited to RNA
localization. Myo4p and She3p participate in the delivery of cortical
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the bud. Furthermore, a fraction of She2p co-
fractionates with the ER. Given the correlation between the ER and ASH1 mRNA
localization components, a second aim of this project is to determine if there
is a mechanistic connection between ASH1 mRNA localization and the association
of She2p with the ER. The biochemical, genetic and cell biological experiments
contained within this project will further uncover the mechanism for ASH1 mRNA
localization, and the insight obtained from S. cerevisiae will likely have
relevance for the sorting of cell-fate determinants required for development in
higher eukaryotes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Research in
Dr. Long's laboratory is heavily dependent on research conducted by post-
doctoral fellows and graduate students. Since arriving at the Medical College of
Wisconsin, Dr. Long has trained two post-doctoral fellows. One of these fellows
is currently an Assistant Professor at Loyola-Marymount University. Dr. Long has
also trained two graduate students who have garnered post-doctoral positions in
excellent laboratories at the University of North Carolina and the University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine. Furthermore, in the Long laboratory a third
graduate student is currently pursuing her Ph.D. and a third post-doctoral
fellow is acquiring additional skills and expertise. Dr. Long's laboratory has
an established history of including undergraduate students within his research
program by hosting five undergraduates in the laboratory for 10 weeks of
research training during the summer. Dr. Long anticipates a similar level of
student participation in the studies proposed in this application and expects
that his undergraduate research training environment will increase through the
recruitment of undergraduates from small liberal arts colleges in and
surrounding Milwaukee. Dr. Long's laboratory also has a strong record of
publishing in high visibility journals (Eukaryotic Cell, Journal of
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology of the Cell and RNA) and participating in
prominent meetings (American Society for Cell Biology and FASEB Summer Research
Conferences). In addition to his classroom teaching responsibilities, Dr. Long's
interest in scientific education is further reflected by his role as a Course
Director in Classical and Molecular Genetics and previously in Techniques of
Molecular and Cell Biology. Furthermore, Dr. Long serves on the Medical College
of Wisconsin-Interdisciplinary Program (graduate student) Admissions Committee
as well as the Medical College of Wisconsin Medical School Admissions Committee,
and he also participates in guiding the direction of the Medical College of
Wisconsin Graduate School by his active participation on the Graduate Studies
Council.