* 0918950
* RUI:    Centrosome positioning and polarity establishment in the C. elegans embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Rebecca Lyczak, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2013
* USD 308,000.00

The establishment of future body axes (e.g., head to tail or top to bottom) is a
crucial early step in animal development. In the soil nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans, the anterior-posterior (head to tail) axis is established in the one-
cell stage embryo when the centrosome, the microtubule organizing center of the
cell, contacts the cell cortex. Although the contact appears to be essential for
axis establishment, the timing and mechanism governing this centrosome-cortical
association is unknown. The PI has identified the PAM-1 protein (puromycin-
sensitive aminopeptidase) as a crucial regulator of these events. This protein
is found in diverse animals from C. elegans to humans. In this project, the
timing and mechanism of centrosome movements will be elucidated using genetic
and molecular approaches with study of PAM-1 as a central component of the work.
The roles of the microtubule motor protein dynein and microtubule growth will be
examined as well as new proteins identified through genetic screens. This
project will reveal the proteins that control centrosome movement and cortical
association in C. elegans as well as how these events are coordinated with the
cell cycle. The outcomes are likely to have far reaching impacts on the fields
of microtubule dynamics, axis establishment and puromycin-sensitive
aminopeptidase function. This work will be performed at an undergraduate
college; hence, a major goal of this project is to immerse undergraduates in
meaningful research projects. All the work will be performed in conjunction with
undergraduates and portions of the research will be incorporated into an open-
ended laboratory course in Molecular Genetics. Students will present their work
at national conferences and will be prepared for entry into research-based
graduate programs.