* 0918081
* The Complex Organization of Communal Bison Hunting: Revisiting the Late Prehistory of the Northern Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Maria Zedeno, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 193,699.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Dr. Maria Nieves Zede√±o and a team of colleagues and Blackfeet
collaborators will conduct two seasons of archaeological fieldwork on the US
northwestern Plains. Together they will examine the relationships between social
investment in communal bison hunting and organizational complexity among Late
Prehistoric hunter communities who inhabited the foothills and prairies of the
Montana-Alberta border between AD 1050-1660. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centuries
preceding the adoption of the horse by North American bison hunters were marked
by important technological advances and demographic processes that visibly
transformed the physical and social landscapes at various scales. Evidence of
landscape engineering at the Late Prehistoric Kutoyis locality in north-central
Montana will be explicitly targeted in order to evaluate large-scale bison
harvesting and concomitant development of social, political, and ritual
structures and practices. The research team will conduct archaeological mapping
of domestic and nondomestic structures, excavation of kill and processing
features, and a host of paleoenvironmental and geophysical analyses to answer
the following questions: (1) Did economic intensification shape the landscape at
Kutoyis and how? (2) Is there any evidence of regulatory social action in the
architecture of Kutoyis? (3) Was the Kutoyis landscape shaped by integrative
mechanisms such as communal rituals? (4) Are the agencies and practices of
individuals and groups visible in the material record of bison hunting at
Kutoyis? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kutoyis, also known as the Two Medicine Bison
Jump Site, is located in the Blackfeet Indian Reservation, Glacier County,
Montana. Kutoyis. It consists of a vast complex of rock features and bone
scatters extending over 13 km2 on a plateau overlooking the Two Medicine River
and in its floodplain. Remote and little known, this is nonetheless one of the
largest and most significant Blackfeet heritage sites in the region. The
completeness and intricacy of the drive line system, the multiple kill episodes,
the existence of a corral / processing component, and the presence of two large
campsites with initial evidence of architectural variability and one possible
ritual component in close proximity to the kill site, make the Kutoyis locality
a strong analytical case for investigating the articulation of social
investment, landscape engineering, and material imprints of organizational
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the opportunity to
evaluate and update deeply set models of sociopolitical organization that have
characterized archaeological and anthropological approaches to big game hunters
in general, and to northern Plains bison hunters in particular. It will
integrate diverse archaeological components and data sets, paleoecology, and
ethnographic information into a multi-scale landscape approach to bison hunting.
Finally, it will furnish a substantial amount of new information to augment
current knowledge of northern Plains prehistory. As a collaborative endeavor
with the Blackfeet Tribe, the research has great transformative potential: it
will incorporate an underrepresented constituency into archaeological research,
and will promote archaeological practice that is not only scientifically sound
but cognizant and responsive to the traditional knowledge and practices of this
constituency. This project will create multi-year research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, and a participatory model of archaeological
investigation for them to follow.