* 0918474
* Engaging Secondary Students and Teachers Through a Proficiency-based Assessment and Reassessment of Learning Outcomes (PARLO) system in mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2010,02/29/2016
* Barbara Stankus, The 21st Century Partnership for STEM Education
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 02/29/2016
* USD 2,444,714.00

Using a clustered randomized control trial of 44 secondary schools in the
greater Philadelphia area, the project is researching the efficacy of a learning
and assessment system that emphasizes students' attaining proficiency or better
on a limited set of high value learning objectives in Algebra. The study allows
for and expects students to resubmit assignments and be reassessed until they
achieve proficiency or greater. In this new classroom dynamic, students assume
more responsibility for and be active agents in their own learning. For their
part, teachers will adopt instructional strategies and techniques that support
their students' ongoing and continuous learning, including defining learning
outcomes, providing frequent and individualized feedback, and participating in
professional development. Based on six years of beta-testing, the model has
demonstrated great promise for raising academic achievement and reducing dropout
rates by increasing students' engagement with important mathematical content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's research questions are: 1) Does the use of
proficiency-based assessment and reassessment of learning outcomes (PARLO) in
Algebra lead to increases in secondary students' achievement and engagement in
mathematics? 2) Does PARLO lead to increased student interest in pursuing more
complex mathematics or science courses? Two cohorts of ninth grade students are
being followed. While the system is being implemented only in ninth grade
Algebra classes, student achievement data is being collected in grades 10 and 11
for all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in a refined
assessment system as well as published papers.