* 0918938
* Collaborative Research:  Range Limits and Their Response to Environmental Change:  Experiments and Stochastic Models
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Brett Melbourne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 497,774.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Although the distribution of every species is limited to a particular range, the
fundamental ecological processes that determine species' range boundaries are
not understood well enough to predict how species will respond to environmental
change. This project will investigate three overarching questions. First, what
determines range limits? Second, how variable are range limits and what factors
determine this variability? Third, how do range limits respond to environmental
change? That is, how quickly do they respond and how predictable or variable are
their responses given the inherent variability arising from random population
processes? These questions will be addressed using a laboratory based
experimental system together with mathematical and statistical modeling.

Understanding what sets range limits and their variability is vital for
understanding and forecasting how species will respond to climate change and to
increasing variability in climate. This understanding is also vital for the
management of species - both those that are undesirable and those that are
endangered. Only a combination of manipulative experiments and mathematical
modeling will yield the understanding needed by society over the available time
before action is required. This approach has the additional benefit of providing
real interdisciplinary training and experience for both graduate and
undergraduate students, and plans are presented to include more than 40
undergraduate and 2 graduate students in the research. Both investigators have
strong records of recruiting undergraduate assistants from groups typically
underrepresented in biological research.