* 0918993
* OPUS:   Nutrient cycling by animals in freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 146,894.00

This project is designed to provide an understanding of the role that animals
play in the cycling of nutrients in freshwater ecosystems. The project will
utilize and synthesize data collected by the principal investigator over a
20-year period. Through a variety of ways, animals can affect the supply of
nutrients (such as nitrogen and phosphorus) to plants. For example, all animals
release nutrients as waste products, and some animals can move nutrients great
distances via their movements. These nutrients then become available to plants,
perhaps increasing plant growth. While the importance of animals has been
demonstrated in many situations, there has not been a synthesis of the role of
animals in nutrient cycling in freshwater ecosystems (lakes, ponds, streams and
rivers). This project will utilize previously collected data to produce a series
of scientific papers describing and analyzing the roles that freshwater animals
play in nutrient cycling. In addition, it will generate two critical thinking
exercises for undergraduate classes that will help students understand nutrient
cycling concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
substantial and diverse. Nutrient cycling is one of the most important
"ecosystem services" (processes occurring in nature that have economic value to
humans); nutrient cycling sustains productivity, and hence the capacity of
ecosystems to provide food, fiber or materials for human consumption. In
addition, some ecosystems receive too many nutrients, which can lead to blooms
of algae and subsequent deterioration of water quality. Because animals can
affect the supply of nutrients to algae and plants, they can impact these
ecosystem services and water quality problems. Thus, this synthesis will provide
valuable information on the roles of animals in ecosystem services and water
quality. In addition, the critical thinking exercises will provide undergraduate
students with a hands-on, inquiry based approach to nutrient cycling and how it
relates to these environmental issues. Nutrient cycling can be a difficult
concept for students to grasp, and these exercises are designed to facilitate
learning of this material, and to improve students' abilities to manipulate and
analyze data.