* 0918289
* Nucleosomal Dynamics fromTranscription-Induced Topological Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Vaughn Jackson, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

In eukaryotes, DNA in the nucleus is packaged into nucleosomes. Each nucleosome
consists of a short segment of DNA wrapped twice around eight proteins that are
called histones. Packaging of DNA with histones is dynamic and has a profound
influence on gene activity. Tight packaging prevents DNA from being accessible
to the machinery that is needed to transcribe the information contained in DNA
to a usable form. In contrast, loosely packaged DNA is accessible. Loosening DNA
packaging is accomplished by changes in the conformation of the histone
proteins, although exactly what conformations promote loose packaging is not
clear. Using biochemical and X-ray crystallographic approaches, this project
will explore the histone conformations that are associated with loose DNA
packaging. Understanding the dynamic nature of conformational changes in
nucleosomal histones will provide important new insights into regulation of gene
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. A major emphasis of this project
is to provide educational opportunities to students at several levels. Eighth
grade students participating in the SMART program (Students Modeling a Research
Topic) will be given the opportunity to build three-dimensional plaster models
of proteins, using information obtained from publicly available protein
databases. The students will then work for a day in the lab getting hands-on
experience with the protein they modeled and later share what they have learned
with the public and at teacher's conferences by giving oral and poster
presentations. High school students and their science teachers will take part in
summer research projects in the lab, aided by undergraduate student researchers.
This intermixing of students with varying educational backgrounds is beneficial
for all.