* 0918220
* CO2 Signal Transduction in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Julian Schroeder, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2014
* USD 792,787.00

Stomata are the pores on the surface of leaves that 1) regulate the diffusion of
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into leaves for photosynthetic carbon
fixation and 2) control the transpirational water loss of plants. Guard cells
sense carbon dioxide concentration, water status, light and other environmental
stimuli and integrate these to regulate stomatal apertures for optimization of
carbon dioxide influx into plants, water loss and plant growth under diverse
conditions. For example, elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in leaves cause
stomatal closure, whereas reduced carbon dioxide concentrations result in
stomatal opening. The concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide is predicted
to double within the present century: carbon dioxide at these increased levels
is known to reduce the stomatal apertures of various plant species by up to 40%.
This will have profound effects on global gas exchange between plants and the
atmosphere and the efficiency of plant water use. However, relatively little is
known about the molecular signal transduction mechanisms that mediate carbon
dioxide-induced stomatal movements. Using the model plant Arabidopsis, the PI
has shown that knock-out mutants in genes encoding carbonic anhydrase show an
impaired carbon dioxide-induced stomatal movement response. The hypothesis that
these proteins function in early carbon dioxide control of gas exchange
regulation will be investigated. In this project, the genetic, molecular,
cellular and physiological mechanisms by which these proteins mediate the
stomatal response to carbon dioxide concentrations will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The P.I. will pursue
outreach efforts through public forums and through research and career training
and preparation of high school students and undergraduate students.
Underrepresented minority students will be trained to pursue supervised
independent research projects. In addition the P.I. is training and preparing
post doctoral and graduate scientists for advanced independent careers in
research, technology and science education. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms by which carbon dioxide modulates stomatal conductance is fundamental
to understanding the regulation of gas exchange between plants and the
atmosphere, will help to predict effects of atmospheric carbon dioxide elevation
on plants, and may also contribute to future engineering of water use efficiency
or leaf heat stress avoidance in crop plants and plant carbon sinks in the face
of the continuing atmospheric carbon dioxide rise and climate change.