* 0918735
* Collaborative Research: Data Games--Tools and Materials for Learning Data Modeling
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2013
* William Finzer, KCP Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Edith Gummer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,621,357.00

Students playing computer games generate large quantities of rich, interesting,
highly variable data that mostly evaporates into the ether when the game ends.
What if in a classroom setting, data from games students played remained
accessible to them for analysis? In software and curriculum materials being
developed by the Data Games project at UMass Amherst and KCP Technologies, data
generated by students playing computer games form the raw material for
mathematics classroom activities. Students play a short video game, analyze the
game data, conjecture improved strategies, and test their strategies in another
round of the game.

The twenty video games are embedded in TinkerPlots and Fathom, two data analysis
learning environments widely used in grades 5-8 and 8-14 respectively. The game
data appear in graphs in real time, allowing several cycles of strategy
improvement in a short time. The games are designed so that these cycles improve
understanding of specific data modeling and/or mathematics concepts. Lessons
will be embedded in LessonLink from Key Curriculum Press to facilitate their
integration into standard curricula. The three-year project expands research in
students' understanding of data modeling and their ability to learn mathematical
content embedded in data-rich contexts.

A teaching experiment methodology is used to investigate four research
questions: (1) To what extent do students view the data as the result of a
production process and does this conception have the same sort of affordances as
repeated-measures contexts for interpreting data in terms of signals and noise?
(2) How do students view data, especially when they encounter data that do not
fit into rows and columns? What data structures are appropriate to introduce in
middle school? High school? (3) How do students' understandings,
interpretations, and interactions with data change as a function of size of the
data set? (4) To what extent do the mechanisms the project builds for web-
enabled collaboration and data sharing enhance classroom activities? Data,
including video, student work, and student interviews, are collected from after-
school Data Game clubs and middle and high school mathematics classrooms. Data
are analyzed using a grounded theory approach.