* 0918169
* Collaborative Research: REVSYS: RUI: Phylogenetic and Revisionary Systematics of early-diverging, ecologically unique clades of fungi, Harpellales and Asellariales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Lichtwardt, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 81,473.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi in the
groups Harpellales and Asellariales spend their entire lives in the guts of
insects; they cannot grow independently. They may be parasites or may be
mutualists that live in harmony with their hosts. The fungal-host associations
can be traced back millions of years. One group, Harpellales, lives primarily in
immature aquatic insects (including important disease carriers such as
mosquitoes and black flies and various nymphs) and the other, Asellariales, in
adult isopods (including pill bugs) and springtails. These fungi are, not
surprisingly, poorly studied. New species are discovered frequently, and their
evolutionary relationships are largely unknown. This project will determine how
many species of these fungi exist, how they are identified, and how they are
related. The project will involve extensive collecting in the U.S., followed by
detailed studies of the organisms and their hosts. Evolutionary histories will
be inferred with DNA sequences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because these fungi
parasitize mosquitoes and black flies, they have the potential to serve as
biocontrol agents. Other fungi in this group have evolved to live without
killing their hosts, but the genetic changes that led to this comfortable
arrangement are not known. This project will provide basic tools for locating
and identifying the fungi, and will make these identification guides available
on the web. Once they are available, it will be possible to investigate the
basic biology of the fungi and to explore their value for ecosystems and for
society. &lt;br/&gt;