* 0918832
* Collaborative Online Projects for ELL Students (COPELLS)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Kenneth Doxsee, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,182,442.00

The purpose of this R&D project is to study the feasibility of culturally and
linguistically sensitive science instructional materials with middle-school
level Spanish-speaking English language learners (ELLs) in Oregon. The project
is a collaborative effort between the University of Oregon's National Center for
Supported Electronic Text and the Center for Advanced Technology in Education
(CATE), in partnership with the Latin-American Institute for Educational
Communication (ILCE, Spanish acronym) in Mexico; it aims at selecting,
translating into English, enhancing, and evaluating the use of ILCE-produced
instructional materials. ILCE's materials consist of a series of Collaborative
Online Projects (COPs) in Spanish, available through "Red Escolar" with
headquarters in Mexico as well. COPs are 5-6-week duration technology-enhanced
instructional modules. Generally, they consist of one study unit containing four
to five lessons on specific science topics designed to enhance understanding of
key science concepts and skills.

Modification and development of COPs will be based on a cognitive-affective
theory of multimedia learning that founds itself on dual-coding theory,
cognitive-load theory, and constructivist learning theory. Enhanced bilingual
versions of COPs will be aligned with the Oregon Science Standards and the
National Science Education Standards (NRC, 1996). These COPs will include
support resources, such as interactive online reading through e-text, audio and
video explanations of fundamental scientific vocabulary, illustrations (e.g.,
images, videos, games), access to an online bilingual dictionary, text-to-speech
software that enables all words to be read out loud, and links between the two
language versions. In addition, the project aims at developing accompanying
teacher guides to ensure their understanding of the science content and
instructional strategies.

The project will adopt a designed-based research approach to the redesign,
testing, refinement, and evaluation of COPs focused on the interaction between
teachers, students, and materials with a functional, evidence-based intervention
as one of the outcomes of the process. The main assumption of the proposed scope
of work is that adapting quality science materials already in use by Mexican
science teachers and students may be an efficient way to develop and deliver
culturally relevant materials to the linguistically diverse population of ELLs
in Oregon. The project will investigate the following research questions: (1)Do
COPs facilitate science content learning, scientific attitudes, and second-
language development? (2) What factors influence students' effective use of
COPs? (3) Are teachers and students motivated to use the COPs in the future?

The research design consists of two stages. The first stage--already completed--
is informed exploration through which the research team identified and described
the problem and assessed needs, conducted a comprehensive literature review,
developed appropriate theoretical constructs, and characterized the audience.
The second stage is a three-step enactment process: (a) selection and redesign
by which a team of scientists, science educators, Oregon Department of Education
content specialists, science multimedia experts, and science teachers will
identify three COPs, translate them into English, and post them for in-house
testing and refinement; (b) conduct case studies to gather and interpret data
from classroom observations, logs of students' questions and comments,
assessment of students' scientific knowledge gains, and students' and teachers'
satisfaction and engagement; and (c) implement a feasibility study in three
Oregon school districts, including eight science teachers, and 160 secondary
school Spanish-speaking ELLs (20 students/teacher). Qualitative and statistical
data gathering and interpretation strategies will be employed. Project
feasibility measures include (a) students' learned science concepts using a
single-condition pre-test-posttest design, (b) English and Spanish academic
language proficiency growth; and (c) teachers' and students' use of technology
in science classrooms, satisfaction, engagement, and attitudes.

Major project outcomes consist of three COPs aligned with state and national
science standards designed to enhance understanding of the science content and
support bilingual literacy acquisition; and research-informed data on the
usability of the instructional units. Project evaluation includes both formative
and summative components, an external evaluator, an advisory board, and a
science review committee. Posting COPs on the CATE's website, journal articles,
and presentations at major regional and national conferences are the main
dissemination activities.