* 0918425
* Supports for learning to manage classroom discussions: Exploring the role of practical rationality and mathematical knowledge for teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2018
* Daniel Chazan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,467,721.00

Researchers at the Universities of Michigan and Maryland are developing
materials to survey the rationality behind secondary mathematics teaching
practice and to support the development by secondary mathematics preservice
teachers of specialized knowledge and skills for teaching. The project focuses
on the leading of classroom discussions for the learning of algebra and
geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using animations of instructional scenarios, the
project is developing online, multimedia questionnaires and using them to assess
practicing teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching and their evaluations
of teacher decision making. Reports and forum entries from the questionnaires
are integrated into a learning environment for prospective teachers and their
instructors built around these animated scenarios. This environment allows pre-
service teachers to navigate, annotate, and communicate about the scenarios; and
it allows their instructors to plan using those scenarios and share experiences
with their counterparts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on teachers'
rationality uses an experimental design with embedded one-way ANOVA, while the
development of the learning environment uses a process of iterative design,
implementation, and evaluation. The project evaluation by researchers at
Northwestern University uses qualitative methods to examine the content provided
in the environment as well as the usefulness perceived by teacher educators of a
state network and their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;