* 0918505
* Science &amp; Mathematics Integration for Literacy Enhancement (Project SMILE)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Pradeep Dass, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Schatz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 449,827.00

The goals of STEM instruction are to educate a populace that is scientifically
and mathematically literate and who can solve real-world problems by applying
science and mathematics. Project SMILE (Science and Mathematics Integration for
Literacy Enhancement) is an exploratory project to study the effectiveness of
professional development focused on the integration of mathematics and science
instruction, mediated by technology tools, to improve middle school teachers'
ability to teach scientific inquiry and mathematical problem solving. The study
also investigates the extent to which modern technology tools such as
InspireData, a data visualization and analysis software, improves the
integration. Twenty middle school science and mathematics teachers are recruited
from schools near Appalachian State University to engage in activities designed
to develop and implement modules that integrate science inquiry and mathematical
problem solving using InspireData as a tool for gathering, organizing,
analyzing, and visualizing data and processing conclusions about questions,
issues, and concerns derived from real life situations relevant to student's
lives. The Iowa Chautauqua Model of professional development is used to organize
the three week summer institute and academic year on-line courses through
MOODLE. Teacher surveys and SCOOP notebooks are used as pre-post data sources
and a modified RTOP is used for classroom observation to test hypotheses and