* 0918387
* Collaborative Research:   Coupled Biogeochemistry and Geomorphology in Three Tropical Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Stephen Porder, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 451,502.00

One of the dominant paradigms in biogeochemistry is that old soils are infertile
as a result of the long term depletion of nutrients supplied through the
breakdown of rocks. Nutrient depletion, particularly of phosphorus, is
postulated to be widespread in tropical lowlands where the lack of historic
glaciation suggests that soils are older than in many temperate regions. This
assumption, however, is almost certainly an oversimplification. Tropical
landscapes are dynamic systems in which the conversion of bedrock to soil and
the removal of soil through erosion occur at different rates in different
geologic and climatic settings. Thus mapping the extent of phosphorus depletion
in the tropics requires addressing a fundamental and little acknowledged
question that is the focus of this project, what are phosphorus residence times
in the tropics and are they sufficient for phosphorus depletion to occur? This
question will be addressed in a multidisciplinary, multisite study that will be
the first to integrate assessments of soil fertility with new technologies that
can help quantify soil residence times. This project will integrate
biogeochemistry and geomorphology to answer fundamental questions about soil
fertility and nutrient cycling and will promote a much needed effort to quantify
differences in fertility in the tropics. It will support international research
at several institutions and involve local scientists and students at each
location. In addition to training graduate students and postdoctoral scholars,
this project will establish site locations for a field course that integrates
tropical ecology, biogeochemistry, and geomorphology.