* 0918268
* Causes and consequences of variation in the hippocampus of individuals utilizing different spatial strategies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Barry Sinervo, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 07/31/2014
* USD 406,000.00

Spatial memory use has been associated with many behaviors such as
territoriality, mate choice, navigation and acquisition of food resources.
Differential demands on spatial abilities have been shown to affect the
hippocampus, the region of the brain thought partially responsible for spatial
processing. Although many studies have found a positive association between
space use strategies and hippocampal structure, little is known about the causes
of variation in the hippocampus and if or how genetics, experience, hormonal and
maternal effects influence this variation. More importantly, while most studies
assume fitness consequences based on hippocampal variation, there have been no
tests of this assumption. The primary goal of this research is to look at the
genetic, maternal, hormonal, and experiential basis of variation in the volume,
number of neurons and neurogenesis in the hippocampus, as well as the fitness
consequences of variation in the hippocampus of male side-blotched lizards (Uta
stansburiana). Consequently, this study has 5 primary goals: (1) to determine
whether changes in the hippocampus are genetically encoded and relate to
particular genetic combinations, (2) to explore if maternal effects, in the form
of estradiol deposition in egg yolk, can cause variation in the hippocampus, (3)
to manipulate testosterone in males to gauge if differences in gonadal hormones
mediate underlying changes in hippocampal morphology, (4) to explore if changes
in the hippocampus can be induced or enhanced by spatial use experiences, and
(5) to assess if natural and lesion-induced variation in hippocampal attributes
relate to fitness, namely survival. Thus, this research links the mechanism,
developmental and fitness consequences of variation in the hippocampus. This
study will provide interdisciplinary research training to underrepresented
undergraduate students, as well as educating the general public via K-12
scientific videogames, popular print, visual media and presentations at
community colleges.