* 0918167
* LiT:   Collaborative Research:  What lies beneath: P limitation and soil microbial community composition in hardwood forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kurt Smemo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 09/30/2013
* USD 318,383.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Soil pH (acidity) has a major influence on soil fertility, and therefore the
structure and function of ecosystems. The availability of phosphorous (P), in
particular, is highly controlled by soil pH. Both natural processes and human-
induced disturbance, such as acid rain, have resulted in acidification of some
ecosystems. Soil acidification can lead subsequently to a decrease in
phosphorous (P) availability to eastern hardwood forests. However, to date there
has not been evidence of P limitation in these forests, whether as a result of
natural or anthropogenic acidification. This research is focused on testing the
hypothesis that while available P may be reduced by soil acidification, P
limitation to plants is ameliorated by microorganisms that are able to liberate
P that is normally unavailable to plants, thereby masking P limitation to trees.
To test this hypothesis, lime, P, or both will be added to two forests in
eastern Ohio to determine if soil acidity or P availability can actually change
soil microbial communities and their ability to produce plant-available P.

This research addresses the potential consequences of human activities and the
way forest and soil ecosystems may respond to acidification. This project will
be used as a teaching tool for undergraduate and high school students in the
Appalachian region of southeast Ohio, and a series of collaborative workshops
will facilitate the training of K-12 teachers on the importance of soil
processes in relation to human prosperity.

