* 0918450
* Resolution of evolutionary mismatches: the ecological and evolutionary processes of invasive species integration into native communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Jennifer Mui, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 304,440.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The introduction of exotic species to native communities has caused considerable
ecological and economic damage to agriculture, forestry, and fisheries. Research
suggests this damage occurs in part due to a mismatch of evolutionary histories
between the native and exotic species: native species are constrained by a
complex web of interactions between species that has developed over millennia,
but because exotic species evolved in a different part of the world, they are
not involved in these co-evolved webs in their new range. However, evidence
shows that both exotic and native species can evolve rapidly after the new
species has been introduced. This project seeks to understand how rapid
evolutionary changes in garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), one of the most
aggressive invaders of eastern North America, and in native plants will affect
their "evolutionary mismatch" over time. If, as predicted, rapid evolution acts
to enmesh garlic mustard into the web of interactions with the native species,
this may act to constrain the spread and impact of this devastating invader. The
broader impacts of this research include management applications, training of
undergraduate students, and educational outreach to high school classrooms. Land
managers will benefit from understanding how the impact of an invasive species
changes over time. The PI and collaborators will develop a citizen scientist
network involving high school classrooms in which students conduct experiments
on their local population of garlic mustard. The combined data will provide
valuable information for the scientific goals of this project, while also
providing students with hands-on experience in the scientific process.