* 0918963
* The community context of genotype-by-genotype interactions:   implications for biological invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 687,256.00

Just as in human populations, individuals of a single species differ in traits
that influence their survival in different environments. The genetic variation
that underlies these trait differences may be especially important for exotic
species that invade new areas, as populations without individuals that can
tolerate the novel environment may not be able to establish and successfully
reproduce. Similarly, individuals of native plants may differ in their ability
to resist invasion or coexist with invaders because of genetic differences. The
proposed research examines how the genetics of two plant species in California
grasslands, one native and one exotic, affect the invasion success of the exotic
species. Interactions between different genetic individuals of the two species
will be examined in the presence and absence of insects that eat the plants to
determine how environmental differences may also affect invasions by exotic
plants. This project thus incorporates the relatively new field of community
genetics (simultaneously examining genetic variation in multiple, co-occurring
species) with invasion biology, and will provide important insights for related
studies.

A postdoctoral researcher, graduate student, and undergraduate students will be
trained and mentored in this research. Curriculum focused on invasive species
biology will be developed for a K-12 program based at the Kellogg Biological
Station in Michigan. A more complete understanding of the invasion process may
help prevent future invasions that may be both ecologically and economically
costly and also may aid in ensuring the success of intentional introductions
(e.g., for biological control or cultivation).