* 0918072
* Collaborative Research: MSB:   Assembling Litter Decomposer Communities and Functions from the Leaf to the Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Donald Zak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 168,915.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;Saprotrophic fungi are the primary agents of leaf
litter decomposition in forest ecosystems. Fungal communities develop on
millions of senescent leaves each year, providing an ideal opportunity to study
how these biotic communities assemble and function. This project will examine
the relationship between fungal community assembly and the distribution and
biochemical makeup of dominant tree species. Two complementary approaches will
be used: a spatially-explicit survey of fungal communities on leaves sampling at
scales from individual leaves to the regional forest landscape, and an
experimental manipulation of fungal colonization of leaves. These approaches
will help elucidate the relative importance of leaf biochemistry, a species
trait, and processes such as dispersal and priority effects, which are strongly
influenced by local environmental factors. Decomposition of leaves by fungi is
regulated by the presence and expression of specific functional genes encoding
extracellular enzymes. Because of the enormous diversity, redundancy, and
genomic plasticity present in fungi, it is unclear to what extent variation in
microbial taxonomic composition affects leaf decomposition. The hypothesis that
fungal traits associated with leaf decomposition can be regulated independent of
the particular fungal taxa present on a leaf will also be tested.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will train undergraduates, graduate students, and laboratory technicians
in the fields of forest and fungal ecology, contributing to the development of
future scientific workforce. It will provide undergraduates with research
opportunities that are individualized, but which are also fundamentally
integrated into larger research goals. The undergraduate program will involve
mentoring and supporting coursework designed specifically to complement the
research being performed. This will provide students with a research experience
that will prepare them for graduate school and careers in science.