* 0918060
* A Study of the Struggling Learner's Knowledge  and Development for Number and Operation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Lannin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2014
* USD 449,997.00

John Lannin and Delinda van Garderen, University of Missouri, are conducting a
three-year exploratory study that targets 1st and 2nd grade students who
struggle in the area of number and operations. The research questions are as
follows: (1) What cognitive obstacles exist for 1st and 2nd grade children who
struggle with number and operations? (2) What similarities and differences exist
in the cogntive obstacles for these groups of children? (3) What impact do the
identified cognitive obstacles have on the learning trajectory for these groups
of children? Utilizing design research methodology with a longitudinal
component, classrooms are set up so that six pairs of students will work in
joint activity on tasks that address both routine and transfer. Deliverables
include publications in journals and the development of a design-driven model
that will help struggling students at the primary grades deal with number and
operations. The model includes a conceptual framework and a refined learning
trajectory with implications for instruction. The emerging learning trajectory
could potentially inform and guide educational researchers, curriculum
designers, assessment developers, and teachers as they address the needs of
children with learning difficulties in mathematics at the primary school level.
Multiple case studies are developed; data from classroom observations during
mathematics instruction and interviews with teachers are included in the
analysis. Interviews with teachers about student work and their students'
thinking are also used to learn more about the interventions used in the
teaching experiments. Data analysis involves constructing case studies of
struggling students in order to establish learning trajectories in the area of
number and operations. The product will be a set of cases that will lend insight
into how struggling students might be supported as they learn about number and
operations at the primary grades, thus helping link assessment and instructional
practice in a grounded way, and contributing to the knowledge base regarding
interventions for a range of struggling young students in the area of number and
operations.