* 0918199
* RIG:   Genetic and Molecular Basis of Bacteriophage Life History Variation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* John Dennehy, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2012
* USD 174,155.00

To construct an organism, DNA is translated into proteins which are assembled
into or direct the assembly of a physical structure. This process is almost
unimaginably complex for most organisms, but what about the simplest of them,
the bacterial viruses (i.e. phages)? For example, the coliphage lambda consists
of a strand of DNA enclosed by a protein shell. How is the assembly of lambda
phage controlled? How does stochasticity in the control mechanisms affect the
ultimate product? How does evolution shape the control mechanisms? The ultimate
goal of this research is to determine how phage assembly is controlled, to
assess the role of variation in the assembly network, and to understand how
evolution shapes this biological system. This project is an initial step towards
that goal as it uses mutagenesis to systematically alter the expression of phage
structural proteins. Organismal responses will be assessed by quantifying mean
and variation of phage reproductive output. Evolution experiments will further
determine how phages respond to changes in phage reproductive output. Successful
completion will provide a clearer picture of how a complex process responds to
system-wide perturbation, and how evolution is able to return the process to an
optimal state. The broader impacts of the proposed research include encouraging
persons of disability to participate in scientific research, increasing the
participation of underrepresented minorities in science and enhancing research
in evolutionary biology with next-generation scientific instrumentation and
recently developed molecular techniques. The project will not only improve
opportunities for the PI, a hearing impaired individual, but will increase the
visibility of disabled scientists and encourage other disabled individuals to
explore science as a career. As an underrepresented minority, the PI is keenly
aware of the importance of fostering inclusiveness in the scientific community.
The PI is active in efforts to increase scientific literacy including keeping a
blog, giving science talks to the general public and participating in a web
encyclopedia project.