* 0918413
* Collaborative Research:   QEIB:   Spatial Ecologies Under Temporal Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Gyorgy Korniss, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 182,775.00

Invasive species threaten agricultural productivity and public health, and may
further destabilize the species composition of certain native ecosystems. An
invading species' population, by definition, must advance from its point of
introduction. Consequently, ecologists and conservation biologists seek a
predictive understanding of a successful invader's pattern of spatial growth.
The proposed research will address biological invasion as a front moving, with
some random variation, through a two-dimensional environment. Both the theory
and experimentation will explicitly consider an ecologically superior invader
competing with a native, resident species. Details of the model for spatially
clustered growth of the two species permit application of the theory of kinetic
roughening, developed in statistical physics, to predict the quantitative
behavior of the invasion process. The results generate novel hypotheses
concerning both the velocity of the invasive front's advance and the relative
position of the furthest invasive incursion into the resident's habitat.
Expected values of these quantities depend on the length of the invading front;
hence they depend predictably on the linear size of the habitat invaded. Once
results for a constant physical environment have been identified, spatial
competition in a time-varying environment will be investigated. Field
experiments, using a rye grass-clover system, will be used to test hypotheses
generated by the models.

A greater understanding of links between individual-level interactions and a
population's spatial growth will increase our ability to predict how invasive
species, emerging infections, and evolutionary adaptations spread across
ecological landscapes. The research plan emphasizes education and training of
young scientists at both graduate and undergraduate levels. The collaborative,
interdisciplinary nature of the research will enhance quantitative skills of
ecology students, and will introduce contemporary challenges in ecology and
conservation to physics students.