* 0918438
* Formative Assessment in the Mathematics' Classroom:  Engaging Teachers and Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2015
* Fred Gross, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,457,917.00

With the FACETS project, Education Development Center, Inc. is developing and
testing a 2-year, intensive professional development model for building middle
grades mathematics teachers' facility with formative assessment. Using a
combination of institutes, ongoing professional learning communities, and web-
based resources, this model attends both to teachers' knowledge of critical
aspects of formative assessment and their implementation of formative assessment
in the classroom. Implementation consists of teachers integrating practices
associated with critical aspects of formative assessment into mathematics
instruction on a daily basis; full implementation, which the project is working
towards, requires internalizing a comprehensive understanding of these aspects.
The project has two rounds of professional development: a pilot version with a
first cohort of 40 teachers and a revised, field test version with a second
cohort of 60 teachers. The audience for the FACETS project is middle school math
teachers including special education teachers who are responsible for some math
instruction, professional development providers, and the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research questions are: 1) How do
mathematics teachers' knowledge and practice of formative assessment change as a
result of participation in the proposed professional development? 2) What
learning trajectory describes teachers' developing knowledge and practice of
formative assessment, and what common barriers are associated with different
parts of that trajectory?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is collecting
evidence of teachers' learning at a number of different points during the 2-year
professional development experience. Teachers' understanding and use of six
critical aspects of formative assessment will be assessed before, during, and
after the professional development sessions though a series of surveys and
questionnaires. In addition, the project will use classroom observations for a
sub-sample of participants to chart changes in classroom practices over the
course of the professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data related to
barriers and challenges to teachers' understanding and implementation of
formative assessment come from teachers' survey responses as well as from
classroom observations and observations of professional development activities.
These data inform modifications to the pilot version of the professional
development and drive the larger set of revisions for the field test version.
The data also inform the articulation of the participants' learning trajectories
and provide value to the mathematics education and formative assessment research
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables include a model of professional
development for the learning of formative assessment in mathematics, a
facilitator's guide describing the components of the professional development
model and suggestions for using the model to provide a professional development
program, cyberlearning products such as interactive forums, video and other
materials for the professional development activities and resource library, and
journal articles describing teachers' learning trajectory for implementing
formative assessment in middle grades mathematics
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;External evaluation of this project is carried
out by Char Associates.