* 0918741
* Extending and enhancing Understanding Evolution for the undergraduate community
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roy Caldwell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Katherine J. Denniston
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,919.00

Biological Sciences (61). This project, a collaboration between the University
of California Museum of Paleontology, American Institute of Biological Sciences
and the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center (NESCent), is expanding the
highly successful Understanding Evolution K-12 website (UE) with the aim of
improving evolution education at the college level. UE's Undergraduate Library
is a freely accessible online resource that targets college instructors of
introductory biology to help them clarify evolutionary concepts in pedagogically
sound ways, integrate evolution throughout their teaching, spend more class time
on evolution-related concepts, and relate evolution to current research and
issues that matter in students' everyday lives. Functionalities built into the
site also encourage community building among these instructors. To support these
goals, the Library is offering a wide variety of resources, including webinars,
discussions, teaching materials, professional development tools, and much more.
This comprehensive set of materials reflects the recognition that some
instructors are prepared to make only small modifications to their pedagogy, and
others will embrace sweeping ones. By facilitating small improvements and
providing a community-based support system, the site aims to move instructors
towards more fundamental transformations of their evolution instruction. An
evaluation component is addressing the extent to which the project is meeting
its goals, informing the design of online community-building tools for teacher
professional development, and informing other efforts to encourage the
integration of evolution throughout biology instruction (e.g., NESCent's
Evolution Across the Curriculum working group). The project's freely-accessible,
online environment provides a vehicle for reaching a diverse group of students
and instructors - from rural and inner city community colleges, research
universities, and private institutions - by removing geographic and economic
barriers to participation.