* 0918982
* Collaborative Research:  Bivalves in time and space:  Testing the accuracy of methods to reconstruct ancestral morphology, dates, geography, and diversification patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Rudiger Bieler, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2014
* USD 332,425.00

This project seeks to develop bivalve molluscs as a preeminent model for
evolutionary studies that span long periods of time. Evolutionary family trees
(phylogenies) will be constructed for two families of bivalves, the
cockles/giant clams and the pitarines, using a combination of DNA sequence data
and morphology. These phylogenies will include 200 living and 100-200 extinct
species and will be combined with computer simulations and the exceptional
bivalve fossil record to test the accuracy of common methods in evolutionary
estimation and reconstruction. Specifically, the project will test methods that
use data from living species to estimate the ages, physical traits, and
geographic distributions of ancestors throughout history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly every aspect of modern comparative biology rests on
the assumption that a phylogeny can be used to reconstruct the evolution of a
variety of ancestral attributes. But reconstructions based on living species
have broad uncertainties because the methods have not been tested against a
precise history as represented in the fossil record. The bivalves are ideal for
this effort because they are abundant today but also and have a rich fossil
record. By using bivalves as a model to test all the major methods of
reconstructing ancestral traits, ages, and distributions the results of this
research will have far reaching impacts on fields as diverse as genomics,
immunology, and ecology. As part of this effort the project will also train
students from the high school to postdoctoral levels and will disseminate
results broadly.&lt;br/&gt;