* 0918590
* Change Thinking for Global Science: Fostering and Evaluating Inquiry Thinking About the Ecological Impacts of Climate Change
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* James Beach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 3,440,688.00

This project is developing learning progression-driven visualization
technologies, curricular units, and assessments towards realizing empirical
evidence about middle and high school students' complex thinking about
ecological impacts of global climate change. During the lifetimes of current
middle and high school students, it is likely that our planet will undergo more
anthropogenic change than it has during all of human history to date. With a
national interest in complex thinking for globally competitiveness, a sense of
urgency exists to build a solid, research-based foundation about a new,
interdisciplinary focus area within precollege science education - students'
complex reasoning about the impact of global changes on ecosystem dynamics.
Recognizing the need for systematic development of resources, this project
builds from existing resources and utilizes a learning progression approach for
the systematic design of coordinated curricular, tool and assessment products.
Quasiexperimental research studies on matched and consecutive cohorts are
conducted to document learning outcomes and trajectories. Cross-sectional
investigations are used to determine information on the effectiveness of
curricular programs on student achievement. Growth curve analysis is used to
descriptively examine students' complex reasoning growth trajectories throughout
curricular programs. This work provides dynamic, age-appropriate visualization
and modeling tools, and associated curricular units and assessment instruments
to serve as foundational, empirically based information on teaching and learning
about the impacts of global climate change. This work also provides an empirical
and theoretical basis for content and inquiry reasoning progressions that
articulate critical concept development in science and that explain how learning
development is consistent with theories of learning. Data from middle and high
school students coordinated with longitudinal data from 4-6th grade students
provides information on student growth trajectories and achievement outcomes
that will contribute to an understanding of possible learning progressions-
driven outcomes over multiple units and years. Research results will also
provide insights into the character and dynamics of learning trajectories and
the challenges that occur as content and reasoning knowledge develops.