* 0918648
* Collaborative Research: Ecosystems and Evidence Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jacqueline DeLisi, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 20,524.00

This proposal is an exploratory research and development project that addresses
the question, "Can students develop an understanding of the ecological nature of
science (ENOS) in high school biology and environmental science classes that is
useful and productive in environmental citizenship?" To address this question,
the project will identify the essential elements of ENOS, investigate how these
can be taught and learned, and explore how ENOS skills and understandings are
used to enhance environmental citizenship. Four core hypotheses form the
research focus and rationale for the proposed project: 1) ENOS is distinctive in
important ways from generic NOS; 2) ENOS mastery enhances students' abilities to
critique claims, address issues and support scientific approaches to problems;
3) personal facility with ENOS and related teaching, recognition of ENOS as a
worthy target of instruction, and self confidence enable teachers to integrate
ENOS into their instruction; and 4) students can develop ENOS mastery when they
have direct experience creating arguments from ecological evidence of diverse
types in diverse contexts, reflect on ENOS, and have scaffolded experiences
transferring ENOS within ecology and to other arenas. To explore these
hypotheses, the project will define ENOS, develop assessment tools for
describing students' and teachers' skills and understandings of ENOS, and test
ways for teachers and students to become more adept at acquiring and applying
ENOS skills and knowledge. ENOS Learning Communities (high school biology and
environmental science teachers, ecologists and educators) at the Cary Institute
and Rutgers University will work with a Concept Development Team (8 ecologists,
educators and teachers) to develop an ENOS framework, plan and carry out student
and teacher research, develop ENOS teaching experiments, test approaches to
teacher professional development, and craft a plan for broader application of
the ENOS framework and teaching models. Over the course of two years,
approximately 720 students will be reached, with the expectation that their
environmental citizenship will be enhanced through mastery of ENOS skills and
concepts, as will their self confidence in approaching problems. Six ENOS
Teaching/Research Fellows (high school biology and environmental science
teachers) will be partners in the project, and will receive professional
development and support including more than 210 direct contact hours with
project staff. Finally, local communities will benefit from projects carried out
by students in their culminating activities where they address a local issue
using multiple forms of ecological evidence. Products of the project will be
disseminated broadly, including: 1) a framework to guide incorporation of ENOS
into high school instruction and assessments; 2) a collection of assessment
items and protocols for describing students and teachers ENOS skills and
knowledge; 3) research publications and presentations about student thinking and
learning, and about teachers ENOS practices; and 4) instructional models with
modified lesson plans for infusing ENOS into high school biology and
environmental science courses.