* 0918959
* DIYModeling -- Do  It Yourself Modeling and Simulation for STEM Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Marion Smith, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

Disciplines: Mathematical Sciences (21) and Interdisciplinary/Multidisciplinary
(99)

The "DIYModeling -- Do It Yourself Modeling and Simulation for STEM Learning"
CCLI Phase 2 collaborative research project is developing 1) the Do-It-Yourself
Modeling (DIYModeling) software which enables users to create models using the
ordinary language of mathematics and then to enter a game quality simulation; 2)
the DIYModeling Component Libraries which can be added to a simulation to enable
users to focus on modeling and the underlying science and mathematics; and 3) a
library of educational resources that are centered on the models and modeling
supported by DIYModeling.

The intellectual merit of this project includes using simulation and gaming
software to construct an environment in which students hypothesize solutions to
problems, construct models to simulate their hypotheses, and then compare the
results of those models to observations. The students are using modern
mathematical notation instead of special, software-specific notation for their
modeling tasks. Using space exploration as a theme, this professionally-
developed software is a powerful tool for exploring challenging and realistic
problems.

The collaborative DIYModeling project team includes six universities which
represent diversity in type of institution and in geographical location. The PI-
team is teaching and is field-testing the software and corresponding learning
resources in mathematics, business, physics, and biology courses. Furthermore,
this project is building a large community of users to expand and enhance the
component library. Both formative and summative evaluations are included. The
software and the lessons are being disseminated through workshops,
presentations, and NSDL.