* 0918907
* MSB:   Community structure, genomic heterogeneity and metabolic diversity of the microbiome of the oldest and driest desert on Earth, the Atacama Desert in Northern Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Jocelyne DiRuggiero, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robb Brumfield
* 10/31/2012
* USD 478,584.00

Life can adapt to extreme environments but are there limits? Can life adapt to
places where there are essentially no water or nutrients? The Atacama Desert in
Northern Chile is the oldest and driest desert on Earth. Its hyper-arid core has
extremely low levels of organic carbon and rain events are sparse, occurring
once every 10 to 50 years. While microorganisms have been shown to inhabit this
unique environment, no large-scale study has been conducted to characterize the
microbial community in this extreme environment. In this project, we will use a
metagenomic approach to survey and characterize the structure, metabolic
diversity, and genomic heterogeneity of the microbial soil community of the
Atacama Desert. The Atacama Desert is well suited for this investigation because
of the long-established extreme conditions (>15 million years) with low water
and nutrient availability.

This project will also provide insights on the diversity of resilient
microorganisms that we might find when large-scale desertification takes place,
which can occur with climate change. The project will train a PhD student in
genomics and bioinformatics, and several undergraduate students will be involved
through the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates program. The PIs will
continue their commitment to K-12 education through NSF programs and direct
contributions to the community. The metagenomic data generated by this project
will be integrated into a microbial genomic class at Johns Hopkins University.



