* 0918618
* Science Learning: Integrating Design, Engineering and Robotics (SLIDER)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Michael Ryan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2016
* USD 3,492,961.00

The Science Learning: Integrating Design, Engineering and Robotics (SLIDER)
project is a collaborative effort involving the Center for Education Integrating
Science, Mathematics and Computing (CEISMC), the Center for the Enhancement of
Teaching and Learning (CETL), the School of Psychology, the School of Biomedical
Engineering, and the College of Computing at Georgia Tech; the State of Georgia
Department of Education; and three Georgia school systems: one urban, one rural,
and one suburban. The project is developing and implementing a rigorous eighth
grade physical science program that utilizes engineering design, LEGO robotics
and mechanics, and a problem-based learning approach to teach mechanics, waves,
and energy. The project seeks answers to these research questions: Can research-
based physical science instructional materials that use problem-based inquiry
learning in the context of engineering design scenarios empower a broad range of
middle school learners to learn physical science content and reasoning skills?
Can these educational materials lead to increased engagement, motivation,
aptitudes, creativity, and interest in STEM fields; if so, does this effect
persist as students move into high school? Do students engage with the materials
differently depending upon their gender, race, socioeconomic status, prior
academic achievement level, or location (urban, suburban, or rural)?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the process of answering these primary questions,
additional questions being addressed include: How should the learning be
assessed in the classroom and how does this assessment impact student
performance? What instructional materials and professional development are
necessary to prepare teachers to deliver this type of instruction effectively in
their classrooms? Three geographically disparate schools with strong school
leadership and an existing track record of robotics use are participating in the
project. In each school, two teachers utilize LEGO kits and storage units to
fully support instruction in their physical science classes. The SLIDER
instructional materials consist of contextualized, problem-based challenges that
require students to design, program, investigate, reflect, and revise their
products or solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: SLIDER
contributes to the knowledge base on the effectiveness of using engineering
design and robotics in K-12 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
SLIDER impacts K-12 physical science education by providing a research-based and
thoroughly tested set of instructional materials for use by teachers. These
materials are designed to attract more students, particularly those previously
underrepresented in STEM, into technical fields and careers. The project also
impacts the educational research workforce by training graduate students,
undergraduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in the theory and methods
of educational research and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;