* 0918218
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Estimating Species Trees with Population Genetic Approaches: Working Towards a New Phylogenetic Paradigm for 21st Century Phylogenetics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* L. Lacey Knowles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2013
* USD 356,083.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental issue in studying
biodiversity is understanding the relationship between species. This is
approached by developing trees that describe the relationships and facilitate
their study, the field of phylogenetics. When such trees are developed from DNA
sequences, they do not necessarily match trees developed from morphology, or
even trees developed from other DNA sequences. The theory for developing trees
from DNA does not take population genetics into consideration, or the messiness
of real data (e.g., limited genetic variation, missing data, inability to sample
all species in a tree, and realistic sampling effort). The funded work will
address these issues though theory development followed by testing with both
computer simulations and data collected from well-understood study species. The
investigators will develop software and guidelines for accurate species-tree
estimation, identify the limits of these new methods, and identify areas for
future theoretical and methodological development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will train postdocs and graduate students. Opportunities for cross-training in
phylogenetics and population genetics will be provided to students and faculty
nationwide through workshops and making the software freely available on the
web. A computer workshop will bridge the gap between the theoretical basis of
the methods and the backgrounds of those interested in applying them. Thus the
project will provide tools to a diverse cross-section of researchers, given the
central role of species trees in biology. This project opens a new line of
research that should be invaluable to both basic and applied scientists who
study biodiversity and its changes.&lt;br/&gt;