* 0918498
* REVSYS: A phylogenetic monograph of the species-rich neotropical tree genus Swartzia (Leguminosae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Benjamin Torke, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Ranker
* 05/31/2012
* USD 135,000.00

The genus Swartzia (in the legume, or bean, family) includes approximately 200
species that together form a diverse and characteristic element of Central and
South American rainforests. Many species of Swartzia are abundant and play
important ecological roles. Despite its importance, and despite the ongoing
destruction of tropical rainforests, Swartzia has been under-studied relative to
other plant groups. The taxonomy of the genus is badly outdated, most aspects of
its biology are unknown, and many species in remote regions have yet to be
described. Funding will be used to carry out extensive museum-, field-, and
laboratory-based studies of Swartzia. This research will synthesize current
information and will generate new data on species distributions, ecology,
variation, biology, uses, and conservation status, particularly from previously
under-sampled geographic regions. These data will be used to clarify the
taxonomy of Swartzia and will be published in an encyclopedic taxonomic
monograph and website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will greatly advance a
long-term objective to develop a model system in tropical trees for studying the
origins and maintenance of species diversity in rainforests. Through the project
website, all data will be made available to the scientific community and public.
These data will help in species identification, biodiversity research,
conservation, and management. The research team includes personnel in five
countries and is a model of international collaboration. The project presents
substantial educational opportunities for students and volunteers in the United
States and South America.