* 0918435
* Talk Science: Scalable, Web-based Professional Learning to Improve Science Achievement
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Susan Doubler, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,819,418.00

TERC, in close collaboration with the Mason School in Roxbury, MA, the Benjamin
A. Banneker School in Cambridge, MA, Newton Massachusetts Schools, and
scientists and linguists from Tufts University in Medford, MA, Clark University
in Worcester, MA, and Boston University, in Boston, is conducting a four-year
project to enhance and study the development of elementary science teachers'
skills in managing productive classroom talk in inquiry-based physical science
studies of matter. The project hypothesizes that aligning professional learning
with conceptually-driven curriculum and emphasizing the development of
scientific discourse changes classroom culture and increases student learning.
The project deliverables are new web-based resources, Talk Science! PD, to help
elementary teachers better facilitate scientific discourse. These resources are
comprised of two nine-week professional development courses for 4th and 5th
grade teachers. The resources are being designed in collaboration with
scientists, linguists, and cognitive psychologists to develop media-rich video
case-based learning experiences that enhance teachers' understanding of the
science and classroom discourse. The resources are closely aligned with the
newly-developed, NSF-funded Inquiry Curriculum, a curriculum for elementary
grades about the nature of matter and the conceptual development of material,
mass, volume, and density.

The project is studying three research questions: 1. How do teachers' awareness,
understanding and skills for supporting science talk change as they use Talk
Science!? 2. How does student talk change as a result of changes in teachers'
language-related actions? 3. How do classroom discourse patterns change as a
result of changes in the teacher's action?

The resources are being evaluated through a comprehensive pre/post evaluation
plan. The project is documenting teachers' learning and closely studying the
changes in discussion patterns in 18 science classrooms from urban, suburban and
rural schools in Massachusetts and Vermont. The products and research results of
the project are being disseminated widely through conference presentations and
publication of articles in appropriate professional journals.