* 0918623
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Fourier analytic and probabilistic methods in geometric functional analysis and convexity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2012
* Roman Vershynin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2012
* USD 205,701.00

The aim of this project is to bring together tools from Fourier analysis, affine
convex geometry, geometric functional analysis, probability theory, and
combinatorics to attack problems arising in geometry, analysis, and in various
areas of applied mathematics and computer science. On the technical level, the
focus is on the study of properties of (generally high-dimensional) convex
bodies, random matrices, Gaussian measures and processes, and of approximation
problems. Specific sample directions of planned research are related to the
slicing problem, the Mahler conjecture, the Gaussian correlation conjecture,
combinatorial dimensions of classes of functions, singular numbers of random
matrices, signal reconstruction (notably, compressed sensing), and links to
quantum information theory. A combined, focused effort is expected to bring new
insights toward a better understanding of the participants' respective fields of
research, which - while related and occasionally overlapping - are not identical
and often employ different perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of
mathematics encompassing the methods and the problems described above has
recently entered a period of rapid growth. In large part this is due to numerous
links to other fields such as computer science and mathematical physics. In a
nutshell, the wealth of connections between high-dimensional convexity and
applications is due to the complexity of the systems (e.g., physical, biological
or economical) that one wants to analyze: the large number of free parameters in
such systems may be reflected in the large dimension of the mathematical object
that serves as a model. Additionally, many results in, say, geometric functional
analysis, can be presented as statements about the complexity of high
dimensional objects in presence of convexity; this explains the links to
computer science. In addition to research per se, a major component of this
project is the training of postdocs and graduate students in an integrated
research environment. This includes organization of a summer school and of a
conference. Workshops and seminars devoted to the project at each institution
are also planned. The dynamic growth of the area and wealth of applications
makes it an ideal topic of study for graduate students and young researchers,
whom we expect to attract. Special attention will be paid to recruiting members
of groups under-represented in the field of mathematics.