* 0918309
* Mathematics and Culture in Micronesia: Integrating Societal Experiences (Macimise)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Thomas Craven, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,476,443.00

Founded on ethnomathematics research findings, this project--a collaborative
research and development effort between Pacific Resources for Education and
Learning and the University of Hawaii-Manoa--aims to increase the mathematics
learning of first-, fourth-, and seventh-grade elementary school Micronesian
students. Plans are to develop and field-test culturally and linguistically
sensitive grade-level curriculum units in specific mathematics topics, such as
number and counting, division of whole numbers and fractions, and elements of
geometry, focused on the indigenous mathematics learning experiences of eight
distinct islands in the Pacific region. A team of mathematicians, mathematics
educators, mathematics teachers, graduate students, curriculum and assessment
experts, and quantitative and qualitative methodologists will develop and
implement approximately 24 curriculum units (8 for each grade
level).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis that inclusion of indigenous ways of
knowing into the mathematics curriculum may enhance students' NCTM standards-
based mathematics learning and meaning making drives the proposed scope of work.
Thus, the main research question is: Does knowledge of recovered culturally
based mathematics significantly improve indigenous student scores on
standardized mathematics tests at grades 1, 4, and 7? The specific setting of
the study comprises eight islands included in the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Palau, and American Samoa. Participants include 2,304 first- , fourth-
, and seventh-grade students: 24 experimental and 24 control groups, two of each
grade level on each of the eight U.S.-affiliated islands of the Pacific region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative data gathering strategies, such as interviews
with local informants, teachers, and students; and classroom observations are
used to document indigenous ways of knowing, mathematical content, assessment
practices, and cultural practices. Quantitative data gathering and
interpretation strategies using pre-and post-test scores, as well as scores from
standardized assessments, will include statistical analyses to determine the
effect of the curricular units on participating students' grade-level
mathematics achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation plan comprises
both formative and summative components, including implementation evaluation and
progress evaluation. Grade-level curriculum units, three publications on
findings, a professional development model for teachers through graduate
courses, and a cadre of masters' and doctoral degrees in mathematics education
are among the main products of this effort.