* 0918442
* Collaborative Research:Reassembling pollinator communities to promote pollination function at the landscape scale
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Maile Neel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 52,527.00

Pollinators provide enhanced fruit and seed production for roughly 35% of global
crop production and 75% of crop types. Wild pollinator populations are currently
suffering from habitat loss, while semi-domesticated pollinators, particularly
the most widely used crop pollinator, the European honey bee, are declining in
North America and Europe due to diseases, pesticides and unknown causes. These
losses have reached critical proportions in some areas. As pollination services
decline, human diets could become impoverished in fruits and vegetables that
provide us with essential vitamins and micro-nutrients. Wild plant populations
that depend on pollinators for reproduction (the majority of flowering plants)
may also suffer, with potential cascading effects on other wildlife. This
research will utilize a multi-pronged approach to understand how the
distribution of habitat patches in a landscape can support wild pollinator
communities in agricultural regions and thus ensure the continued delivery of
pollination services to crops. This comprehensive approach includes field
observations and experiments in the Central Valley of California, development of
mathematical models for understanding pollination services across space, and
application of these models to pollination studies from around the globe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased understanding of pollination services can
benefit society by identifying pathways for restoring a diverse community of
pollinators to agriculture, and thus helping to reduce the risk of over-reliance
on honey bees as a critical input to agricultural production. This research will
also contribute to the fundamental understanding of the relationship between
changing habitat distributions at the landscape scale and the ecosystem services
they produce. Three postdoctoral scientists will be mentored and trained in this
project, along with numerous undergraduate students. Results will contribute to
public outreach through interactions with the Xerces Society which works with
farmers in California and across the U.S. to conserve native pollinator
communities to benefit agriculture. Additional outreach will be conducted
through the Lincoln Park Zoo in Illinois to increase participation in a citizen
science pollination program.