* 0918656
* Collaborative Research:   Community composition and disease outcomes in a multihost-parasite system
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Jeremy Wojdak, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2015
* USD 193,872.00

As the incidence of infectious diseases in both wildlife and human populations
continues to rise, studies addressing the ecology of disease are becoming more
important. Too often, though, our understanding of pathogens and parasites in
natural systems develops from studies abstracted from the complex ecological
communities in which disease dynamics actually play out. Recent evidence
suggests that the presence/absence and relative abundance of different species
in the biological community can substantially influence the outcome of host-
parasite interactions. However, changing the composition of the community can
result in either an increase or decrease in disease risk, and the mechanisms
responsible for these outcomes have been experimentally investigated in very few
systems. This research will experimentally investigate the role of community
composition in modulating disease outcomes in a complex host-parasite system
composed of snails, amphibians, and a trematode parasite. A series of
experiments will address how infection of parasite hosts is influenced by
changes in the composition and relative abundance of multiple hosts, multiple
parasite infectious stages and non-host competitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will establish a collaborative research program between the
laboratories of the PIs at Virginia Tech and Radford University (a predominately
undergraduate institution 25 km from Virginia Tech) that will provide broader
educational experiences for the students at both institutions. The partnership
between Virginia Tech and Radford University includes collaborative research
projects, joint laboratory meetings, and support of graduate students at
Virginia Tech and undergraduate student research at both universities. In
addition, a teaching module on host-parasite interactions based on the research
results will be developed for Ecology and Parasitology courses at Radford
University and will be disseminated to the broader teaching community.