* 0918983
* Elucidating the Central Pathway of Microbial Electron Transport Systems in Complex Consortia
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,04/30/2013
* Yuri Gorby, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,271,371.00

Ecosystem Research: Elucidating the Central Pathway of Microbial Electron
Transport Systems in Complex Consortia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;Microbes perform fundamental energy transfer reactions that drive
ecosystem changes such as the degradation of organic matter, and nutrient
cycling in soils and sediments. Presently, little is known about what biological
processes are facilitated and regulated within diverse microbial communities
that perform energy transfer reactions. Microbial energy metabolism is dictated
by electron transfer, i.e. the process of respiring or fermenting different
chemical compounds. ?Extracellular? electron transfer (EET) is a strategy that
microbes employ when they are respiring or deriving energy from a solid-phase
compound, like iron(III)-oxides, which are extremely prevalent in most natural
environments. Understanding the microbial EET reactions that drive many
biological processes will contribute to the development of new methods for
dealing with several environmental challenges including bioremediation of
contaminated sites, treating wastewater, and reducing methane emissions from
agricultural and industrial settings.&lt;br/&gt;Microbial fuel cell (MFC)
electrodes can act as analogs to environmental solid-phase electron acceptors
and are therefore ideal systems for isolating biofilms (bacterial communities
attached to surfaces) that can perform EET; and for controlling EET reactions.
This project will utilize MFC systems to isolate phylogenetically diverse,
electrogenic, microbial consortia and will apply metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic analyses to characterize gene expression in these biofilms.
These data will be used to identify common genes associated with biofilms formed
from different environments and under different MFC operating conditions. The
resulting gene expression data will provide insights into the specific genes and
pathways that are important for EET reactions in diverse microbial consortia.
The research results will be applied toward creating new genetic markers that
will enable the real-time investigation of EET reactions within natural
environments. Ultimately, results from this project will generate fundamental
knowledge about electron transfer processes and how they relate to ecosystem
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to a
broader impact by: 1) developing post-doctoral research programs in the
interdisciplinary field of ?Electromicrobiology?; 2) providing opportunities for
post-doctoral led sessions at scientific meetings; and 3) facilitating
undergraduate education and laboratory experience via summer internship programs
that will address topics ranging from advanced microbial cultivation techniques
to comprehensive gene expression analyses. Post-doctoral appointees will have
the opportunity to conduct interdisciplinary work in fields such as
electrochemistry, microbial physiology and ecology, and metagenomic and
metatranscriptomic analyses; and will emerge with unique expertise that can be
applied in many research areas. &lt;br/&gt;