* 0918577
* Quantifying the Role of Chemical Weathering on the Composition of the Continental Crust Using Mg Isotopes and Other Tracers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the mineral
resources necessary for modern society are found in the continental crust,
particularly in the form of ores. Ore formation requires trace metals from the
crust to be scavenged, redistributed and then re-deposited, processes which in
some cases are controlled by physical and chemical interactions (weathering)
between the crust, atmosphere and hydrosphere. The purpose of this project is to
explore isotopic proxies that could eventually be used to assess the role of
chemical and physical weathering on the composition of the continents in order
to better understand the pathways of chemical transport. The proposed study also
has indirect implications for understanding feedbacks between the deep Earth and
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the Early Grant for Exploratory
Research (EaGER) is focused on finding ways to quantify the extent to which
chemical weathering modifies the major element composition of the continental
crust from its basaltic parentage to its defining felsic (Mg-poor, Si-rich)
character. In particular, this proposal seeks to test the hypothesis that some
fraction of Mg lost from continents is accommodated by the leaching out of Mg
during weathering, followed by sequestration in oceanic crust during
hydrothermal circulation, and finally subduction back into the mantle. The other
lost component is through the generation of mafic cumulates or residues at arcs,
which founder back into the mantle. The approach will be to use Mg isotope
ratios as a tracer of chemical weathering because weathering processes leach out
light Mg and leave behind heavy Mg in the soils and sedimentary residues. High
temperature processes should not fractionate Mg isotopes significantly and thus
Mg isotopes should be most sensitive to the weathering process. Mg isotopes will
be measured on mafic minerals in granitic plutons from the Cretaceous Peninsular
Ranges Batholith in southern California and will be combined with existing
oxygen, strontium, and lead isotope data on the same samples. The Peninsular
Ranges Batholith represents a mixture of juvenile magmas and preexisting
metamorphic basement, the latter of which has a Paleozoic sedimentary protolith.
Preliminary results show correlations between Mg isotopes and O, Sr, and Pb
isotopes, allowing an estimate of the extent of chemical weathering experienced
by metamorphic basement earlier in its history. To further complement this work,
the Mg isotopic compositions of hydrothermally altered oceanic crust and their
metamorphic equivalents (greenschists and amphibolites) will also be examined.
Collectively, this work should shed more quantitative light on the rock cycle.