* 0918782
* Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,247,586.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
understand the mechanisms of charge separation and recombination in
photosynthetic reaction centers (RCs) and the higher-order organization of
photosynthetic membranes. This research project focuses on three areas: (i) the
mechanism of electron transfer in RCs where the primary electron acceptor has
been removed; (ii) the use of vibrational spectator probes to quantify
electrostatics in the RC; and (iii) the development of advanced imaging
techniques using well-defined photosynthetic complexes and assemblies as a model
system. By working with RCs in which normal electron transfer is blocked, new
pathways can be revealed in a clean background and important intermediates can
be trapped. In particular, the kinetics and energetics of electron transfer
along the ordinarily non-functional side of the RC can be studied in depth. This
project will investigate the orientation of a particular amino acid that is
believed to modulate reaction energetics. A suite of methods will introduce
spectator vibrational probes into the RC to measure differences in electrostatic
fields in symmetry-related positions, as well as probe changes in fields as
electron transfer occurs. Areas (i) and (ii) focus on specific, well-defined
questions that arise in bacterial photosynthesis; the results and methods will
apply to more complex photosynthetic organisms and the broad area of biological
electron transfer. Area (iii) uses photosynthetic systems, but will impact the
development of new approaches for characterizing membranes and membrane proteins
in general. Imaging mass spectrometry will be pushed to its limit using the
highly organized photosynthetic membrane, in particular to see whether integral
membrane protein organization can be visualized. A "membrane interferometer" has
been developed that combines advanced fabrication, membrane assembly and optics
in a device that is highly sensitive to membrane curvature and osmotic pressure.
Photosynthetic proteins will be used to test the precision of this
interferometer, to test hypotheses concerning the impact of photosynthetic
membrane proteins on membrane curvature and budding, and as reporters of
membrane curvature upon incorporation of channels that are sensitive to membrane
tension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustained support in this area has led to the
development of many new approaches for studying electron transfer reactions, one
of the most important classes of reactions in physical and biological systems.
Nearly every spectroscopic, structural, and theoretical method has been applied
to some aspect of RC and photosynthetic membrane function. In many cases this
was the first example of new physical approaches applied to a biological
problem, often leading to significant improvements in the physical and
theoretical methods, and these concepts and methods are now used in many other
fields. Assembly of RCs on surfaces opened an entirely new area of technology,
membrane patterning, which is now used in many laboratories and is the basis of
efforts to use membrane and membrane-protein arrays for screening in several
biotechnology companies. This general area of research has been a tremendous
source of training for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, often serving as a bridge between the physical sciences and biology.
The PI has given more than 100 invited talks at universities, national labs,
companies and scientific conferences worldwide over the past 5 years. Viewed in
broadest terms, concepts and results from photosynthesis research have impacted
solar energy research and the emerging area of molecular electronics.