* 0918902
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: Evolutionary Genetics of Pollen Competition in Yellow Monkeyflowers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Lila Fishman, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2012
* USD 338,364.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the barriers to reproduction between species
is central to evolutionary biology. The evolution of reproductive barriers is a
key step in the accumulation of genetic differences among populations of plants
and animals, ultimately leading to the formation of new species. By
understanding mechanisms of reproductive isolation, broad insight into the
origins and maintenance of biological diversity can be gained. This research
focuses on reproductive isolation between closely related native plant species
that exhibit a common form of reproductive isolation due to competition among
male gametes (pollen) during pollination. This research will identify the
molecules that are responsible for pollen competition, revealing how these
molecules contribute to reproductive isolation among species. The work
integrates classical genetic approaches, state of the art technologies, and
powerful statistical analyses in a collaboration building on the strengths of
two researchers at separate institutions. It has the potential to transform the
study of the molecules responsible for reproductive isolation and
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will train graduate and undergraduate
students in modern tools of biological research. Students from groups currently
under-represented in the sciences will be targeted using existing recruitment
tools and aspects of these studies will contribute to existing programs
enhancing K-12 science. In addition, because this work develops novel methods
for identifying the causes and consequences of reproductive isolation, it may
lead to new approaches in solving issues in the fields of human reproductive
health. &lt;br/&gt;