* 0918010
* Deep Convective Transport to the Upper-Troposphere/Lower-Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gretchen Mullendore, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* A. Gannet Hallar
* 07/31/2013
* USD 333,155.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gases in the upper troposphere and
lower stratosphere (UT/LS) have a significant effect on the chemical and
radiative budgets of the global atmosphere, crucial to understanding climate
change. To understand the chemical makeup of the UT/LS region, a much better
understanding of deep convective transport is needed. Transport in deep
convection is unique in its ability to entrain constituents from the near
surface and rapidly transport them to the UT/LS region where they are detrained.
The variability of entrainment and detrainment in storms is not captured in
current climate model convective transport
parameterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes to address these
problems with a tripartite approach. First, using dual-Doppler velocity data
from field campaigns, the observed detrainment profile will be derived for a
suite of storms covering a range of storm morphologies and background
environments. Second, radar reflectivity data from the same field campaigns will
be used to look for relationships between velocity-derived detrainment profiles
and the reflectivity fields. The goal of the second part of the proposal is to
define an algorithm for processing radar reflectivity observations that will
allow for estimates of convective mass transport based on radar reflectivity
observations over any region covered by the weather radar network. Third, cloud-
resolving models will be used to assess the quality of reflectivity-based
transport estimates for specific storms. Using the combination of radar
reflectivity observations and modeling, a climatology of convective transport
over the central United States will be
compiled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in understanding and modeling of
deep convective transport resulting from this study will directly benefit many
complementary modeling efforts and improve understanding of convective transport
of gases into the UT/LS. Ultimately, these results can be used to reduce
uncertainty in climate prediction models, a critical need considering the
climate challenges facing humanity.