* 0918929
* Effects of Encroaching Forest for the Rocky Mountain Apollo Butterfly, Parnassius smintheus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Stephen Matter, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 286,759.00

This project investigates the effects of forest encroachment in alpine regions
for the Rocky Mountain Apollo butterfly, a species restricted to habitat above
treeline. Using historical aerial photography documenting past encroachment,
habitat mapping, and tree ring dating, areas above treeline that are and are not
subject to forest encroachment will be determined at three sites in the front
range of the Rocky Mountains. These data will be combined with existing long-
term population data for the butterfly to predict if continuing forest
encroachment will affect the butterfly, and if so, when these populations may
begin to see effects.

This research addresses an important question for conservation as well as for
ecological and evolutionary research: Does habitat change in alpine systems
necessitate extinction or will local refugia be sufficient to permit
persistence? Currently, the elevation of treeline is rising in many alpine areas
throughout the world, potentially threatening organisms restricted to alpine
habitats. The project will provide training for one graduate student, three to
nine undergraduates and one postdoctoral researcher. The investigators
participate in the WISE and McNair programs and the Girl Scout summer program
and have a strong record of outreach to diverse groups. The project has been
featured in park visitor centers and magazine and newspaper articles.