* 0918984
* The interaction between spatially and temporally heterogenous selection:   salmon as a model system
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Marissa Baskett, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2012
* USD 132,691.00

Movement between different locations might either reduce the potential for
individuals to adapt to local conditions or help maintain a population at a
given location. This project will develop a set of models to investigate how the
interaction between natural selection and movement that vary in both space and
time determines the effect of movement on local populations. These models will
be based on salmon that receive inputs from aquaculture (fish farming) and
hatcheries (supplemental fish raised in captivity), as the many types of such
programs provide a data-rich source of information about exchange between
populations that experience different (natural and artificial) selection.

While factors such as population size, the amount of movement, and variation in
selection have been explored separately, how these factors interact to determine
the effect of movement on local populations, the central question of this study,
remains unknown. In addition to addressing this fundamental scientific question,
results of this project will be relevant to pressing questions about the design
of hatchery and aquaculture programs. Results will inform the design of hatchery
and aquaculture programs that allow for conservation of salmon, an important and
threatened natural resource. The project will also provide an educational
benefit through graduate student training, which will have a broader societal
benefit as federal agencies are struggling to find individuals with postgraduate
training in quantitative marine resource management.