* 0918280
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Dynamic Policy Responsiveness in the US States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Eric Plutzer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,236.00

When citizens change their policy preferences, how closely do policies follow?
The answer is central to democratic theory. The principal of popular sovereignty
implies some degree of dynamic policy responsiveness; when public opinion
changes substantially, public policy should shift to reflect changed public
preferences. While dynamic models of policy responsiveness have been tested and
confirmed at the national level, much less is known about policymaking at the
state level. This is an important shortcoming because state governments vary in
important ways that can enhance or diminish the voice of the people in policy
making.

To answer this question, the investigator measures state preferences towards
smoking bans over time by combining individual survey data from the Gallup Poll
Social Series on Consumption Habits 2001-2008 and the Current Population Survey
Smoking and Tobacco Supplement 1992, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998, 1999, 2000, and
2001. In both surveys, respondents were asked their preferences towards smoking
bans in workplaces, restaurants, bars, and hotels. After creating state level
preferences towards smoking bans using recent methodological advances in
aggregate opinion estimation, state preferences are linked to the adoption of
smoking bans in restaurants, bars, and workplaces using data compiled from the
National Cancer Institute's State Cancer Legislative Database. The resulting
series will span sixteen years, begin prior to the first state?s adoption, and
include a year of overlap to account for potential "house" and question effects
that may influence expressed support for the policy.

The broader impacts of the study are embodied in the original dataset that will
be made publicly available, along with the details of the methodology used to
generate and validate dynamic measures of state public opinion. The methods of
estimation can be extended to measure other preferences at the state level over
time, as well as other attitudes such as tolerance, trust, efficacy or
confidence which may also exhibit over time change across states. Theoretically,
by including measures of public opinion into our models of policy adoption, we
can better understand the mechanisms through which other variables impact policy
changes. More broadly, this research can assess the extent to which states
exhibit policy responsive over time to ordinary citizens in the area of public
health.