* 0918429
* Vibrio parahaemolyticus as a model system to determine bacterial adaptation to changes in the marine coastal ecosystem
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Fidelma Boyd, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2013
* USD 471,102.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrio species are part of the normal
microflora of coastal waters throughout the world and are especially abundant in
warmer waters. These organisms can survive and proliferate in fluctuating
environmental conditions such as salinity, temperature and pH. However, the
underlying mechanism of how these bacteria cope with rapid changes in growth
conditions is poorly understood. Vibrio parahaemolyticus is a moderate halophile
capable of growth at 0.1M to 1M NaCl. The dramatic increased incidences of V.
parahaemolyticus in geographic climes such as in the Pacific Northwest have
resulted in intense interest in the ecology of this organism. In this project,
the principle investigator will determine the physiological responses of V.
parahaemolyticus to changes in salinity. Work undertaken as part of this project
will ascertain the underlying molecular mechanisms of osmotic tolerance and its
role in microbial communities as a compatible solute producer using molecular
genetics, genomics and phylogenetic analyses. Intellectual merits. V.
parahaemolyticus is a key component of the aquatic ecosystem, and likely play an
important role in the health of this ecosystem, therefore understanding how it
adapts to a changing environment is essential, especially given the unknown
effects global warming will have on this ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts and significance. In 1996, a novel pathogenic strain of V.
parahaemolyticus emerged in Asia causing severe outbreaks and has now
disseminated globally marking the emergence of a pandemic clone. How or why
novel strains emerge remains unknown, in the case of V. parahaemolyticus global
warming as well as the acquisition of novel traits may be key factors. The
primary strategy for adaptation to high salinity in most living organisms is the
accumulation of compatible solutes. An aim of the project is to determine the
functional role and hierarchy of the solute synthesis and transporter systems in
V. parahaemolyticus and reconstruct the phylogeny of these systems among
bacteria. This work may provide insights into why novel strains of this
bacterium emerge. Integration of research and teaching will occur during the
project through the mentoring of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students by the Principle Investigator. The research objectives proposed will
give students a broad appreciation of the diversity and complexity of microbial
communities in the aquatic ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;