* 0918112
* Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Tropical Forest Recovery in an Agricultural Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2013
* Karen Holl, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 333,992.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reforestation of tropical landscapes
that were cleared of trees is a goal that has important implications for
conservation biology, for developing diverse local economies, and for carbon
sequestration and climate change. A novel approach of planting tree islands as
source points for restoration of tropical forest is being tested with a large-
scale and long-term experiment built around 15 ~1 ha plots spread across 100
square km in Costa Rica. The relative importance to forest recovery of local
factors (restoration strategy, tree cover) versus the nature of the landscape
(nearby forest cover) is also being tested. Treatments, established from
2004-2006, include tree islands of three sizes that were either planted with
trees or left to be colonized through natural dispersal. Results to date have
provided key insights into patterns of bird foraging, seed rain, seed
germination, and seedling growth. This award will maintain an experimental
infrastructure that has attracted numerous project collaborators and support
ongoing and new monitoring of vegetation, seed dispersal, bats, and birds in
restored and reference forests. Results of this study will inform tropical
forest restoration efforts, which are critical to conserve biodiversity and
ecosystem services, such as hydrological cycling and carbon sequestration.
Additional broader impacts will include training of US and Latin American
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as Costa Ricans of all educational
levels. Results will be disseminated in English and Spanish to general and
scientific audiences, through educational institutions, government agencies, and
non-profit organizations.