* 0918683
* Cyber-Enabled Earth Exploration: Development of Materials for Middle School Earth Science Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Heather Almquist, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 449,461.00

This project will develop new instructional materials for middle school science
teachers that help create a compelling classroom culture of scientific
discovery, engage students in the creative opportunities that abound in science,
and inspire them to pursue the high school science coursework needed for future
careers in science. The materials will incorporate emerging and widely available
technologies such as Google Earth to engage middle school students in exploring
an essential science question, "Does the Earth's structure affect you?" The use
of computer technologies has been shown to successfully motivate middle school
students, and the use of an integrated Earth System Science approach provides
the knowledge base, methodologies, and global context to make science
accessible, relevant and meaningful for middle school students. A complete
learning unit and teacher's guide will be developed by a team of experts in K-12
curriculum design, geology, and geography, using a Learning-for-Use curriculum
design framework. The materials will be tested for ease-of-use and effectiveness
in approximately ten classrooms across Montana, which include both large and
small class sizes, urban and rural communities, and white and Native American
students. Participating teachers will provide feedback to help guide revision of
the materials, which will subsequently be disseminated to the national K-12
community.