* 0918320
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Discrete Time-Series Cross-Section Models of Political Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Andrew Martin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Discrete Time-Series Cross-Section Models of
Political Economy

Discrete time-series cross-sectional (TSCS) data are a very important type of
data in a variety of disciplines, including political science and economics.
TSCS data have both a time and spatial dimension and are thus rich in structure
for analysis. However, this correlated data structure invites multiple possible
sources of error and raises several important methodological challenges.

This research will develop a new method for analyzing TSCS data: a Bayesian
generalized linear multilevel model with two-dimensional random effects and p-th
order autoregressive errors for analyzing the temporal and spatial dependence of
discrete TSCS data. The model empowers substantive researchers to better
understand the dynamic process under investigation and to conduct comparative
studies. Estimating the parameters of the proposed model and performing
computations to facilitate model comparison are difficult and computationally
intense. This project will solve these technical difficulties by designing a
hybrid Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm with a special focus on simulation
efficiency. To facilitate model choice, this research will also develop a
relatively easy means of computing Bayes factors. A well-designed, user-
friendly, and open source R package will also be provided to the scientific
community that implements the proposed model and methods.

This project will apply the model to several important questions in the field of
international political economy. Substantively, the model will be applied to
studying the "democratic advantage" theory in political science.