* 0918856
* Collaborative Research:  Cyberinfrastructure for a Virtual Observatory and Ecological Informatics System (VOEIS)
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Fox, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sian Mooney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,000,000.00

EPS-0919557, University of Montana, Richard Hauer, linked to EPS-0918856
(University of Kentucky Research Foundation)&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
Cyberinfrastructure for a Virtual Observatory and Ecological Informatics System
(VOEIS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Montana-Kentucky (MTKY) cyber consortium is a partnership of the primary
research universities in the two states--University of Montana (UM), Montana
State University (MtSU), University of Kentucky (UK), University of Louisville
(UL), Eastern Kentucky University (EKU), Flathead Lake Biological Station (FLBS)
in Montana operated by UM, Hancock Biological Station (HBS) in Kentucky operated
by Murray State University (MuSU), the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Cisco
Systems, Inc. NCSA and Cisco. &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between MT
and KY and partners from industry and the public sector plans to develop an
integrated sensor and ecological informatics system through the use of modern
cyberinfrastructure resources. Through this CI project, the researchers will
develop a collaborative, research-based line of inquiry and informatics
framework that will function from the collection of streaming sensor data to the
application of those data in simulation models and visualizations. This is to be
accomplished by developing and implementing a combination of the necessary
hardware, networking, software and human resources to ensure an end-to-end
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The research carried out by the
cyberinfrastructure will enable an integrated sensor and informatics network in
the nature of a pilot project which will develop expertise in environmental
science of importance in the future competitiveness of Montana and Kentucky. The
consortium team, composed of faculty and students at Flathead Lake Biological
Station (MT), Hancock Biological Station (KY) and research and education centers
at four universities in Kentucky and two in Montana, will contribute to the
design, development and application of this network. The informatics system
developed through this project would be designed to manage vast amounts of
legacy data, as well as new data generated by the sensor network. Data will be
analyzed through a workflow environment designed in collaboration with the
software experts at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)
in Urbana-Champaign, IL. Private sector and collaboration partner, Cisco Systems
Inc., will contribute sensor and router development and resources to this
effort. Visualization of the data will be carried out jointly between NCSA and
the Kentucky Center for Visualization and Virtual Environments. The combination
of these resources will form a cyberinfrastructure to explore fundamental
questions in environmental science, including the effects of climate change, the
imposition of human activities on the environment, and the resilience of the
nation?s water resources. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Training of students in
the use of VOEIS and the NCSA open source software is an important part of this
project and will develop local expertise in sensor development, deployment and
simulation. Undergraduate curricula in limnology and ecology will be designed
and tested in Montana and Kentucky universities. A special effort will be made
to include students from underrepresented groups (e.g., students at the seven
Tribal Colleges in Montana and the economically disadvantaged students from the
Appalachian counties of Kentucky). Interaction with the public and K-12 students
will be channeled through the outreach programs at the Kentucky Water Resources
Research Institute (KWRRI) and the Montana Water Center (MWC), which are both
part of the national network of water centers. This is expected to raise the
awareness of how human activities have impact on the environment. &lt;br/&gt;