* 0918553
* RUI:   Evolutionary and ecological importance of hybridization and cryptic diversity in a rapidly expanding aquatic plant
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ryan Thum, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,500.00

Ecological properties that facilitate the invasion of weedy species into native
populations have been studied intensively. In contrast the potentially critical
role for evolutionary processes in many biological invasions has rarely been
considered. This project will explore the extent to which hybridization (crosses
between species) influences invasion of the aquatic plant Myriophyllum
heterophyllum (Water Milfoil), and the effects of invasion history on the
evolutionary trajectories of genetically distinct lineages. Specifically, this
research will utilize numerous molecular markers to compare patterns of gene
flow in the native and invaded range, and will utilize a field reciprocal
transplant experiment to determine whether hybrid lineages grow more invasively
than non-hybrid lineages.

Biological invasions are widely recognized as a major social, economic, and
environmental threat. Water Milfoil is a significant invasive in the
northeastern United States and severely impacts recreation and property values.
The proposed research activities will highlight the evolutionary and genetic
contributions to invasiveness and will directly influence aquatic plant
management decisions and policy. Resulting data also will be incorporated into a
new course in Molecular Ecology and the project will provide research
experiences to several undergraduate students and one Master's degree student at
an undergraduate institution.