* 0918262
* LTREB: Multi-scale effects of climate variability and change on hydrologic regimes, ecosystem function, and community structure in a desert stream and its catchment
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 09/30/2013
* USD 449,298.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because climate and water are
intimately linked in deserts, desert streams are well suited for observing
consequences of both natural climate variability and human-caused climate
change. Here, researchers propose to study how stream ecosystem structure
changes as variable frequency and magnitude of both flash floods and drought
periods over many years cause losses or gains in the abundance of wetland
plants. A shift in stream ecosystem structure to dominance by wetland plants
affects ecological functions in important but undocumented ways. Both the causes
and consequences of this shift will be assessed by surveying structure,
monitoring stream chemistry, comparing wetland with unvegetated stream reaches
during recovery following winter-spring flooding, and statistically analyzing
hydrology-ecosystem relationships. An interdisciplinary team will reevaluate
stream ecosystem models and test new models using long-term data from this and
other streams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will promote synthesis of
long-term data from aridland streams and advance understanding of these
ecosystems in ways that can contribute to the general theory of stability of
multiple ecosystem states. A distributed graduate seminar will give students
experience with use of long-term databases and foster collaborative
interactions. The database for this well-known stream ecosystem will be extended
to more than 35 years and made available to the scientific and management
community, potentially informing management in a highly variable environment
where stressors of climate change and population growth are converging.