* 0918733
* Introducing Dynamic Number as a Transformative Technology for Number and Early Algebra
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Steven Rasmussen, KCP Technologies
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,518,976.00

Introducing Dynamic Number is a research and development project undertaken by
KCP Technologies to extend and operationalize research in number, operation, and
early algebra. The project builds on the paradigm of Dynamic Geometry (the
interactive and continuous manipulation of geometric shapes and constructions)
with a new technological paradigm, Dynamic Number, centered on the direct
manipulation of number representations and numerical constructions. Using The
Geometer's Sketchpad as a starting point, KCP Technologies is developing new
software tools to deepen students' conceptions of integers, fractions, decimals,
real numbers, and early algebra in grades 2-8 mathematics. These tools are
accompanied by 40 supporting classroom activities, as well as a six-week online
professional development course for teachers.

Both the software and learning materials are being designed from the perspective
of a "bottom up/top down" analysis of the content domains. The University of
Georgia, working under a subcontract, serves as the project's evaluator. Using a
combination of videotaped teaching experiments and classroom observations from
eight field-test schools, they are examining how Dynamic Number technology
effects students' conceptions of discrete numerical quantities, continuous
numerical quantities, and early algebraic principles, such as the concept of
variable. They are also examining whether the software allows students to design
and construct dynamic mathematical models of their own invention.