* 0918433
* Molecular Characterization of Plant Plasmodesmal &amp; Non-Cell-Autonomous Potein Pathway Components
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 12/31/2012
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT PI LUCAS Proposal IOS-0918433.
&lt;br/&gt;During the process of evolution, cellular specialization required the
development of a matrix of signaling pathways with inherent plasticity to
provide organisms with the capacity to respond to a wide range of inputs. The
resultant signaling systems can be divided into two categories. The first
involves signaling agents whose actions are confined to the individual cells in
which the specific signaling process was initiated; i.e., these molecules are
cell-autonomous in behavior. The second group involves signals that act beyond
their sites of production; i.e., these signaling agents function in a non-cell-
autonomous manner and can involve hormones, metabolites, peptides and
macromolecules. Such signals can move either via the extracellular pathway,
which is common to all organisms, or, in the plant kingdom, they can traffic
from cell to cell through highly unique structures, termed plasmodesmata (PD).
It is now well established that PD mediate trafficking of proteins, such as
transcription factors, and RNA molecules. However, little is known regarding the
molecular constituents of PD. In this project, the investigators will use a
combination of biochemical, molecular and genetic tools to isolated and
characterize a set of PD proteins. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
will add significantly to our understanding of the molecular components involved
in the cell-to-cell trafficking of proteins and RNA. Knowledge of this PD
pathway will clearly contribute to our understanding of how plants coordinate
developmental and physiological events at the cellular, tissue and organ level.
The project will also yield additional insights into how viruses spread within
plants; this should lead to the engineering of novel defense strategies, thereby
leading to enhance food security. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will
train underrepresented/minority undergraduate students and high school students.
A high school science teacher will also work on the project. Finally, the
investigators will disseminate the exciting discoveries resulting from this
project by seminars and lectures given to local, national and international
groups.&lt;br/&gt;