* 0918952
* The influence of oysters on sediment nitrogen cycling: an ecosystem approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Timothy Hoellein, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2012
* USD 281,995.00

Pollution of estuaries from human activities such as agriculture and
urbanization has disrupted the global cycling of elements including carbon and
nitrogen (N) and reduced stocks of coastal fisheries worldwide. Enhanced water
quality in New York City has stimulated interest in reviving the previously
abundant eastern oyster to the Hudson-Raritan estuary (HRE). Oysters filter the
overlying water for food particles, and then deposit their waste to the
sediments below. The delivery of N-rich waste to sediments may stimulate the
microbial transformation of biologically active N into inert N gas. This process
is the only pathway through which N is permanently removed from aquatic
ecosystems; however, the environmental conditions under which oysters could
enhance the activity of N-cycling microbes have not been previously examined.
This study will document how two important factors, oyster density and water
column N concentration, control the influence of oysters on sediment N cycling.
The PI?s will quantify rates of oyster filtration, excretion, and sediment N
transformations seasonally over a two-year period.

This experiment will document the potential for the re-introduction of eastern
oysters to enhance N removal in urbanized ecosystems. The results will directly
inform the application of limited management funds towards oyster restoration
projects, which can provide the maximum benefits for management of N pollution.
To ensure the utility of the findings towards ongoing restoration activity, the
PI?s will work in close cooperation with multiple stakeholders including
government agencies and non-for-profit groups. Finally, this research supports
the participation of students from high school through graduate school levels.
The integration of public outreach, education, and robust experimental design
are critical to the long-term conservation of urbanized aquatic environments.