* 0918942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Synthetic Data Generation for Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Joseph Sakshaug, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2011
* USD 6,000.00

Demand for small area estimates is growing heavily among a variety of
researchers, analysts, decision-makers, and community planners, who use these
data to advance current knowledge on issues affecting communities and the lives
of their residents. Statistical agencies regularly collect survey data from
small geographic areas, but are often prevented from publicly releasing these
data in microdata form because of confidentiality risks associated with
releasing small area identifiers. The main objective of this proposal is to
develop a methodology for generating fully-synthetic micro-level datasets that
permit valid estimation of small area statistics while protecting the
confidentiality of respondent?s data. The proposed methodology will use well-
known Bayesian hierarchical modeling techniques to generate simulated (or
imputed) values based on an assumed prediction model for a commonly used set of
variables found in public-use datasets. The modeling approach will account for
different levels of variation occurring at the county- and state-level for the
purposes of generating synthetic data that produce valid inferences for both
levels of geography. Parametric and nonparametric modeling strategies will be
considered, and small area inferences based on the actual data and synthetic
data will be compared to evaluate the utility of the synthetic data methodology.
In addition, two real-world data complexities typically ignored in synthetic
data applications will be addressed in this research, including: 1) generating
synthetic data for household- and individual-level attributes and maintaining
the within-household composition structure; and 2) accounting for complex sample
design features (e.g., unequal probabilities of selection, stratification, and
clustering). The proposed research will break new ground by testing an
alternative method of disseminating public-use data suitable for small area
estimation while enhancing confidentiality protection. If the proposed methods
prove to be successful, then the current practice of requiring data users to
access small area data within restricted data center facilities may be avoided.
By releasing synthetic microdata with small area identifiers, users will be able
to perform customized small area analysis for levels of geography that are not
currently permitted without restricted data access. This innovation may help
meet the growing demand for small area estimates and increase the sheer volume
of small area estimates produced using microdata from statistical agencies.