* 0918491
* Conference:  Grant to Support the 5th International Conference on Steroids and the Nervous System  held in Torino, Italy 02-14-18, 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Cheryl Frye, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2010
* USD 14,000.00

Trainees are the future of science. Participation in conferences enhances
trainees' scientific knowledge, professional development, and networking.
Presenting at international conferences enables trainees' scientific
contributions to be recognized and readily incorporated into the scientific
community. Support will enable U.S. undergraduate students, graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty to present at the 5th International
Meeting on Steroids and the Nervous System, February 14-18, 2009 (Torino,
Italy). This conference is organized to update our knowledge on the
relationships between steroid hormones synthesized in different organs and the
nervous system, which spans areas from molecular biology to behavior. Topics to
be covered at the 5th meeting are diverse and include sex differences in, and
hormonal influences on, steroid receptor action in the brain; pain; vitamin D.
These and other topics are comprehensively covered in half-day symposia. There
is a Young Investigators Symposium, in which six trainees present their
research, poster sessions, and roundtable discussions focused on "Androgens and
androgen receptors", and "Neurosteroids and pregnancy". The conference committee
seeks to maximize interactions between investigators and trainees across many
levels of analyses in the study of steroid hormones. Funding from NSF will
partially support a professional development workshop, meet the professor lunch,
awards to recognize trainees, a young investigator symposium and other
educational programs at this venue. Together, the program affords a training
atmosphere that is vital to the success of new scholars and enhances their
professional development, beyond what can be accomplished at local, regional, or
national meetings. This is congruous with NSF's goals through supporting
scientifically meritorious endeavors and support of trainees in order to foster
their scientific and career development. With the support of NSF, the 5th
International Meeting on Steroids and the Nervous System enhances education,
recognizes research contributions of U.S. trainees, and includes them in the
scientific community by allowing for increased interaction with senior and
international investigators.