* 0918430
* Studies on ETR1 Ethylene Receptor Structure, Function and Output
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2014
* USD 451,985.00

The plant hormone ethylene regulates many critical processes in plants including
growth, fruit ripening, senescence, and shedding of leaves and petals. The first
step in this signaling pathway is the binding of ethylene to receptors. Plants
contain multiple ethylene receptor isoforms. The first to be isolated and the
most studied is the ETR1 receptor from the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana.
Despite over a decade of study, the mechanisms for how the ETR1 receptor works
are still unknown. The focus of this research project is to follow up on the
recent observation from the Binder laboratory that the ETR1 receptor has
multiple and unique functions. Loss of the ETR1 receptor isoform, but not other
isoforms, causes loss of ethylene-stimulated nutations (oscillatory bending) yet
results in more sensitive responses to ethylene for other traits such as
inhibition of growth. These apparently contradictory results represent the first
description of a non-overlapping role for an ethylene receptor. Therefore the PI
will study the role of the ETR1 receptor in a new context to uncover more
details about ethylene receptor function and output. To do this, the output of
the ETR1 receptor that leads to nutations versus other traits will be
delineated. There are three general aims to this project. The first is to
determine whether or not there are multiple signaling pathways downstream of
ETR1. The second aim is to ascertain which domains or sites on ETR1 are required
for nutations versus other characteristics. Both of these objectives will be
addressed using physiological analysis of mutants. The third aim is to determine
whether or not the paradoxical role of ETR1 is caused by changes in the
distribution of ETR1 within the growing plant. These studies will provide
details about how ethylene receptors function to regulate multiple traits. This
multifaceted project will transform our understanding about links between events
at the molecular level with those at the organ level to give a broader
understanding of how plants grow and develop.

Broader Impacts of the Project: This project will enhance research and
educational infrastructure by broadening opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to engage in research in the Binder lab. Dr. Binder also
encourages high school students to engage in lab research. He participates in
the University of Tennessee Pre-Collegiate Research Scholars Program that is a
collaboration between The University of Tennessee and the Science Academy at
Farragut High School in Knoxville. Currently one student is in the lab through
this program and another was recruited from another high school independently.
This project will enhance collaborations between the University of Tennessee and
high schools in the area. This is an important element in educating future
scientists. Student training will occur under the mentorship of Dr. Binder. In
addition, Dr. Binder will continue to visit local classrooms to talk about
biology research and will mentor for Planting Science (plantingscience.org), an
on-line program that provides a learning and research resource in the plant
sciences for K-16 students and teachers. All these activities will increase
awareness about scientific research and ensure interested students become our
future scientists. The increased understanding about ethylene signaling gained
from this project will have profound impacts on a variety of crop related
practices, most notably on post-harvest storage practices. This research will
provide more focus so that specific responses to ethylene can be manipulated
without compromising plant survival and vigor.