* 0918867
* Viral Microdissection of Central Circuitry Integrating Autonomic Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Alan Sved, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 470,914.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The nervous system exerts profound regulatory
influence over peripheral physiology and this control is essential for
homeostasis and coordinating adaptive changes across physiological systems. The
regulatory oversight exerted by the brain necessary for the integrated action
within and among these systems is considerable, and the brain meets this
challenge through regulation of the autonomic nervous system and neuroendocrine
control over the pituitary gland; the general goal of this research program is
to understand the organization of this regulation. During the past 25 years much
has been learned about how the brain controls the autonomic nervous system and
this project continues that work by addressing two fundamental questions that
remain unanswered. First, what is the nature of the brain circuitry that allows
both selective control of specific tissues and also global control involved in
activating all sympathetic outflows as occurs in response to certain stressors.
Second, what are the brain circuits that provide for the coordinated control of
sympathetic and parasympathetic outflows such that when sympathetic activity is
increased parasympathetic activity decreases. This project examines these issues
using novel neuroanatomical techniques relying on a genetically engineered virus
that gets passed among connected nerve cells thereby allowing the visualization
of neural circuits in rats. Understanding the nature of these neural circuits is
essential for understanding of physiological regulation in mammals. In addition
to addressing key questions pertaining to the organization of central autonomic
circuits, these studies will provide strong foundational support for this
methodology, which can be generally applied to complex neuroanatomical issues.
Also, undergraduate student researchers are incorporated into all aspects of
this research program, and this project provides an excellent opportunity to
immerse undergraduate students in basic neurobiological research. One component
of this is the development of a new course in autonomic neuroscience, in which
students will be given their own component of this project to develop, analyze,
and present their findings.