* 0918868
* RIG:  Disease as a driver of diversification in life history, pathogenicity and reproductive strategies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jorge Mena-Ali, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 173,000.00

Diseases are often viewed from an epidemiological perspective in which
interactions between pathogens and hosts are modeled as static. However, closely
related pathogens often show striking differences in virulence and transmission
between host species. There is a critical need to better understand disease
transmission across species, particularly as recent infections (e.g., avian
influenza, H1N1), have directly affected human populations. The main goal of
this project is to identify factors driving the evolution of contrasting disease
strategies among closely related pathogens, and to describe how the dynamics and
establishment of such strategies vary across their hosts. The project will focus
on the role that host life history and population structure can play on the rise
and invasion of new virulence strategies that allows a pathogen to make an
ecological shift and infect new host species. Smut disease (Microbotryum spp),
which infects several plant species of the Portulacaceae (the spring beauty)
will be used as the study system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this
project will be broadly relevant to the modeling of disease dynamics in other
host-parasite systems, including humans. This project will be conducted at a
primarily undergraduate institution and will provide opportunities for students
to receive research training in disease evolutionary ecology and epidemiology. A
new, senior-level course on the evolutionary biology of disease will be
developed, providing the next generation of scientists with important tools and
training in disease biology in a multidisciplinary setting.