* 0918848
* Evolutionary ecology of a multi-species mutualism at a regional scale
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 376,138.00

Mutualist interactions between species, in which each species benefits the
other, are vitally important in many ecosystems. Interactions involving more
than two mutualist partners are common, but rarely studied. The exchange of
services between mutualist partners varies in response to changing ecological
conditions. This work will examine a three-way mutualism among trees, ants, and
scale insects found in the tropical Americas. Cordia alliodora trees provide
living space for Azteca ants in their branches; the ants defend the tree's
leaves from herbivory by caterpillars and beetles; and scale insects live with
the ants, consume fluids from the tree and feed the ants their sugar-rich
excretion. The project will investigate three kinds of changes in the
interactions among these mutualist partners: as the tree grows, in response to
ecological differences in the quality of the habitat, and on the long-term
evolutionary timescale. First, the project will examine how the interaction of
scales and ants with the tree depends on the tree growth. New leaves produce
more nutrients for the tree, so additional protection by ants would be
beneficial. Are scale insects better fed near new leaves, and does this induce
more ant defense near new leaves? Second, the project will examine how the
mutualism depends on the amount of rainfall. Trees grow larger at sites with
higher rainfall, and trees at these sites may be less dependent on ants to
defend their leaves. Do trees in lower quality environments, with less rainfall,
benefit more from the ants, despite the scale insects that the ants tend? Third,
the project will examine differences among populations in the effectiveness of
ant defense. By comparing the genetic structure of ant populations from Mexico
to Argentina, it will be possible to distinguish how much the mutualism arises
from interbreeding or from local evolutionary change. The results of the project
will show how mutualistic interactions can respond to ecological change and how
this influences their evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train US
undergraduates, and graduate students, including individuals from under-
represented groups, and involve them in international collaboration. The project
strengthens international scientific infrastructure and collaboration and
includes outreach to K-12 teachers and students, as well as the general public,
in Mexico and Costa Rica. The project uses local residents from Mexico and Costa
Rica to help with field work and students from local Mexican and Costa Rican
universities participate in the research. The focal tree species, Cordia
alliodora, is an important forest tree of significant economic importance and
the work has important implications for management.