* 0918282
* Exploring the Fudamentals and Applications of Pickering Emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/03/2008,08/31/2010
* Lenore Dai, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 08/31/2010
* USD 156,142.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0625191&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Dai, Lenore&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: Texas tech University &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Exploring the Fundamentals and Applications of Pickering
Emulsions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emulsions are ubiquitous in natural and industrial
processes. Conventional emulsions use organic surfactants or polymers as
stabilizers. Although solid particle stabilized emulsions (Pickering emulsions)
are often encountered in the recovery of crude oil, oil separation and cleaning,
and wastewater treatment, the phenomenon is poorly understood and has been
neglected for nearly a century. This proposal focuses on integrating research
and education centering on exploring the fundamentals and applications of
Pickering emulsions. The self-assembly of solid microparticles in Pickering
emulsion will be investigated using a laser scanning confocal microscope. In
particular, the influence of bulk solid particle concentration, particle size,
particle wettability, and bulk viscosity on self-assembly will be studied. In
addition, Pickering emulsions will be used as a novel template to synthesize
composite-latexes through a one-step emulsion polymerization. In the proposed
work composite latexes of different sizes as well as composite-latexes
containing inorganic particles with variable size and functionality will be
synthesized. Pickering emulsions offer a new paradigm of colloidal science, and
the proposed work is anticipated to contribute significantly to a better
fundamental understanding of the formation of Pickering emulsions. The proposed
novel one-step Pickering emulsion polymerization adds a new dimension to
emulsion polymerization and the synthesis of composite-latex
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration between research and education will be
performed to meet the NSF's goals for two strategic outcomes: People and Ideas.
With a strong commitment to education, the PI will establish research-related
open-ended projects in existing courses, promote undergraduate and graduate
research, establish a new summer program to broaden the participation of under-
represented groups, participate in the Teacher Training Institute, and promote
technology transfer. Pickering emulsions involve an "innovative concept for
particle use"; the proposed work is anticipated to provide new opportunities for
widespread practical applications. Last, but not least, this project also
provides a unique opportunity to meet our nation's need for a cutting-edge
research with the potential of significant expansion in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;