* 0918083
* 11th International Workshop on the Modeling of Mantle Convection in Braunwald, Switzerland from June 29-July 2, 2009
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Allen McNamara, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin R. Phillips
* 05/31/2010
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal requests funds to provide partial travel and registration support
for junior US scientists to travel and attend the 11th International Workshop on
Modeling Mantle Convection and Lithospheric Dynamics. The workshop will be held
in Braunwald, Switzerland and will last 5 days from June 29 ? July 3, 2009. The
meeting is capped at ~125 participants, with ~20 US participants planning to
attend, including one invited keynote speaker, Magali Billen, from the
University of California Davis. Geodynamical research is a critical element in
geophysical research, providing a linkage between dynamical processes and
seismological, mineral physics, geochemical, and geodetic observations.
Geodynamical modeling provides a powerful tool to investigate heat transport,
thermal and chemical evolution, and the driving forces behind plate tectonic
processes. Computational and experimental techniques are continually advancing,
largely due to the sharing of technical information and ideas between
scientists. As in past years, this workshop aims to provide an environment in
which geodynamicists from around the globe can interact in a very technical,
specialist atmosphere compared to typical, much-broader international meetings.
Furthermore, several members from other disciplines are invited, and we will
explore how geodynamical modeling can be best integrated with other geophysical
disciplines to tackle big picture problems currently facing the community. The
primary goal of the workshop is to provide a forum for detailed discussion on
technical issues associated with geodynamical modeling and how it can be
integrated with other fields to address current scientific questions. It will
also serve to introduce junior scientists to latest advances in geodynamical
modeling and to foster interdisciplinary and international collaboration. Most
importantly, the workshop will provide a means for American graduate students
and postdocs to meet their European colleagues with the goal of fostering
international research collaborations and employment opportunities that will
last well into the future, motivating scientific discovery.