* 0918277
* Science Teachers Learning from Lesson Analysis (STeLLA) Professional Development Program: Scaling for Effectiveness
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Kathleen Roth, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2015
* USD 5,088,504.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Science Teachers Learning from Lesson Analysis (STeLLA)
professional development program is a one-year sequence of professional
development activities that engages teachers in content-specific analysis of
science teaching and learning using video cases of science lessons. In small,
facilitated learning teams, teachers examine specially created video cases and
video from their own classrooms. The video cases provide rich contexts for
deepening teachers' content and pedagogical content knowledge by providing a
shared context for evidence-based analysis. The STeLLA program is built on two
key research-based ideas for teacher learning that are examined in depth. The
first premise is that teachers can improve their science teaching effectiveness
by developing two lenses for analyzing teaching: the student thinking lens and
the science content storyline lens. These two lenses provide a conceptual
framework for the program. The second key idea is that teachers will deepen
their science content knowledge through the use of these two lenses. The current
project scale-ups STeLLA in two large, diverse Colorado school districts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to rigorously test the
effectiveness of the STeLLA professional development program when it is scaled
to(a) reach large numbers of teachers and students in a wider array of school
settings, (b) be delivered by facilitators who are not the program developers,
and (c) include random assignment to two treatment groups. The scaled-up version
of STeLLA (n~100 teachers) is compared with a science content deepening
professional development program of the same duration (n~100 teachers). Measures
of teachers' science content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, and
teaching practice documents STeLLA's impact on teachers. Students in 4th and 5th
grades (n~6,000) are given two sets of pre-post unit tests to provide evidence
of student learning, and 5th grade student data are also assessed through the
Colorado Science Assessment Program (CSAP), the state science assessment. The
project tests whether teacher variables (content knowledge, pedagogical content
knowledge, and teaching practice) mediate student learning, and explores other
factors that may explain variance in student achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a teacher professional development
model originally suggested by TIMSS video data on science classroom instruction.
The TIMSS international comparison of science lesson enactments showed that U.S.
teachers, in contrast with teachers from higher-achieving countries, emphasized
student participation in activities with little or no attention to using those
activities to develop science ideas or to engage students in thinking deeply
about the target learning goals The STeLLA project is designed to improve
elementary science instruction through the development of video cases of science
teaching that support teachers in focusing on science ideas, student
understanding of those ideas, and instructional responses that make clear links
between the lesson activities and the development of science ideas and
understanding. Guided by research results of previous studies, STeLLA focuses on
improving teachers' content knowledge and their practice through the use of
video. This concentrated, focused approach to professional development in
science education is substantially different from other approaches. It holds a
great deal of promise through its creative use of video technology, its clearly
articulated theory of action, and a thoughtful scale-up research design that
helps to illuminate the factors that can improve science teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;