* 0918756
* Phenological coupling and decoupling in a mutualism: Temperature effects on a bark beetle host and two fungal symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Powell, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 371,947.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutualisms are important drivers of
ecosystem structure and function but little is known about how their stability
may be influenced by changes in the environment. The mountain pine beetle (MPB,
Dendroctonus ponderosae) has two fungal symbionts (Ophiostoma montium,
Grosmannia clavigera) that provide rood resources that are critical for growth
and reproduction of the beetle. The two fungi possess different thermal growth
ranges, allowing the beetle to inhabit a broader range of habitats that support
at least one of the fungus species. However, warming due to climate change is
likely to decouple these mutualisms as the distribution of the fungi or the
beetle shift with changes in temperature. Temperature-driven developmental
models will be developed for the two fungi and then coupled to an existing MPB
model. Together, these models will be used to predict prevalence of the two
fungi with their beetle host under differing temperature regimes allowing a more
realistic prediction of how climate change will affect future distributions of
this important insect. In addition to generating information that will be useful
for forest resource managers, two graduate and three undergraduate students will
receive mathematically-driven biological training. Outreach to popular audiences
will be facilitated by communications graduate students at UM and USU. Lessons
on mathematical synchrony for secondary education outreach will be developed by
math education graduates and Utah secondary teachers, and project-based
educational modules will be developed and implemented at the post-secondary
level.