* 0918533
* The Scientific Thinker Project:  A study of teaching and learning concepts of evidence and nature of scientific evidence in elementary school
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Catherine Milne, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2011
* USD 448,840.00

New York University (NYU) will study children's developing epistemological
understandings of evidence (e.g., what is scientific evidence, how does it
differ from other kinds of evidence, why is it durable and tentative and what is
its role in scientific thinking). NYU seeks to understand the experiences and
conditions that facilitate elementary science students understandings of the
nature of scientific evidence. This will be accomplished through a design-based
research program.The project will take place over a 2-year period to study the
possibility of emphasizing more challenging forms of science and epistemological
forms of understanding than is typical for U.S. elementary school children. The
overarching research goal is: To determine whether elementary school children
can learn the nature of scientific evidence when provided a coherent, contiguous
course of study in one topic area (development and interactions) sustained over
time (a 2-year period; grades 3-4). Along with documenting how and to what
extent students can understand the nature of scientific evidence, identification
of what teaching-and-learning supports are necessary to achieve this and if not,
what are the barriers to learning.

The work will be conducted in elementary classroom and laboratory settings at an
elementary school in New York City with a diverse student population (grades
3-4). The design-based research model proposed for this study is one of
iterative cycles of intentional intervention and analysis. Through this approach
NYU will develop and test instructional tools (materials, interactions,
experiences) that shape and are shaped by an activity theory model for
development.