* 0918555
* Characterization of Frontostriatal Neural Codes of Executive Functions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Craig Berridge, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 458,998.00

Cognitive control of goal-directed behaviors likely involves the communication
and computations across millions of cells in a distributed manner across
multiple brain regions. To date, little is known regarding how the coordinated
activity of these neurons represents cognitive processes involved in goal-
directed behaviors, such as working memory, attention, and decision/response
selection (i.e. the population code). To address this lacuna, these
electrophysiological studies will record electrical signaling of neurons in rats
within two fundamentally important brain regions, the prelimbic region of the
frontal cortex (plPFC) and dorsal striatum (dSTR). A primary goal of this
project is to relate this neural activity to animal performance in spatial
delayed response tests of working memory using state-of-the-art computational
strategies. Importantly, these studies will examine the distributed
representations of task-related events within populations of plPFC and dSTR
neurons as well as for the PFC-dSTR circuit as a whole under varying conditions
associated with varying levels of performance (short delays, long delays, noise-
stress). These studies are anticipated to further elucidate the neuronal codes
and network circuitry that underlie higher cognitive function as measured in
this task. In addition to the scientific knowledge gained by these studies, this
project contains learning opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students,
and post-doctoral fellows. A key theme in this work is the need for cross-
disciplinary training in biology (neuroscience) and computational/engineering
sciences. As part of our ongoing commitment to provide these educational
opportunities, we have developed a neural analysis programming contest to 1)
introduce students to computational neuroscience approaches, 2) educate and
engage researchers outside the field of neuroscience in computational techniques
and issues in neuroscience, and 3) build an open community and forum discussion
for computational approaches in neuroscience.