* 0918141
* Collaborative Research:  Assessing Teachers' Pedagogical Design Capacity and Mathematics Curriculum Use
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Janine Remillard, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 589,927.00

The project focuses on revealing and assessing the capacities (knowledge,
abilities, ways of understanding and acting) needed by elementary teachers for
productive use of mathematics curriculum materials. The project is guided by the
assumption that well designed curriculum programs have the potential to
contribute to improvement in mathematics learning opportunities in K-12
classrooms. Minimal research has examined the kind of knowledge and capacities
necessary for teachers to use these resources productively. The project team
will undertake research to examine and identify these capacities (referred to as
pedagogical design capacity or PDC) and develop tools to assess them. A key
resource to be developed is a tool to assess elementary teachers' knowledge of
mathematics embedded in the representations and tasks in curriculum materials
(Curriculum Embedded Mathematics Assessment [CEMA].&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project includes interrelated development and research activities. The
development activities include developing the CEMA and developing and refining
tools for gathering data on teachers' use of curriculum materials. The research
activities involve employing these tools to gather and analyze data on teachers'
curriculum use and the capacities critical to it for the purposes of both
refining the tools and developing a conceptual model of PDC. These activities
are organized into 3 stages of work. The Instrument Design stage involves
designing and testing the CEMA and developing and adapting other tools to
collect data on teachers' curriculum use. The Instrument Pilot stage consists of
a pilot study of 10 teachers' use of 5 different curriculum programs using all
project instruments in order to refine them and develop an initial model of PDC.
The Instrument Implementation stage involves employing the refined instruments
to study 15 teachers' curriculum use in order to develop a conceptual model of
PDC, which will guide future research and professional development. In order to
consider the role that particular curriculum features and resources play in
influencing teachers' use of the materials, each of the 5 programs will be
analyzed during first stage.