* 0918968
* Statistical Analysis of Causal Mechanisms: Identification, Inference, and Sensitivity Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Kosuke Imai, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2012
* USD 97,574.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Causal inference is the central goal of
most social science research. In recent years, empirical researchers are
increasingly relying on experiments in order to improve the validity of causal
conclusions. At the same time, the methodological literature on causal inference
has flourished. Despite these two developments, experiments confront a
fundamental weakness since they only provide a black-box view of causality. The
randomization of treatment makes it possible for researchers to obtain a valid
estimate of treatment effect and thereby determine whether the treatment
causally affects the outcome. However, randomized experiments do not provide
much information about the underlying causal mechanisms that have brought about
such causal effects. They do not answer the important questions of how and why
the treatment causally affects the outcome. This is an important limitation
because the identification of causal mechanisms is often required to test the
validity of competing theories that offer different explanations about causal
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to overcome
this limitation by developing a set of new statistical methods for the analysis
of causal mechanisms. Specifically, the investigator focuses on causal mediation
analysis where causal mechanisms are examined by estimating direct and indirect
effects. In this framework, alternative causal explanations are investigated by
examining the roles of intermediate variables that lie in the causal path
between the treatment and outcome variables. The proposed research addresses
three important aspects of causal mediation analysis. First, identification
analysis establishes a minimum set of assumptions that are required to ascertain
direct and indirect effects and clarifies the exact degree to which the data are
informative about particular causal mechanisms. Second, the proposed development
of parametric and nonparametric estimators will make inference from the observed
data possible and allow researchers to compute uncertainty estimates as well as
point estimates. Third, sensitivity analysis is essential for causal mediation
analysis which requires a strong identifying assumption. The proposed methods
for sensitivity analysis will allow applied researchers to examine the
robustness of their empirical findings to the possible violation of the key
identifying assumption.&lt;br/&gt;