* 0918339
* A Digital Resource for Developing Mathematics Teachers' TPCK."
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Patton, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,687,955.00

Abstract

The project A Digital Resource for Developing Mathematics Teachers' TPCK is
developing and conducting initial tests of a highly innovative interactive
digital textbook to enhance middle grades mathematics teachers' understanding of
core concepts in proportionality and their understanding of ways that technology
can be used to enhance instruction. The project is led by professionals from SRI
International with substantial contributions by mathematics educators at San
Diego State University, San Francisco State University, the Singapore National
Institute of Education, and the Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST).

The digital textbook combines elements from SimCalc, Geometer's Sketchpad, and
data analysis software to teach core ideas of proportionality from algebraic,
geometric, and statistical perspectives. It also includes elements designed to
help teachers see the connections among those uses of proportional reasoning and
the ways that such tools can be used in classroom instruction with middle school
students.

The basic hypothesis of the project is that the proposed DynaBook will be a
highly effective tool for mathematics teacher preparation and professional
development and, ultimately, for classroom instruction of middle school
students. Pilot tests in laboratory, teacher preparation, and professional
development settings are providing initial empirical evidence about two core
research questions:

* In what ways does the DynaBook effectively support teacher learning of
pedagogical and technological content knowledge?

* Does the DynaBook foster teachers' understanding of the coherence and
connectedness of middle school mathematics?

This project explores very promising new forms of instructional materials with
potential to transform the ways that we think about educational texts and
teaching strategies.