* 0918535
* The Molecular Basis of Cadherin-Mediated Cell Adhesion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2014
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 1,018,445.00

The main objective of this project is to understand the molecular basis of
cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Cadherins are a family of molecules that
are located on the surfaces of many cells. When like cells come in contact they
adhere to one another whereas cells of different types tend to separate. This
crucial property, which allows different tissues in the body to form and to
separate from one another, can be traced to the molecular properties of
individual cadherin molecules. But different cadherin family members are all
similar to one another. What mechanisms allow small molecular differences to
mediate highly specific cellular behavior? To address these questions, binding
affinities of wild type and designed mutant cadherins will be carried out with
the goal of modifying their behavior in controlled ways. The experimental work
will be based on the use of theoretical methods that will elucidate the
molecular basis of cadherin binding. The second stage of the project will focus
on relating molecular to cellular properties. Once cells containing cadherins
begin to adhere, the cadherins on each cell tend to cluster together to form
junctions. Simulations will be carried out to clarify how this occurs and, based
on the results that are obtained, new theoretical methods to simulate cellular
processes will be developed. This research project represents an integrated
research effort involving both theory and experiment and spans quite diverse
disciplines including molecular modeling and simulation, structural biology,
solution biophysics, and cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
multi-scale and interdisciplinary in nature and the strategy that is being
developed can serve as a model for other such efforts that integrate
computational methods in cutting edge areas of modern biology. A particularly
important element of the project is the development of scientists with expertise
in both computational and experimental work including joint mentoring from
senior researchers with very different backgrounds. The training of women and
minority scientists is an integral component of the research. The lab
participates in the EXROP (Exceptional Research Opportunities) program organized
by HHMI and, in this context, hosts minority undergraduate students each summer.
Both undergraduate and graduate minority students trained in the lab have become
highly successful research scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly supported by the Biomolecular Systems and Cellular Systems Clusters in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;