* 0918730
* Collaborative Research: Ectomycorrhizal fungal diversity of the central Guiana Shield
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 260,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document diversity
of ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi, an important group of symbiotic fungi associated
with a broad range of host plants in the central Guiana Shield (Guyana) of
northeastern South America. Neotropical forests are known to harbor high levels
of biodiversity in plants and animals, yet little or nothing is known about the
diversity of fungi from these forests. The investigator team will combine
traditional fungal sporocarp (mushroom) surveys with molecular methods that
detect mycorrhizal fungi using DNA sequences to provide the first-ever complete
documentation of EM fungal diversity from neotropical forests. Specific aims
include development of a web-accessible database with documentation of EM fungal
diversity in lowland neotropical forests, including the identities of key plant
and fungal species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also provide
taxonomic, molecular biology, and tropical biodiversity research training for
over 10 Guyanese and US postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students, and
also will support training of several indigenous parataxonomists in Guyana. By
providing basic information on fungal biodiversity and unique EM-dominated
habitats, this project will also help to inform conservation efforts in Guyana,
and provide detailed information about native neotropical EM fungi and plants
useful for reforestation of degraded habitats in the neotropics.