* 0918418
* International Seminar on Low-Dimensional Homotopy Theory and Combinatorial Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* F Rudolf Beyl, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 05/31/2010
* USD 20,300.00

Topologists will meet for an intensive international workshop at Wallowa Lake
Lodge in Oregon. The focus of this meeting will be ongoing work on unsolved
problems in low-dimensional homotopy theory and combinatorial group theory.
These include Whitehead's Asphericity Conjecture, the Andrews-Curtis Conjecture,
Wall's Domination Problem in dimension two, the relation gap problem, and the
Eilenberg-Ganea Conjecture. They highlight the very delicate interplay of
topology and group theory in low-dimensional homotopy theory and also involve
other branches of mathematics like geometry, combinatorics, and algebraic
K-theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is in succession to similar
conferences held in Italy, the Pacific Northwest, and Russia. It aims to
maintain needed connections between American and international topologists. The
problems to be addressed are geometric in nature, challenging the basic human
conception of what three-dimensional space is or can be thought to be.
Improvements in the understanding of the topics and problems considered at the
seminar may open new avenues of thinking and modelling in topology and
eventually in the natural sciences. The workshop format emphasizes detailed
discussion of ideas in progress and collaboration of the participants, from
graduate students to early-career researchers to senior experts.