* 0918109
* Coherent Implementation of Mathematics Instructional Materials: A Study of the Variations and Effects of District Supports for Implementation
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2016
* June Mark, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,700,814.00

This project seeks to understand the district- and school-level supports needed
to implement comprehensive elementary mathematics instructional materials. It
explores through a four-year, longitudinal, mixed methods study the
implementation of Everyday Mathematics or Investigations in Number, Data, and
Space in all of Grades 1-5 in ten to 12 school districts in two to four states.
The project investigates and operationalizes the coherence of implementation
strategies from the district perspective; considers the mediating role of
school-based supports and level of use of the materials; and examines the
connection between coherent implementation and student outcomes as measured on
state assessments in elementary mathematics. Data are gathered through
interviews and surveys of district-level administrators principals, and
elementary teachers, and from annual state tests of student achievement in
mathematics.

Some of the research questions guiding this work are: What are the dimensions of
district-level coherence of implementation of instructional materials? What are
the dimensions of school-level support for implementation of instructional
materials? How does district-level coherence relate to changes in school-level
student scores at a single point in time and over time? What factors moderate
the relationship between district-level coherence and student outcomes (i.e.,
percentage of free or reduced-price lunch, size of district)? Does school-level
support for implementation and/or school-level use mediate the relationship
between district-level coherence and student outcomes? How does school-level
support of implementation relate to changes in school-level student scores, at a
single point in time and over time? What factors moderate the relationship
between school-level support of implementation and student outcomes (i.e.,
percentage of free or reduced-price lunch, size of school)? Does school-level
use mediate the relationship between school-level support of implementation and
student outcomes?

Many districts across the country have centered their recent mathematics
improvement efforts on the use of instructional materials aligned to state
standards, often in response to increased accountability for student outcomes.
Supporting this movement is the emergence of well-designed instructional
materials, including programs such as Everyday Mathematics and Investigations.
The promise of such materials is great, but their impact is mediated by how well
they are used by teachers in their classrooms. Instructional materials do not
stand alone: they must be carefully aligned with elements of practice and policy
at the district and school level to provide teachers with the guidance needed to
enact the materials' vision for classroom practice. School districts vary in the
degree to which they provide these supports. This study should make a major
contribution to understanding what organizations must do realize the promise of
such materials, uncovering conditions crucial to success. Results can be of
major interest to educators, school administrators and policymakers across the
U.S. as they plan, fund and expend efforts to use new instructional materials.
It should shed light on factors affecting the scale-up of such materials at
large scale.