* 0918821
* Gene Imprinting Networks in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Robert Fischer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2012
* USD 636,610.00

Alleles of imprinted genes are expressed differently depending on whether they
are inherited from the male or female parent. Imprinting regulates a number of
genes essential for normal development in mammals and flowering plants
(angiosperms). In mammals, imprinted genes contribute to the control of fetal
growth and placental development. The endosperm, one of the products of
angiosperm double fertilization, is an important site of imprinting in plants.
The endosperm has functions analogous to the placenta and supports seed growth
and development. Failure to imprint certain genes results in embryo abortion and
seed death. Genetic and molecular studies have shown that epigenetic regulation,
particularly parent-specific gene expression (genomic imprinting), plays an
essential role in endosperm development, influencing seed size and quality. The
model plant Arabidopsis is being used to study how gene imprinting is
epigenetically regulated. Epigenetic information resides in chromatin, DNA and
its associated proteins, which exists in an open conformation with the genes
accessible to transcription factors or in a compacted conformation that silences
genes. Two interdependent processes regulate chromatin conformation: Polycomb
group proteins methylate histone proteins around which the DNA is wrapped, and
the DME DNA glycosylase demethylates DNA. In Arabidopsis, the DME DNA
demethylase and Polycomb group proteins (MEA, FIS2) are the primary regulators
of gene imprinting. However, very few sites of action of these proteins, and
only a handful of imprinted genes, have been identified. This project will
implement highly efficient genomic technologies to systematically elucidate the
network of imprinted genes in Arabidopsis endosperm. Specifically, the research
will identify all imprinted genes, distinguish all imprinted genes demethylated
by DME, define imprinted genes regulated by Polycomb group proteins, and
functionally analyze imprinted genes. These studies will lead to a comprehensive
understanding of the regulation and function of gene imprinting in angiosperms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will advance understanding
of endosperm, a major component of crop seeds and the site of synthesis and
storage of protein, starch, and lipid nutrients that comprise half of the world
food supply. Imprinted genes influence seed yield by controlling resource
allocation to the endosperm. Understanding this important process will enable
new technologies that increase crop yield and food production to feed a growing
population and to address the problem of hunger in our society. Because this
research combines genetics with genomics and computational analysis, the
students who participate will receive invaluable cross-disciplinary training
that will enable them to address future questions that require a multifaceted
approach. Moreover, the teaching of science to undergraduates will be integrated
into the research activities through collaboration with programs designed to
promote the success of undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in
the biological sciences and by incorporating research results and state-of-the-
art genomic and computational approaches into plant biology lecture and
laboratory classes.