* 0918904
* Collaborative research: Defining ecosystem heterotrophic response to nutrient concentrations and ratios
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2014
* Jonathan Benstead, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 12/31/2014
* USD 231,464.00

Streams and rivers are important sites of global carbon processing. Carbon in
the form of dead leaves and wood (detritus) from the land enters streams and is
colonized by bacteria and fungi (heterotrophic microorganisms). This complex of
microorganisms and detrital carbon fuels food webs that support fish, amphibians
and other consumers. Detrital carbon is consumed by organisms but is also
converted to carbon dioxide by bacteria and fungi. Problematic to this important
detritus-fuelled pathway is that human-derived nutrient inputs (nitrogen and
phosphorus) stimulate microbially-driven release of carbon dioxide and
decomposition of detritus, resulting in less available carbon for important
ecosystem functions. In this study, laboratory incubations, streamside channels
and whole-stream nutrient additions will be used to determine the concentrations
and ratios of nitrogen and phosphorus that elicit such ecosystem changes.
Knowledge of these threshold concentrations and ratios can guide management of
aquatic ecosystems to maintain water quality for wildlife conservation and human
utilization. Study findings can aid predictions of how excess nutrients affect
the fate of detrital carbon in streams, which is relevant to global carbon
budgets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excess nutrient loading is the primary source of
impairment to more than half of the freshwater and coastal ecosystems in the
U.S. While hundreds of scientific studies have assessed autotrophic (e.g. algal)
response to nutrient loading, few have tested nutrient effects on detritus,
heterotrophic microorganisms and the larger aquatic organisms they support. The
proposed research will advance our understanding of how aquatic ecosystems are
affected by nutrients via detritus-fuelled pathways that potentially lead to
carbon loss, a perspective that is currently lacking in management decisions
related to nutrient enrichment. This project will provide critical research
support to four early-career investigators, as well as experience and training
for undergraduate and graduate students at three institutions in the
southeastern U.S. The project will include public and K-12 educational
components that will focus on how excess nutrients affect aquatic food webs and
water quality.