* 0918457
* Collaborative Research:  Impacts of urbanization on nitrogen biogeochemistry in xeric ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2014
* Stevan Earl, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 294,769.00

Urbanization dramatically modifies the movement and transformations of nitrogen
(N) compounds in semi-arid ecosystems. In particular, nitrate contamination of
drinking water is a growing concern in urban areas, especially in arid and semi-
arid environments, where urban runoff is actively-managed to recharge
groundwater and augment water supplies. Water managers and urban planners,
however, lack information on what ecosystem characteristics are most important
in controlling the quality of this recharged water, especially its nitrate
concentrations. This research will quantify how sources, transport, and fate of
nitrate in storm runoff vary with the density and type of urban land use in
Tucson and Phoenix (CAP LTER), Arizona watersheds. Seasonal patterns of nitrate
export will be characterized, and new isotopic tracer techniques will be used to
understand nitrate sources and mechanisms controlling nitrogen transformations
along semi-arid urbanization gradients. These mechanisms will be modeled and
integrated into interactive visualization products that will aid in decision-
making regarding urban development patterns and storm water management
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help identify sources of
surface water and groundwater nitrate contamination in arid and semi-arid
deserts. Water is precious in these regions, yet increasing incidences of
contamination of ground and surface waters threaten this vital resource. This
research coordinates local (Tucson, Phoenix), state (Arizona), and federal
(National Atmospheric Deposition Program/Environmental Protection Agency)
resources to focus on a problem that has local, regional and global
implications. The project will engage citizen-scientist volunteers, train
graduate and undergraduate students in policy-relevant research, foster
interactions between scientists and decision makers, and develop transferable
visualization tools.&lt;br/&gt;