* 0918998
* REVSYS: Systematics and Evolution of the "Pacific Rim Clade" of Sphagnum section Subsecunda
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2014
* USD 627,508.00

This proposal funds research on the taxonomy and diversification of the moss
genus Sphagnum, also known as peat mosses. The research focuses on a lineage of
peat mosses that occur primarily in the "Pacific Rim" region from California
north to Alaska and south to Japan and China, and includes about 15-20 species.
The work uses data from DNA sequences and highly variable microsatellite genes
to determine how many species there are and how to tell them apart. A series of
hypotheses are to be addressed, clarifying exactly where individual species
grow, how the plants reproduce, and the frequency and efficacy of sexual and
asexual reproduction. One outcome will be a thorough taxonomic treatment for the
Pacific Rim species of Sphagnum, with illustrations and other resources to
permit accurate identifications of species. The proposal also funds workshops on
identification of Sphagnum species, targeting wetland ecologists doing
vegetation surveys and amateur scientists, many of whom work for environmental
NGOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sphagnum-dominated peatlands have profound effects on
global climate, regional hydrology, and the occurrence of many other organisms,
plant, animal, and microbial. Ecosystem function (productivity, decomposition,
movement of minerals and nutrients) is determined by the suite of species that
occur there, and recent biogeochemical studies indicate that different Sphagnum
species have significantly different chemistries and other properties that
affect peatland function. For that reason, clear species circumscriptions are
critical to understanding their ecological impacts. This research uses modern
molecular approaches, coupled with field and specimen-based research, to provide
a sound taxonomic treatment essential for evaluating the role of peat mosses in
the global biosphere.