* 0918029
* Conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology to be held in Saxton's River, Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Emily Wiley, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2010
* USD 10,475.00

This award will support the Fourteenth International Meeting on Ciliate
Molecular Biology, to be held as a FASEB Summer Research Conference in Saxtons
River, Vermont, from July 19-24, 2009. The ciliates are a diverse group of
unicellular organisms found in many environments throughout the world. For many
years, they have served as model organisms for the study of those mechanisms of
cellular function and inheritance that are shared among eukaryotic (non-
bacterial) species. Key discoveries made with ciliates include RNA enzymes, the
structure of telomeres (the ends of chromosomes), and the first identified
function of histone modification in controlling gene activity. The conference is
the major international venue for ciliate scientists to present their latest
research findings on these topics, as well as on genomics, evolution, cell
development, motility, and signaling. Platform and poster sessions, along with
workshops on current and emerging topics of particular interest, will be
included. Between 120 and 150 researchers are expected to attend, most coming
from within the United States, but some traveling from countries around the
world.&lt;br/&gt; The ciliate research community is known for its highly
collaborative nature and for its commitment to the career development of young
investigators. As at past conferences, there will be a workshop devoted to the
use of ciliates as tools in undergraduate classrooms and independent research
environments. For the first time, this workshop will be held in concert with a
platform session devoted exclusively to undergraduates' presentation of their
own research results. To promote the fruitful exchange of ideas on career and
research development among attendees at various career levels, discussions will
be held on various themes (suggested by registrants) at special "topic tables"
at selected meals. The ciliate scientific community strongly encourages the
participation of young scientists, women, and minorities in the conference
program. The funding obtained from the NSF will be used solely to support
attendance by graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
beginning investigators.