* 0918073
* RUI: Diversification of New World Silversides (Atherinopsidae: Tribe Menidiini)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Kyle Piller, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2013
* USD 172,500.00

Explaining why particular taxonomic groups are more diverse than others, and why
some appear to exhibit explosive adaptive radiations during evolutionary
history, has long been a goal of evolutionary biologists. The silverside fish
genus Chirostoma (Atherinopsidae: Tribe Menidiini), is a highly diverse group
restricted to the Mesa Central of Mexico. Chirostoma has previously been
referred to as a classic example of an adaptive radiation, however this has not
be adequately tested with modern methods. The objective of this
multidisciplinary project is to use DNA sequence data to investigate the
evolutionary relationships among the genera and species within the Tribe
Menidiini, and to gather ecological and morphological data to specifically
address the tempo and mode of diversification within
Chirostoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This field and lab study will train a new
generation of students in a variety of scientific disciplines, including
molecular systematics and geometric morphometrics. Collaboration, education, and
student training are key components of the project. Chirostoma represents one of
the most economically and culturally important groups of fishes in Mexico, and
the results of this study will be of interest to biologists and others. A
website and a photographic key to the Menidiine silversides of Mexico will be
developed, and will be particularly useful to scientists, resource managers, and
government agencies interested in fish conservation in Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;