* 0918617
* Climate-change Impacts on Terrestrial Ecosystems: The Intersection of Restoration, Invasives, and Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Field, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,229,470.00

This is a project on managing ecosystems to protect or enhance key ecosystem
services. It focuses on the intersection between climate change and restoration.
The central hypothesis is that climate change can facilitate or impede
restoration of California grassland ecosystems to native perennial plants, with
the direction of the effect depending on soil fertility and the prevalence of
wildfire. Building on a legacy of ten years of global-change manipulations
(e.g., enhanced nitrogen deposition, warming, elevated carbon dioxide and
altered precipitation) at Jasper Ridge, the research will explore approaches for
enhancing dominance by the native plants and increasing resistance to invasion
by non-native plant species. The research involves a series of field-based
manipulative experiments that will explore the role of climate change in
facilitating or retarding the replacement of non-native plants with native
perennial grassland. It will also address the role of wildfire in this
restoration and assess the susceptibility to invasion of restored and unrestored
grassland, all within the context of a wide range of simulated climate
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts component of the research has
three parts. Part one involves enhancing the visibility and highlighting the
policy relevance of manipulative experiments in the reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (where the PI is co-chair of Working
Group 2 on impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability). Part two is based on
transforming the results of the research into products and presentations
designed to be useful to ecosystem managers. Part three adds a global climate
component to an award-winning Jasper Ridge program focused on engaging sixth-
grade students in environmental studies.