* 0918969
* Pathogen adaptation to specific host genotypes:  Implications for host-pathogen coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2014
* Wayne Potts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2014
* USD 985,070.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammals, including humans, have extremely high
genetic diversity among the genes involved in the immune system. The resulting
differences among individuals are thought to help reduce the severity of
infectious diseases affecting a population. But the mechanisms whereby this
occurs are not fully known. One leading explanation is that hosts and pathogens
are constantly evolving to outmaneuver each other in a so-called molecular arms
race. A host population that lacks sufficient genetic variation would tend to
lose this race because it would be more susceptible to the evolution of virulent
pathogens. This study tests predictions of this hypothesis by allowing two
viruses to adapt to specific host strains over many generations, and testing
whether the resulting pathogens are more virulent and why.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include improved
understanding of pathogen-caused health problems for humans, agricultural
species and wildlife, the evolution of emerging diseases including bioterrorism
agents, and reducing the impact of pathogens on endangered species. Climate
change and other human activities will cause an estimated Â¼ of earth's
vertebrate species to become endangered during the next 20 years. These
endangered species suffer reduced genetic diversity and the dismal 11% success
rate for their reintroduction may be due in part to rapid evolution of
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project for the first time directly tests
this hypothesis in vertebrates and provides the groundwork for identifying
critical host genetic diversity needed to slow the evolution of virulent
pathogens. This project also provides training and employment for numerous
students in an interdisciplinary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;