* 0918934
* UV-light regulation of skin endocrine functions:  Proopiomelanocortin system
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrzej Slominski, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,424.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultraviolet radiation (UVR) spectrum
of solar light represents a major environmental stressor, which is absorbed
predominantly by the skin. This project will test the hypothesis that skin
contains a sophisticated stress response system that is activated by UVR and
regulates body homeostasis through endocrine effects or through activation of
the brain via sensory nerve endings. Using mice as a model and techniques of
photobiology, endocrinology, molecular biology, biochemistry and pathology, the
transformation of UVR energy into neuro-hormonal responses at the local (skin)
and global (entire organism) levels will be studied. This research will reveal
how the body of vertebrates responds to UVR stimuli and how the brain receives
and further transmits information encoded by the electromagnetic energy of UVR
absorbed by the skin. A broad biological impact will be represented by answering
a fundamental biological question on the organization of stress response to the
UVR fraction of solar light and its conservation at both peripheral (skin) and
central (brain and endocrine system) levels. This will form a basis for further
analyses on the evolution of the stress response system and the role of solar
radiation in this process. This research will involve high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as post-docs, and a special
emphasis will be placed on recruiting students from groups underrepresented in
science. &lt;br/&gt;