* 0918175
* Student Travel Assistance for the Symposium of 35 Years of Chemical Sensors in 215th ECS. To be held May 25-27, 2009 in San Francisco.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2009,07/31/2009
* Richard Brown, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 6,000.00

PI: Richard B. Brown&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Utah
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0918175&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Conference symposium support is requested for the 215th Electrochemical Society
Symposium titled ?35 Years of Chemical Sensors? to be held in San Francisco May
25-27, 2009. The symposium, organized to bring together scientists and engineers
focused on electronic, magnetic and photonic devices which are able to transduce
chemical concentrations for a wide variety of applications. The Symposium is
intended to stimulate research in the field, to promote interest in the
development of such sensors among students, and to bring more researchers to the
field. The requested support will be used to provide travel stipends for
undergraduate and graduate students and junior faculty who have papers being
presented at the conference. This symposium will focus on all aspects of
chemical sensor technology based-on electronic, magnetic and photonic devices
and organic semiconductors. The Symposium will include an array of related
topics ranging from materials to applications: sensing materials, micro/nano-
machining, fabrication processes, packaging, and the application of these
structures and processes to the miniaturization of chemical sensors, biosensors,
higher order sensing arrays, and chemical analysis. The overall vision of the
conference is to stimulate research in the area by bringing together researchers
working in various aspects of sensor technology. All of the travel support will
be given to US citizens, permanent residents and US nationals, with
consideration to demographic and geographic diversity. The chemical sensor field
will require an influx of new people in order to have sufficient human resources
for development and application of the technology to critical applications such
as energy, national security, health care, and food and water safety. The
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, enabled through the
requested support, will help to foster the integration of young participants
into this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impact of the
proposed program will involve bringing students from underrepresented groups
into this exciting, interdisciplinary area. Applying electrical, optical and
magnetic technologies to sensors appeals to students because of the obvious good
that can be done for humanity through sensing both inside the body, and in the
environment in which we live. An excellent way to draw new researchers into the
sensing area is to involve graduate and undergraduate students in a technical
conference run by a major professional society. In addition to technical
exposure, this experience will provide the opportunity to interact with a broad
range of researchers involved in this field. The requested funding will enable
broader student participation in the conference. If the allocated funds are not
all needed to support the travel of students presenting papers, the remaining
funds will be used preferentially to support the travel of underrepresented
students who are working with sensor groups. The conference will publish
proceedings, to be distributed. The proceedings will provide an opportunity for
student authors to publish their current work, as well as providing a technical
archive for the presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;