* 0918258
* Phylloquinone Biosynthesis in Plants:   Enzyme Discovery and Pathway Flux Control
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Gilles Basset, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 440,356.00

Scientific merit: Phylloquinone (vitamin K1) is a fat-soluble molecule that
plays a crucial role as electron carrier in photosynthesis. It is synthesized
exclusively by plants and certain bacteria. Humans require it as a dietary
supply for blood coagulation and for calcium fixation in bones. Although the
biosynthesis of phylloquinone has been tacitly assumed to have been defined for
more than a decade, the comparative analysis of bacterial and plant genomes
reveals that several enzymes involved in phylloquinone biosynthesis are missing.
Moreover, plants have evolved an extraordinary metabolic architecture to
synthesize this vitamin, including multiple events of gene fusion, highly
diverged enzymes, and likely, a separated compartmentalization in chloroplasts
and peroxisomes. Plant phylloquinone biosynthesis is also connected via shared
intermediates to that of tocopherols (vitamin E), chlorophylls, and salicylate
(a plant hormone). Combining comparative genomics, reverse genetics, metabolic
profiling, metabolic engineering, and protein biochemistry, this project aims to
characterize the missing key steps of phylloquinone biosynthesis, and to
establish how plants regulate the flux splits between this pathway and other
metabolic branches.

Broader impacts: As plant-based foods represent the main source of dietary
vitamin K for humans, this project will raise the awareness of phylloquinone and
other plant micronutrient (vitamins, minerals, antioxidants) nutrition for
children of the Nebraska 4-H program (Head, Hands, Heart, and Health). For that,
the project will develop two presentations and a workshop during which children
of middle-school age will learn to calculate how much of each vitamin they get
per day during their meals at home and at school, and how these values compare
to the recommended dietary intakes. This project will also contribute to the
training of two undergraduate research assistants, two PhD students, and one
postdoctoral associate in the laboratory of the PI.