* 0918986
* Suppression of rhizobial reproduction by legumes:  Implications for mutualism
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Robert Ford Denison, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2012
* USD 262,215.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rhizobia are bacteria that can live in
soil, but also symbiotically, inside root nodules on plants like soybean or
alfalfa. Although many rhizobia provide their host plants with nitrogen, saving
farmers billions in fertilizer costs, less beneficial strains cause problems in
some areas. Some hosts, including alfalfa and pea, make rhizobia swell up as
they start to provide nitrogen. Unlike the nonswollen rhizobia from soybean or
cowpea nodules, swollen rhizobia apparently lose the ability to reproduce, but
does rhizobial swelling somehow benefit the plant? To find out, the
investigators will map this trait on the family tree for crops and wild plants
that host rhizobia, to see if causing swelling evolved more than once,
suggesting a positive benefit to the plants. Three dual-host rhizobia (plus
mutants that differ in their ability to hoard resources) will be used to measure
effects of rhizobial swelling on costs and benefits to the plants. Plant
defenses against rhizobia that provide little or no nitrogen, already
demonstrated in soybean, will be tested in species that impose bacterial
swelling. This research will increase understanding of a symbiosis that supplies
nitrogen to agricultural and natural ecosystems, with implications for other
important symbioses. Results could guide the development of crops that
selectively enrich soils with the best rhizobia, decreasing future fertilizer
requirements. Educational opportunities will be provided for undergraduates, at
least one graduate student, and a postdoctoral researcher. Two female high
school students have already won trips to the International Science Fair for
research done in the principal investigator's laboratory, where such mentoring
will continue to be a priority.