* 0918176
* Conference: FIFTH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON THE BIOLOGY OF VERTEBRATE SEX DETERMINATION (CONFERENCE/SCIENTIFIC MEETING)April 20-24, 2009 in Kona, Hawaii
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2010
* Richard Behringer, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Heinz De Couet
* 03/31/2010
* USD 5,600.00

This scientific meeting, held once every three years, brings together the entire
international community of scientists and their trainees, researching the
molecular, genetic, and environmental mechanisms of how males and females are
formed (sex determination) in diverse vertebrate animals, including amphibians,
fish, birds, reptiles, and mammals. Some of these species rely on environmental
sex determination, such as visual or population cues, or temperature of egg
incubation. In contrast, most mammals use a genetic sex-determining system that
depends on the Y chromosome-linked gene Sry. Despite this species diversity,
many of the same genetic pathways for male and female formation are involved.
However, the mechanisms of testis and ovary formation are proving to be highly
diverged, providing exciting insights into the evolution of male and female
pathways. As it is nearly impossible to keep up with the advances made in so
many diverse animal systems, the objective of this meeting is to exchange
information, using a comparative approach between vertebrate species to advance
our understanding of the process of sex determination for the formation of males
and females. This meeting emphasizes the participation of junior scientists,
including assistant professors, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students, an
essential aspect of their scientific training. Indeed, at the last meeting in
2006, ~80% of the participants who gave talks or presented posters were junior
scientists. In addition, ~35% of the invited speakers at the current meeting are
women. Thus, the incorporation of significant numbers of junior scientists and
women into this meeting will continue. Another important objective will be to
increase the participation of underrepresented minorities. Knowledge of sex-
determining mechanisms in diverse vertebrate species provides important insights
into how nature balances sex ratios in animal populations.