* 0918526
* MRI: Acquisition of Tunable Laser Systems for Laser Induced Fluorescence in Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Amy Keesee, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 08/31/2012
* USD 265,294.00

Laser-induced-fluorescence (LIF) provides a means of non-perturbatively
determining the complete ion or neutral atom velocity distribution (VDF)
function in a plasma along any direction with high spatial and temporal
resolution. The upgrade of the laser systems currently in use will significantly
enhance the present experimental capabilities of the laboratory. The new
instrumentation includes a solid-state-laser pumped ring dye laser for Ar II and
Xe II LIF and a portable, tunable, high-power diode laser in a Master Oscillator
Power Amplifier (MOPA) configuration for Ar II, He I, and Ar I LIF. These new
laser components will enhance four ongoing experimental projects, which include:
a study of the effects of multi-ion species plasmas on double layer formation in
the expansion region of compact helicon source plasma; an investigation of ion
heating and acceleration arising from the damping of magnetohydrodynamic waves
thought to play important roles in the heating and acceleration of the solar
corona; a collaboration with the University of Troms√∏ that will examine the role
of sheared flows in multi-species plasmas, and a collaboration with Auburn
University that will investigate the bulk flow of ions while simultaneously
measuring the dust velocity field in a complex, i.e., dusty, plasma. In addition
to these ongoing collaborations, this group is actively pursuing additional LIF-
based collaborations involving plasma thrusters, studies of ion heating during
magnetic reconnection, and plasma-assisted reforming of coal into methane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the impact that the proposed instrumentation will
have on ongoing scientific studies, the WVU physics program attracts
collaborators from within and outside the United States; over 30 collaborators
have participated in either training or collaborative LIF experiments in the
PI's laboratory over the past ten years. This group has a record of
disseminating their LIF advances through publications, collaborative experiments
involving the portable LIF system, and hands-on training of visiting scientists
and students from the United States and abroad. In addition, the laboratory
provides internal training and education opportunities for graduate students,
undergraduates, and postdoctoral researchers. The proposed activities will
improve the percentage of women and other underrepresented groups, such as first
generation college students, obtaining advanced degrees in physics; increase
involvement of undergraduates in cutting-edge scientific research; enhance the
mentoring of postdoctoral researchers in the development and leadership of
national and international collaborations; help to attract new minority physics
faculty, and support the plasma physics investigations of six current external
users through their use of the LIF system at WVU and the use of the portable LIF
system at their home institutions