* 0918807
* RIG:  Structural Biology of the Soil Bacterium M. xanthus Development and Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Ernesto Fuentes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Roberts
* 07/31/2012
* USD 175,000.00

Intellectual merit. The soil bacterium Myxococcus xanthus is a model organism
for studying prokaryotic chemosensory signal transduction. This bacterium
contains eight chemosensory systems that regulate developmental gene expression,
motility, and biofilm formation. The focus of this project is to elucidate the
regulatory mechanisms of signal transduction in the Che3 and Frz chemosensory
systems, which are critical for spore development and motility, respectively.
The Che3 system regulates transcription of important developmental genes in
response to outer membrane stress. This regulation is derived through the
recently identified regulatory protein, CrdC (chemosensory regulator of
development protein C). This investigator's preliminary findings indicate that
CrdC modulates downstream signaling and sporulation by forming a regulatory
complex with CheW3. Solution NMR methods will be used to determine the
structures of CheW3 and CrdC and define the residues that mediate their
interaction. These structures will provide the foundation for understanding the
biochemical and structural features required for Che3 chemosensory regulation.
The Frz chemosensory system and the protein MglA are critical regulators of
motility. The Frz system is capable of activating MglA by an unknown mechanism.
Activated MglA, in turn, is critical for regulating motility through the
interaction with downstream effector proteins. The MglA protein has homology to
eukaryotic GTPases, but its ability to bind and hydrolyze guanine nucleotides
has not been determined. This study will use biochemical and biophysical
approaches to define the nucleotide-binding properties of MglA and the
requirements for interacting with downstream signaling effectors. The results
from these fundamental studies will provide key structural and biophysical
insights into the mechanism of Che3 and Frz chemosensory regulation and the
framework for future research towards developing a comprehensive structural and
mechanistic picture of chemosensory regulation in M. xanthus. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Exciting students about science and biochemical
research is critical for fostering science-based careers. The principal
investigator will engage students early in their undergraduate career in two
ways. First, he will design and implement a new laboratory section for the
existing experimental Biochemistry course that features biophysical experiments.
This novel section will complement the existing didactic courses in biophysics
and expose undergraduate students to quantitative methods and biophysical
techniques. Second, he will initiate a new program to provide summer research
opportunities to under-represented minority students. This program will be
funded by the RIG grant and the Department of Biochemistry. Collectively, these
strategies will help provide the necessary academic and research background
necessary to attract and retain talented undergraduate students in the sciences.