* 0918697
* Persistent, Enthusiastic, Relentless: Study of Induction Science Teachers (PERSIST)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Marilyn Thompson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Gibbs
* 09/30/2012
* USD 895,883.00

This project examines the effect of four different types of induction programs
on 100 5th year teachers of secondary science. The teachers involved in the
study have participated in a previous study during their first three years of
teaching. &lt;br/&gt;The four types of induction programs are described as
follows.&lt;br/&gt;1. General induction programs offered by school
districts/regional centers,&lt;br/&gt;2. Science-specific e-mentoring programs
offered by higher education or science organizations,&lt;br/&gt;3. Science-
specific programs offered by higher education institutions, and&lt;br/&gt;4.
Intern programs that allow teachers to earn their teaching credential while they
complete their first year of teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Luft's research
concentrates on providing the details that give insights into why newly
qualified science teachers are leaving or persisting in the profession and how
induction programs affect their beliefs and practices. The research questions
for this study are: &lt;br/&gt;1. Do induction programs make a difference in the
retention of secondary science teachers during their fourth and fifth
year?&lt;br/&gt;2. What characterizations can be made about teachers who
persist, their performance, and the assistance they receive?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do
beginning science teachers develop over their first five years? How do induction
programs contribute to this development?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection
includes 8 interviews and 2 classroom observations of each teacher. The CETP-COP
and Oregon Teacher Observation Protocol are used for classroom observations.
Quantitative data analysis utilizes ANOVAs and HLM, to be followed by a
qualitative analysis exploring the findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research
team is based at Arizona State University and includes Dr. Luft, Dr. Marilyn
Thompson, five graduate students and one undergraduate student. The products
will include papers submitted to professional journals, postings to the Arizona
Science Coordinators Association listserv, and direct dissemination to school
administrators and local meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The impacts will be
increased understanding of induction programs, what they achieve and what
characteristics are effective. This will help policy makers and administrators
modify the programs for increased effectiveness. Given the high rate of teachers
leaving the profession during the first five years and the popularity of
induction programs, the primary impact would be increased retention of quality
teachers.