* 0918715
* Biodiversity and ecosystem multifunctionality:   Do species loss order and richness matter in a native-dominated serpentine ecosystem?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Erika Zavaleta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 489,029.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Growing attention has turned to the importance of bridging
more effectively from biodiversity-ecosystem functioning research to studies of
the ongoing and potential consequences of actual species losses. The effects of
non-random plant species declines and losses on multiple, key ecosystem
processes will be examined in the California Floristic Province, a global
hotspot for threatened plant diversity. An experimental approach will be used to
compare the effects of randomized and ordered plant biodiversity changes on
multiple ecosystem functions. The study system is an endemic-rich serpentine
grassland ecosystem of conservation concern, and the experimental grassland
communities will include 16 native, annual and perennial forb and grass species.
These experimental plots will be used to test the importance of species
functional traits in shaping the responses of ecosystem processes to progressive
diversity declines. The project will provide training, mentoring, and research
experience for a postdoctoral fellow, a Ph.D. student, approximately 20
undergraduate interns, and several dozen undergraduate students who will visit
the experiment as part of an ecological field methods class each spring.
Additional public outreach will result because the experiment will serve as an
informational stop on seasonal public wildflower tours that take place at the
study site.