* 0918326
* Examining Coaching in Elementary (K-8) Mathematics Classrooms
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* John Sutton, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2015
* USD 3,499,314.00

DRL: DR K-12&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Yopp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project Examining
Coaching in Elementary Mathematics Classrooms, led by faculty of Montana State
University and professional staff of RMC Research Corporation, is conducting
correlational and experimental studies of elementary mathematics coaching to see
how knowledge about coaching strategy and about mathematics content influences
the ability of coaches to improve teachers' knowledge, attitudes, and classroom
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the hypothesis that the
effectiveness of a mathematics classroom coach in changing teacher practice,
attitudes, and beliefs is positively correlated with his/her knowledge about
coaching strategies and about mathematics content. To test this hypothesis, this
project is addressing two core research questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To
what extent does a coach's depth of knowledge in two primary domains (coaching
knowledge and mathematics content knowledge) influence coaching
effectiveness?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent does professional
development targeting those two knowledge domains improve coaching
effectiveness?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research question is being
addressed by a non-experimental correlational study of knowledge for coaching
and change in teacher practice as a result of coaching. The second question is
being studied by an experimental causal cross-over design measuring the effects
of professional development provided to increase the knowledge of coaches. The
designs address effects of coaching on teachers' classroom instruction, an
critical link in the connection between coaching and improved student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The correlational data is analyzed by structural equation
modeling. The experimental data is analyzed by hierarchical linear modeling,
nesting teachers within coaches. Approximately 60 coaches are randomly assigned
to treatment and control groups, and each coach works with 3 teachers. The
various facets of coach and teacher knowledge and practice are measured by a
variety of existing and previously validated
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of the study will provide valuable
evidence to schools considering use of mathematics coaches as a strategy for
improving results of elementary mathematics instruction.