* 0918571
* Cavern Design for the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Herbert Einstein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 73,258.00

This proposal coordinates the efforts of several geomechanics investigators
planned at the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL)
facility at Homestake Mine. The project will provide a framework that will allow
construction and operational decisions to be made efficiently while ensuring
that important design parameters are obtained. At present, knowledge of the
characteristics of rock masses and, particularly the capability to predict the
performance of underground openings are limited. This limitation is caused by
the lack of three dimensional exposure, the related difficulty to know what is
in the rock mass and the lacking knowledge of the basic behavior of
discontinuous media such as rock masses. At DUSEL it will be possible to use
existing and new rock mass exposure/exploration to develop rock mass models and
to then compare them to reality when construction occurs. Since construction
occurs in stages it will be possible to verify and improve the models in stages.
It is also very likely that doing all this together with other scientists and
engineers will lead to innovative thinking about engineering problems. DUSEL
provides the absolutely unique opportunity to further science and engineering
both in research and education. Underground construction, be that for civil
purposes (transportation, storage, utilities, possibly habitation) or for
mining, is very costly and time consuming. The proposed research will lead to
innovations, which have the potential for significant cost and time savings
while maintaining or increasing safety.&lt;br/&gt;