* 0918434
* R&amp;D: An Architecture of Intensification: Building a Comprehensive Program for Struggling Students in Double-Period Algebra Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Lynn, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,967,902.00

This project combines the expertise and resources of the University of Illinois
at Chicago Learning Sciences Research Institute, the University of Texas Dana
Center, the Urban Mathematics Leadership Network, and the Agile Mind educational
software company to design, develop, and test student and teacher instructional
materials and software for Algebra I. The innovative course is explicitly
designed to address the needs of students whose interest and prior achievement
in mathematics make that subject especially challenging for them. The project
starts from the assumption that those struggling students need to and can master
the concepts and skills of a rigorous Algebra I course. However, the developers
argue that chances of success will be greatly enhanced if algebra classes for
those students provide more instructional time and special complementary
activities focused on social, affective, linguistic, and strategic cognitive and
meta-cognitive dimensions of learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
identified a set of design principles for instructional materials that draw from
research on students with special learning needs, and it uses those principles
in a design-based research process to construct and study effects of the
Intensified Algebra materials. The core of the curriculum materials is the Agile
Mind computer-based Algebra I software, a program that is enhanced by inclusion
of coordinated youth development experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses a series of research questions about usability and effects of the new
Algebra I course. Those questions are studied with a two-tier research effort
over three years. Teaching and learning are examined intensively in a small set
of experimental classes to gain insights necessary for iterative development of
the curriculum materials and teacher resources. A larger sample of experimental
classes are studied less intensively, with survey methods, in order to gain
understanding of the challenges confronting dissemination of the emerging
program to a larger, less directly supported family of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the final products will gain
substantial momentum through the Urban Mathematics Leadership Network whose
members are 22 of the largest U. S. urban school districts and have expressed
strong support for the importance of the planned algebra initiative.