* 0918440
* Dynamical Systems in Biology: Persistence and Models of Bacterial and Viral Infection and Treatment
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Hal Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 474,439.00

The project has both a theoretical component and mathematical modeling
component. On the theoretical side, it will contribute to the mathematical
theory of persistence, an important tool for the analysis of biological models
as it provides a mathematically rigorous method to establish the long term
persistence or viability of a population. Presently, the theory is difficult to
apply to discrete-time dynamical systems arising in epidemiology and population
dynamics because of the complexity of (boundary) attractors for discrete-time
systems (e.g., the standard quadratic map). Recently, the theory of Lyapunov
exponents has been applied to detect when a boundary invariant set, representing
a "resident regime" is normally repelling, meaning it is invadable by a non-
resident. One aspect of the project is to further develop this approach and to
develop methods of computing/estimating the key normal Lyapunov exponents and
their dependence on system parameters. The newly developed tools will be applied
to mathematical models of a fungal disease model in amphibian populations. The
project aims to improve current state-of-the-art mathematical models of in-vivo
bacterial infections by including more realistic immune system responses,
antibiotic treatment and the development of resistance to antibiotic, and
examining appropriate antibiotic dosing strategies. A parallel effort will aim
to improve mathematical models of virus disease by exploring the effects of
multiple viral infections of host target cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
important questions in the life sciences center on whether or not a biological
species or set of species can survive indefinitely in given environment or
whether they will become extinct. Issues of biological diversity revolve around
the question of which species can or cannot survive in an (possibly human-
altered) environment. If a disease or parasite is introduced into a population,
can it survive and become endemic in the host or will it die out or become rare?
Will it drive the host population to extinction as fungal diseases appear to be
doing to amphibian populations? Similar questions arise when an inoculum of
bacteria or virus gains entry into a host animal or plant: can it exploit its
host and initiate a chronic disease or will it be removed by a host immune
response? Currently, there are few guiding principles to decide these questions
but mathematical modeling and analysis can and has played a role. Motivated by
these important biological questions, a mathematical theory (called persistence
theory) has been developing in recent decades to provide answers. The project
will contribute to this theory by sharpening the available mathematical tools
and applying them to important biological problems. On the practical side, the
new tools should help to predict long term persistence or extinction in
particular models. A focus of the project is to apply newly developed tools to
study mathematical models of disease within human and animal populations. Models
of the fungal disease Chytridiomycosis, an infectious disease of amphibians
caused by the chytrid fungus, implicated in the mass die-offs and species
extinction of frogs in many areas of the world, will be studied. Another arena
of important applications are disease processes within a given animal or plant.
Mathematical modeling of in vivo disease processes is a relatively new field
holding great promise due to the difficulty of real-time monitoring of these
processes. Prior work aimed at creating more realistic mathematical models of
generic bacterial infections of mammalian tissues including host immune response
and antibiotic therapy will be extended to include known pathogen heterogeneity
in virulence and susceptibility to antibiotic treatment, and alternative
antimicrobial dosing strategies. The proposed extensions should lead to better
understanding of the infection and treatment processes, allowing computer
simulation of processes which are difficult to monitor in vivo. Mathematical
modeling of virus infections have also proved to be useful, most notably for
understanding HIV replication within the human host. Mathematical modeling can
predict and confirm features of virus-host cell dynamics that are difficult to
monitor in animal models. The investigator will examine effects of multiply
infected host cells on disease dynamics.