* 0918975
* Collaborative Research:  Layers of adaptive radiation in Anolis lizards:  Investigation of previously unexplored ecological and taxonomic diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jonathan Losos, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 593,304.00

Last Modified Date: 07/10/09 Last Modified By: Maureen M. Kearney &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why are
there so many kinds of animals? Does evolutionary diversification tend to follow
a similar trajectory in different groups of animals? Our work addresses both of
these questions using an integrated analysis of DNA sequence data, laboratory
experiments, and field studies of a species rich group of lizards. A primary
goal of our work is to use DNA sequence data to reconstruct a tree reflecting
relationships among species. We will then use this tree to retrace the history
of ecological and morphological diversification, focusing in particular on
whether aspects of this history are repeated by other groups of animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work will employ five persons full-time, including
four graduate students and one post-doctoral scholar. Mentorship and training in
advanced laboratory and field techniques will be provided to all of these
participants. Our group?s work will result in one of the largest and most
diverse compilations of DNA sequence data ever assembled for a group of related
species. The phylogenetic and statistical methods developed to analyze this
dataset and the lessons learned from these analyses will be directly applicable
to similar studies of other organisms, including those with medical,
agricultural, or conservation significance &lt;br/&gt;