* 0918932
* Collaborative Research:  Ancient Biodiversity Hotspot in Southern South America:  Evolution of Speciose Floras in Patagonia from latest Cretaceous to middle Eocene
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Maria Gandolfo-Nixon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2015
* USD 491,250.00

Last Modified Date: 07/14/09 Last Modified By: Elizabeth A. Kellogg &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates exceptionally species-
rich but poorly known fossil plant deposits in Patagonia, Argentina, dating from
66-47 million years old. Approximately 80% of more than 500 species so far
collected are new to science, and the time interval includes the end-Cretaceous
(K-T) "dinosaur" extinction and recovery as well as important global warming and
cooling events. This critical time period is otherwise only well known, for land
plants, in Western North America. The fossil floras hold immense relevance to
modern biodiversity as an unrivaled data source regarding plant evolution,
distribution, and ecology in the Southern Hemisphere. Some of the fundamental
questions to be addressed are: 1) was there a major K-T plant extinction and
long recovery in Patagonia, as in North America? 2) what are the modern
distributions of the fossil plants? Australasian plants, representing a lost
land connection via Antarctica, are the best known, but was the area also a
source for today's Neotropical forests? and 3) was ancient Patagonia a
rainforest? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a well-developed international
collaboration involving abundant intellectual exchange. Training and career
advancement of graduate students and postdocs is a major focus, as well as
public education. Broad scientific benefits include: 1) the first densely
sampled South American floral and paleoclimatic record for a time interval of
immense global interest; 2) numerous, novel, well-dated plant-lineage
appearances in South America of great interest for plant evolution and
biogeography; 3) the first robust geological understanding of the floras; and 4)
a high potential for significant unplanned discoveries. Research results will be
disseminated widely. The thousands of fossil specimens will be permanently
available through deposition in a well-curated public institution, Museo
Paleontol√≥gico Egidio Feruglio, Trelew, Argentina.