* 0918834
* Math Pathways &amp; Pitfalls: Capturing What Works for Anytime Anyplace Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2016
* Joan Heller, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 12/31/2016
* USD 3,516,277.00

Researchers and developers at WestEd are developing, field-testing, and
evaluating ten online professional development modules anchored in research-
based teaching principles and achievement-boosting mathematics materials. The
modules provide interactive learning opportunities featuring real classroom
video demonstrations, simulations, and scaffolded implementation. The
professional development module development builds on the Math Pathways and
Pitfalls (MPP) instructional modules for middle school students developed with
NSF support. The professional development provided through the use of these
modules is web-based (rather than face-to-face), is provided in chunks during
the school year and immediately applied in the classroom (rather than summer
professional development and school year application), and explicitly models
ways to apply key teaching principles to regular mathematics lessons (rather
than expecting teachers to extract and apply principles
spontaneously).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the impact of the
modules on teaching practice with an experimental design that involves 20
treatment teachers and 20 control teachers. Data are gathered from teacher
questionnaires, classroom observations, and post-observation
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;