* 0918522
* Developing, Researching, and Scaling Up SmartGraphs
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Andrew Zucker, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2014
* USD 2,819,492.00

The project goal is to develop Smart Graphs, document their effectiveness
through rigorous research, and scale the implementation so this technology
becomes widely available. The project studies the educational value of "Smart
Graphs", digital objects that "know" about themselves and that provide
scaffolding to students to help them learn about graphs and the concepts
conveyed in graphs. As planned, digital Smart Graphs can be authored or
customized by teachers and accept inputs from students? responses, sketches,
functions, models, and probes. The software analyzes the graphs for the kinds of
features that experts recognize and then engages students in conversations that
instruct and assess.

The development of Smart Graphs is based on extensive prior research about
students' use and understanding of graphs (TEEMSS II Project). The project is
guided by a collaboration between the Concord Consortium and the Pennsylvania
State Department of Education. Pennsylvania's Classrooms for the Future program,
through which 40,000 laptop computers are deployed to serve 500,000 students. An
outstanding panel of researchers and educators serve as project advisors.

After early development and optimization working with one high school, the
technology is fully tested in 24 schools in conjunction with units on force and
motion. Comparison studies (random assignment with implementation delays)
provide the sources of data. The final years are devoted to scaling, reaching
200 teachers in addition to publishers who will be offered support and open
source materials.