* 0918880
* MSB:  Bacterial endosymbionts of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi: ecology and evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Teresa Pawlowska, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 581,894.00

The goal of this project is to understand the interaction between arbuscular
mycorrhizal (AM) fungi (phylum Glomeromycota) and bacteria that reside in their
hyphae and spores. AM fungi and their endobacteria are components of a tri-
partite symbiotic association that also includes the majority of terrestrial
plants, and may be one of the most common symbioses on the planet. AM fungi
colonize roots of land plants and assist in the uptake of mineral nutrients to
the plant in exchange for plant-assimilated carbon. Endobacteria of AM fungi
associated with dune vegetation of the North Atlantic coast of the U. S. were
selected as a focal system for the study. A survey of endobacteria distribution
among AM fungal lineages combined with reconstruction of phylogenies of the
interacting partners will enable inferences about the evolutionary origin, the
age of the association, and the phylogentic relationships of endobacteria with
their free-living relatives. A reconstruction of the population structure of
endobacteria will clarify their reproductive and transmission mode. An
assessment of the effects that harboring endobacteria has on the fungal and
plant fitness will reveal whether endobacteria are parasites or mutualists of AM
fungi. This study will enhance understanding of the biology of AM fungi and of
the functioning of arbuscular mycorrhizae in terrestrial ecosystems, including
agroecosystems. It will provide insights into the interactions of bacteria with
fungi in general, and expand the knowledge of evolutionary processes involved in
the establishment and maintenance of endosymbiotic interactions. By focusing on
AM fungi that occur naturally in coastal dunes, this project will contribute to
the efforts to conserve and restore the fragile dune habitat. A graduate student
and several undergraduate and high school students will be trained in the course
of the project.