* 0918499
* An International Approach to the Biodiversity, Biogeography and Evolution of Caribbean Gastrotricha
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Richard Hochberg, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2013
* USD 598,976.00

This goal of this 3-year project is to make the first comprehensive inventory of
marine, microscopic animals of the phylum Gastrotricha in the western
hemisphere. A team of international researchers from five countries will survey
marine gastrotrichs and a collection of other marine animals from vulnerable
sedimentary habitats of the South Floridian ecoregion and nine small island
developing states (SIDS) throughout the wider Caribbean. A combination of
microscopy and molecular sequencing will be used to advance the discovery of new
species, test hypotheses on the origins of animal biodiversity, and add
significantly to our knowledge of tropical marine biodiversity. The results will
be presented in printed and electronic taxonomic keys, SID-specific taxonomic
guides, web-accessible databases, and collections for natural history museums in
North, Central and South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R. Hochberg and
researchers from Cameroon, Germany, Italy and South Korea will collaborate to
educate and train underrepresented American students and their international
colleagues in the discovery and description of microscopic animals (meiofauna)
from remote and threatened ecoregions. In total, this project will build long-
term, multinational partnerships with scientists in Africa, Asia-Pacific,
Europe, and Central America for meeting the challenges of cataloging marine
biodiversity and understanding its importance in marine sedimentary
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;