* 0918114
* Workshop: The Role of Undergraduate Institutions in Continental-Scale Science to be held on March 24, 2009 at Ohio Wesleyan University, Delaware, OH
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Laurel Anderson, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2011
* USD 40,740.00

Now, more than ever, ecologists are being called upon to provide data and
insight on issues such as climate change, the influence of urban development on
ecosystem services, and the effects of invasive species on ecosystem
functioning. These issues are difficult to address comprehensively through
small-scale, short-term studies at single sites, yet valuable site-level
experiments are often conducted by ecologists at undergraduate institutions
because they are possible within typical practical and financial constraints.
Through long-term, coordinated data collection at a network of sites, these
site-level studies could be powerful in supporting recognition and analysis of
important regional and national patterns. Scientists with limited research
resources may be able to answer broader scientific questions by working
together, and through cooperation can enhance their collective contributions to
ecological science, education, and environmental policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
workshop will be held in March 2009 at Ohio Wesleyan University to bring
together a group of scientists from undergraduate institutions who are
interested in developing collaborative ecological projects at regional and
continental scales. Participants will discuss appropriate research problems,
scientific details of implementing such projects, policies for project
management, and strategies to recruit, support, and retain participants. An
objective of the workshop is to form a broad coalition of scientific
collaborators who can share expertise and contribute data to a range of
ecological experiments, with students as key players in data collection,
analysis, and interpretation. Research and education are tightly integrated in
the undergraduate environment, and participation in collaborative, large-scale
projects is an ideal vehicle for teaching students to think across levels of
biological organization, see ecological connections among different geographic
regions, and use the latest technology to discern broad patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) will
provide a unique opportunity for the undergraduate education community to
participate in and teach ecology at large spatial and temporal scales. NEON will
enormously expand the potential and the opportunities for continental-scale
research, education and training. The NEON data will offer an unprecedented
opportunity for students at small undergraduate institutions to work with real
data from the forefront of ecological research either as classroom exercises or
through independent research projects. The associated cyberinfrastructure will
provide the tools that make such large-scale working partnerships not only
possible, but practical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop participants will
discuss how NEON will enable the research design developed and strategies for
undergraduate institutions to actively participate in this transformative
project. Participants will explore technological advances associated with NEON,
such as cyber tools for data sharing. The workshop will highlight the importance
of ecological research at undergraduate institutions, encouraging collaboration
as a way to enhance the contributions of such research to our understanding of
global ecology, and providing a model for continental-scale research at
undergraduate institutions that is timely, relevant, and engages our students in
the scientific challenges of the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;