* 0918881
* CBMS2010: A Study of Undergraduate Programs in the Mathematical and  Statistical Sciences in the United States and the Publication of the Results
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,05/31/2015
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2015
* USD 589,907.00

This project, CBMS2010, is a comprehensive stratified random sample survey of
the nation's undergraduate mathematical and statistical sciences programs at
two-year and four-year institutions in the fall of 2010. A comprehensive report
describing this survey will be available in the spring of 2012 online. This
project continues a cross-sectional survey of undergraduate mathematics programs
that has been done every five years since 1965. This project is coordinated by
the Conference Board for the Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) and is being managed
by the American Mathematical Society (AMS). CBMS surveys track changes in the
curriculum, pedagogy, enrollment levels, graduates, and faculty in US
undergraduate mathematical sciences programs. In addition, CBMS2010 is also
focusing on: requirements for mathematics and statistics majors, assessment of
mathematics and statistics programs, mathematical preparation of teachers, dual
enrollment, and instructional strategies in College Algebra, Calculus I, and
Elementary Statistics. CBMS2010 will provide the national benchmark data that
the nation's mathematical sciences department chairs called for in the AMS
publication "Towards Excellence: Leading a Mathematics Department in the 21st
Century."

The statistical design and associated computations are being conducted by
statisticians at Westat in consultation with a steering committee appointed by
CBMS, and the final report will be written by the project's senior personnel and
published by the American Mathematical Society. The survey's evolving structure
contributes to educational survey research methodology.