* 0918341
* Ecological Diversity, Systematics, and Conservation of Hawaii's endemic Hyposmocoma
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Daniel Rubinoff, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 421,886.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hawaiian Islands are recognized as
an important model for understanding general patterns of diversification,
evolution and ecology. The endemic moth genus Hyposmocoma contains over 400
species, representing perhaps the most ecologically diverse Hawaiian lineage,
including unique snaileating and aquatic species. However, its evolutionary and
ecological history is unknown. This research will construct an evolutionary
framework for these species using DNA sequences and morphology, which will
reveal mechanisms and patterns of diversification such as how frequent and rapid
terrestrial/aquatic shifts and carnivory occurred in Hawaii, yet remain
essentially unknown elsewhere. Results will shed light on evolution in this
spectacularly diverse group and also provide insight into the mechanisms leading
to globally rare ecological phenomena that are concentrated in
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many Hawaiian species are vulnerable to extinction,
making Hyposmocoma a rare opportunity to study evolution in a still-diverse
Hawaiian lineage. This project will train graduate, minority undergraduates, and
high school students in field biology, DNA and morphological techniques and
conservation biology. Through a science education exchange, promising high
school students will spend a summer and/or academic year in the Rubinoff lab
working on all aspects of the research. This project will contribute both to
theoretical and applied science and increase scientific literacy in
undergraduate and high school students. The results will be disseminated via
publications, websites and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;