* 0918223
* Researching the Expansion of K-5 Mathematics Specialist Program into Rural School Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Reuben Farley, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 4,713,685.00

This project builds upon a successful NSF-funded Math and Science Partnership
that developed a collaborative master's degree program for K-5 Mathematics
Specialists (math coaches) in the State of Virginia. The prior work demonstrated
that the model enhanced the ability of K-5 teachers who are supported by
Mathematics Specialists to provide high quality mathematics instruction, and
resulted in improved student achievement on the Virginia Standards of Learning
(SOL) tests. The State of Virginia has adopted new licensure standards for
Mathematics Specialists. In this project, the original team of collaborating
colleges and universities expands the Mathematics Specialist model to rural
school systems in Virginia, using a combination of distance and face-to-face
learning. In addition, mechanisms are being provided to support Specialists as
they work in remote environments. The research is designed to learn how a new
group of rural Mathematics Specialists work in rural school districts, focusing
on the impact of mathematics coaches and elementary school teachers as they work
together to improve mathematics instruction. The project examines changes in
beliefs about mathematics teaching and learning for mathematics coaches and for
elementary math teachers. It will also measure the impact of the Mathematics
Specialist model on K-5 student mathematics achievement. In addition, an
extensive case study documents the State of Virginia's policy, legislative and
regulatory decisions as the new Mathematics Specialists program is implemented.
The case illuminates how this model for improving elementary mathematics
education scales-up and is institutionalized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
stands to make a substantial contribution to STEM education for several reasons.
First, there is national interest in the use of mathematics coaches as a vehicle
to improve elementary mathematics instruction and student outcomes. This project
is providing research on the effectiveness of this well-defined mathematics
coach model. Second, research on the effectiveness of distance education for
STEM teacher professional development is sorely needed, and this study can
provide insights. Third, this is a promising model for studying the scale-up of
the use of mathematics coaches in Virginia, and includes how the State's policy
environment was affected (or not) by the research results. Substantial
background research has shown that policy decisions often are made without
consideration of research results, but this project builds the research results
(and researchers) into the policy environment. Fourth, the master's program for
Mathematics Specialists is delivered collaboratively by four different public
institutions of higher education in Virginia, and involves public school
superintendents and state-level policy makers. This collaboration can illuminate
how scale-up occurs, and may influence national policy and practice in
elementary mathematics education.