* 0918560
* Learning Science as Inquiry with the Urban Advantage:  Formal-Informal Collaborations to Increase Science Literacy and Student Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Suzanne Wilson, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* David Haury
* 08/31/2014
* USD 2,500,000.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) and Michigan State University are
conducting a research and development project based on the hypothesis that
learners must have access to the real work of scientists if they are to learn
both about the nature of science and to do inquiry themselves. It explores the
question "How can informal science education institutions best design resources
to support teachers, school administrators, and families in the teaching and
learning of students to conduct scientific investigations and better understand
the nature of science?" The project is a middle school science initiative
involving informal science education institutions that provide professional
development for teachers and hands-on learning for students. The major science
topic is the invasion of the Hudson River system by zebra mussels using data
sets provided by the Cary Institute

The project goals are to: (1) Refine a model that uses an informal education
institution to generate a productive overlap of leaning opportunities for
students, parents, teachers, and administrators; (2) Develop and field test
complementary resources that use teaching cases for exploring secondary research
and data analysis as vehicles for providing different audiences opportunities to
do inquiry and to lean about scientific inquiry, the impact of invasive species
on fresh water ecosystems, and the work of scientists; (3) Study the model to
extract more general knowledge and design principles that allow others to pursue
similar approaches; (4) Disseminate the model, resources, and research to
others.

The project will investigate the following research questions: (1) How do
professional development opportunities shape teacher and administrator
understanding of scientific work and inquiry and freshwater ecosystems?; (2) How
do teachers, parents, and administrators use resources to further their own
learning and that of students?; and (3) How do informal institutions' resources
and methods support teachers' practices and student learning? Researchers from
Michigan State University will carry out the research using both qualitative and
quantitative methods to gather data in a parallel/simultaneous mixed methods
design. There is also a comparison group of 30 middle school teachers.

Project partners are the American Museum of Natural History, Michigan State
University, the Cary Institute, and The Academy for Educational Development.
Participants are middle school teachers, middle school students and their
families, and school administrators. Professional development workshops for
teachers and administrators will be held at AMNH. Students and their families
will take field trips to the Hudson River with AMNH and Cary Institute
scientists.

The deliverables will be four case studies for teachers, students, parents, and
administrators; curriculum on the zebra mussel invasion of the Hudson River; and
research results on the educational model. Outputs will be: 150 teachers
participate in 58 hours of professional development; 100 middle school
administrators experience leadership workshops to learn about the project; and
300 families participate in day-long family outreach events to the Hudson River
ecosystem. Through this research and the education resources developed, this
project has the potential to improve science education in many other large urban
areas. It also explores the effect of participants in secondary research as they
analyze large data sets developed by the Cary Institute.

Formative evaluation is carried out during the first three years by AMNH staff.
Summative evaluation is executed by an external evaluator, The Academy for
Educational Development. The summative evaluation explores the extent to which
the collaboration meets the project goals, the quality of the teachers' use of
the project resources, the impact of the project on student learning, and the
response of parents and administrators to the project resources.