* 0918295
* Connected Chemistry as Formative Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Xiufeng Liu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 08/31/2013
* USD 493,260.00

This is an exploratory project focused on the use of computer modeling as
formative assessment in order to improve high school students' chemistry
learning by integrating two research-informed strategies. The first is Connected
Chemistry, a Flash simulation enhanced Net Logo-based computer modeling learning
environment in which students experience simultaneously three levels of
representation of chemical phenomena: (a) macroscopic (visible phenomena),
submacroscopic (movement of electrons, molecules, and atoms), and (c) symbolic
(chemical symbols, equations). The second is formative assessment guided by
research on learning progressions of big ideas in science. The project's
development design phase consists of four building blocks: (1) construct map-
coherent students' development of two big ideas (matter and energy) defined
through student learning progressions; (2) item-design task, consisting of
simultaneous multiple representations of the phenomena and how these are
related; (3) outcome space, a categorization system that defines variation of
students' responses and the use of a scoring rubric that correlates the status
of students' learning progression scores with expected performance indicators;
and (4) measurement model to guide data analysis to facilitate teachers
monitoring of students' learning progressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
research design consists of a hypothesis that guides this exploratory work: If
computer modeling as formative assessment maximizes the potential for improving
students' learning, then formative assessment may increase students'
opportunities to assess their understandings and provide feedback for modifying
both learning and teaching. Thus, the research questions are: (1) Are the
developed formative assessments valid, reliable, and absent of bias? and (2) Can
integration of the formative assessments improve student learning in high school
chemistry? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted with teachers and
students of the Buffalo City School District, characterized by its diverse
student population. It will employ a quasi-experimental design with 16 chemistry
teachers and 400 students taking the NY Regents' chemistry course (8
experimental groups of 25 students each with formative assessments, and 8
control groups with 25 students each without formative assessments). Main
research activities consist of data gathering of the assessments' validity,
reliability, and absence of bias through (a) interviewing and think-aloud
strategies; (b) reviewing of assessments by a panel of a chemistry teacher, a
science education researcher, a psychometrician, and a chemist; (c) pilot
testing of assessments; (d) field testing of assessments; (e) determining
statistical properties of assessments based on classical test theory and item-
response theory (item difficulty, discrimination, and response pattern,
reliability index); and (f) conducting validity, reliability, and absence of
bias studies. Qualitative and quantitative data gathering and interpretation
strategies will be used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important products and
dissemination activities comprise a set of 10 formative assessment systems with
integrated computer modeling and established validity, reliability, and absence
of bias for one-year chemistry course; a monograph on findings; a CD-ROM; and a
website. The proposed evaluation includes both formative and summative
components focused on assessing the impact of formative assessments on improving
students' learning using existing standardized instruments. Emphasis will be
placed on (a) understanding of chemistry concepts, (b) understanding of models
and modeling, (c) chemistry achievement (comparing scores on the NY Regents
standardized exam), and (d) attitude toward chemistry (using a modified version
of the Chemistry Attitude and Experiences Questionnaire).