* 0918383
* Investigating the Effect of Professional Development, Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching, and Instruction on Student Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2016
* Geoffrey Phelps, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2016
* USD 4,744,006.00

Researchers at Harvard University, the University of Michigan, and Brigham Young
University are conducting research on the relationship between mathematical
knowledge for teaching (MKT), teaching practice, and student outcomes. The study
of MKT is embedded in a study of the effectiveness of the Math Solutions
professional development model. Math Solutions is a widely used professional
development provider started by Marilyn Burns. The study builds on work of the
research team and differs from earlier work in that 80 fourth and fifth grade
teachers in twelve Albuquerque, NM schools are randomly assigned to either the
treatment group or the control group. Randomization occurs within grades within
schools. Math Solutions provides teachers in the treatment group professional
development that has a strong focus on MKT. Teachers in the control group
receive the typical professional development offered by the district. This
consists of a combination of summer mathematics institutes and three-to-six hour
introductions to Everyday Mathematics, the instructional materials used by the
schools in the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are as
follows. How effective is Math Solutions as compared to typical ad-hoc
mathematics professional development? Does Math Solutions improve teachers? MKT,
the quality of their instruction, and/or their students? outcomes? How are
different aspects of teachers? mathematical knowledge and instruction related to
student achievement? Teacher MKT is measured by Learning Mathematics for
Teaching (instruments developed by the PI and colleagues) and student
achievement is measured by assessments developed recently by the PI with NSF
support. Classroom observations and video provide data on classroom
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;