* 0918031
* Signal Integration and Protein Degradation in Muscle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Lewis Jacobson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2011
* USD 130,573.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The long-range objective of this
project is to understand the external and intramuscular signals and signal-
transduction networks that regulate protein degradation in muscle. This project
focuses on understanding the basic architecture and behavior of a complex
signaling network to provide a closer understanding of how complex networks of
signals and signal-transduction pathways are coordinated to regulate protein
stability in the target tissue. It will establish the identities of the
components of the signal-transduction pathways and determine whether the amount
and/or the activity of each component is regulated, in order to map the
interplay among components. This project emphasizes the identification of
feedback loops, which are crucial to network behavior. This information (which
has not yet been worked out at this level of detail for muscle cells) is
indispensable for computational modeling of network dynamics. Previous studies
have made it clear that protein degradation in muscle responds to multiple
signals and is mediated by multiple proteolytic mechanisms, and that the state
of protein breakdown is determined by the balance among opposing signals rather
than the intensity of a single signal. These convergent signals are apparently
integrated by control of the phosphorylation state of the Raf kinase molecule.
This protein can be phosphorylated at multiple specific site(s) and the output
of Raf is thus determined combinatorially. An important consequence of this
mechanism is that the phosphatases that act on specific sites on Raf may act as
positive or negative regulators of the "signal integrator". This project aims to
elucidate how Raf acts as a "signal integrator" in the specific context of
striated muscle, particularly in terms of the functions of protein phosphatases
and of calcium signaling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:. Undergraduate
researchers will be an integral part of the project team. One graduate student
will be trained on the project. The senior scientific personnel will make strong
efforts to incorporate aspects of C. elegans biology and neuromuscular biology
in general into undergraduate courses they teach (Honors courses in Genetics,
Introductory Biology) and into other undergraduate courses (Developmental
Biology, Cell Biology). Modules using C. elegans as a model for insulin
signaling and lipid metabolism are incorporated into workshops for high-school
teachers and a module using C. elegans for inquiry-based learning of basic
genetics concepts will be delivered in K-12 school visits through an NIH-
supported Science Education Partnership Award.