* 0918216
* Integrating Computing Across the Curriculum (ICAC): Incorporating Technology into STEM Education Using XO Laptops
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2009,02/28/2014
* J. Michael Wyss, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Andres Henriquez
* 02/28/2014
* USD 2,809,612.00

The ICAC builds and tests applications tied to the school curriculum that
integrate the sciences with mathematics, computational thinking, reading and
writing in elementary schools. The investigative core of the project is to
determine how one-computer-per-child can be implemented in such a way as to
support STEM learning and lead more urban children to STEM career paths. Data
are collected both on the process of adoption and on the outcomes of learning
and entering career paths, as measured by course selection and interests.

Building on a state effort that has provided XO laptop computers to every child
in grades 1-5, ICAC provides approximately 160 teachers and 8000 students with
computer resources and skills and supports the adoption so as to increase the
number of students in the STEM pipeline. The community served by the project is
an urban, predominantly African American, high poverty school system where
students are underrepresented in the STEM pipeline. The project advances
computing, science, and mathematics skills of 4th and 5th grade Birmingham City
Schools (BCS) teachers and students, works with teachers to develop curriculum,
and provides professional development for teachers, and facilitates
participation and support by administrators. In addition, ICAC provides more
extensive training to 320 students, drawn from each school, who become resources
for the teachers and their fellow students. ICAC engages parents so that they
understand the opportunities available for their children in STEM-centered
careers and so that the parents can be supportive of their child's interest in
STEM education.