* 0918117
* (M-DISC) Mathematics Discourse in Secondary Classrooms: A Case-Based Professional Development Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2017
* Beth Herbel-Eisenmann, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,194,326.00

DRL: DR K-12&lt;br/&gt;PI: Herbel-
Eisenmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
Mathematical Discourse in Secondary Classrooms, led by faculty at Michigan State
University and the University of Delaware, is developing and testing materials
for professional development leaders to use in work with secondary mathematics
teachers. The aim is to help those teachers analyze the discourse patterns of
their own classrooms and improve their skills in creating discourse patterns
that emphasizes high-level mathematical explanation, justification, and
argumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic hypothesis of the project is that
engaging in carefully planned analyses of narrative and video cases and in
action research focused on discourse can effectively support teachers in
improving the discourse quality of their classroom instruction. The project
builds on findings from prior work that has shown how meaningful educational
experiences can empower secondary mathematics teachers to identify and change
problematic classroom discourse patterns and create more productive experiences
for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is preparing an introductory
module, five constellations of activities built around narrative and video
cases, and a module to help professional developers support secondary
mathematics teachers in conduct of action research. Development is informed by
"soft pilot" testing that leads to improvement of the professional development
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core research questions of the project
concern the effects of the professional development program on teacher
knowledge, beliefs, and classroom practice. Preliminary evidence about answers
for those questions is provided by an external pilot test of the professional
development program. The effects of the professional development are evaluated
by analysis of data from pre- and post-assessments of teacher knowledge,
beliefs, and classroom practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
challenge of enhancing teacher abilities to deliver high quality mathematics
instruction. By focusing on practices that raise the level of classroom
discourse about mathematics, the results have the potential to enhance the
learning experiences of all students.