* 0918185
* An Exploratory Application of Agent Based Modeling for Policy Evaluations in Hawaii's Longline Fishery
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,12/31/2012
* PingSun Leung, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2012
* USD 287,437.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Fishing and fishery management is typically a complex system of human activities
in which the properties of the system are not obvious from the properties of its
components. For example, the race for fish by rational individuals likely would
result in an irrational consequence for the entire fishery?fishery collapse.
This project adopts agent-based modeling (ABM), an emerging technique for
studying complex systems, as an alternative tool for modeling the management of
pelagic fisheries, using Hawaii?s longline fishery as a case study. ABM is
expected to better incorporate the heterogeneity of individual fishers (e.g.,
different cost structure, risk attitude, fishing preference, etc.) and their
fishing decisions/activities (e.g., responses to change in regulatory policies).
Model development will be guided using the strategy of pattern oriented modeling
(POM). In particular, the project will explore the utility of POM in testing the
credibility of alternative theories concerning fishing decisions and activities
such as revenue targeting, profit maximization and adaptive learning in Hawaii?s
longline fishery. While POM has a record of success in ecology, the proposed
application to socioeconomic systems such as fishing and fishery management is
unprecedented. The developed model will be used to evaluate alternative fishery
policies with respect to their impacts on both the fishing communities
(productivity of vessels, trip choice, remuneration arrangement, etc.) and the
conservation of endangered marine species (e.g., sea turtles).

This research will contribute academically and practically toward the
formulation of ecosystem-based responsible fishery management for Hawaii?s
longline fishery and fishery in general. It will provide vital information in
regards to improving the conservation of endangered sea turtles, assessing the
broad impacts of policy reforms on fishery, and facilitating the decision making
of fishery managers.