* 0918042
* Tropical Pacific Decadal Variability and Its Impact on the Atmosphere in Climate Models
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Antonietta Capotondi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric T. DeWeaver
* 07/31/2013
* USD 327,635.00

Tropical Pacific decadal variability can have large impacts upon the global
climate, and it complicates our ability to separate anthropogenically induced
trends from natural climate variations. Improved understanding of the mechanisms
responsible for such variability is, therefore, fundamental for assessing the
predictability of the tropical oceans and their local and remote climate
influences. This study will examine tropical Pacific decadal variability in the
output of an ensemble of global climate models using runs carried out for the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Relevant physical processes will be identified, along with their regions of
origin, and these regional forcings will be related to the large-scale
atmospheric circulation.

The project will also examine the features of decadal variability likely to
emerge in future climates, along with the impacts of this future variability on
climate variations important to people, such as rainfall over the United States.

The work will use a combination of in-depth diagnostics of existing model output
and sensitivity experiments using an ocean model. Given the central role of
surface wind forcing for decadal variations, these experiments will apply
anomalous wind forcing in different areas, in order to identify key forcing
regions and key aspects of the anomalous winds at decadal timescales. For
climate models with more realistic decadal variations, the associated wind
forcing will be related to the large-scale atmospheric circulation to identify
precursors of that forcing and large-scale atmospheric anomalies resulting from
the tropical sea surface temperature variations. Climate change simulations will
be used to examine the characteristics of decadal variability in a warmer
climate, along with its global influences.

Broader impacts of this work include collaboration with a Ph.D. student at the
University of Colorado. Improved understanding of tropical Pacific decadal
variability in present and future climates will help in assessing the
predictability of persistent droughts over the United States.