* 0918794
* Math Snacks: Addressing Gaps in Conceptual Mathematics Understanding with Innovative Media
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Theodore Stanford, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,498,667.00

DRL: DR K-12 PI: Wiburg

Abstract

This project Math Snacks: Addressing Gaps in Conceptual Mathematics
Understanding with Innovative Media, led by mathematics and education faculty at
New Mexico State University, is developing and evaluating effectiveness of 15 -
20 short computer mediated animations and games that are designed to: (1)
increase students? conceptual understanding in especially problematic topics of
middle grades mathematics; and (2) increase students' mathematics process skills
with a focus on capabilities to think and talk mathematically. The basic
research question of the project is whether the planned collection of computer-
mediated animations and games can provide an effective strategy for helping
students who experience difficulty with core middle grades mathematics concepts
and whether the same material can be a useful tool for ordinary classroom
instruction. The project is developing and testing the effectiveness of an
extensive set of such learning tools, companion print materials as needed to
assist learners in developing conceptual understanding, and short video clips
documenting best practices by exemplary teachers using the developed materials
with students.

A pilot study in year 3 and a substantial randomized control trial in year 4 are
testing the effects of using the Math Snacks software on student learning and
retention of middle school mathematics, as measured by performance on
disaggregated strands of New Mexico state mathematics assessments. Thus the
project will produce software applets, teacher materials, and useful empirical
evidence about the efficacy of their use.

One of the key features of the Math Snacks project is development of the
mediated games and simulations in a form that can be used by students outside of
normal classroom settings on media and game players that are ubiquitous and
popular among today's young people. Thus the project holds the promise of
exploiting learning in informal settings to enhance traditional school
experiences.