* 0918247
* LTREB RENEWAL: The population ecology of wolves and moose on Isle Royale
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Rolf Peterson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 09/30/2013
* USD 449,499.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The wolves and moose of Isle Royale National Park, Michigan, have been studied
for 50 years and represent the longest predator-prey study in the world. The
project's objectives address three of the most fundamental questions in all of
ecology: (i) how and why do animal populations (in this case populations of
wolves and moose) fluctuate the way they do?, (ii) how do predators affect their
prey?, and (iii) how does climate affect population fluctuations? The essential
methods of the project include quantifying the abundance of wolves and moose and
the rate at which wolves kill moose each winter by sampling from a fixed-wing
aircraft. The moose are further analyzed by collecting skeletal remains of ~35%
of all the moose that die on Isle Royale. The project also samples food
conditions of moose and relevant climatic conditions.

The Isle Royale project uses diverse and very creative ways to teach the general
public about ecology, population cycles and species interactions, as wolves and
moose easily capture the public's imagination. In the past 5 years, the project
reached over 100 people though their participation in week-long Earthwatch
research expeditions, more than 15,000 individuals through presentations by the
PIs; over 3,000 individuals through presentations by the project's research
associates; thousands through a feature-length documentary film, museum
exhibits, and art; tens of thousands through a webpage; and hundreds of
thousands of people through professional journalism and popular books. The
broader impacts of this project are outstanding, as they also include informing
management and conservation decisions.