* 0918294
* An Investigation of the Mechanism that Produces Rhythmic Beating in Cilia and Flagella
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Charles Lindemann, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2013
* USD 632,323.00

Intellectual merit. Flagella and cilia are self-contained biological machines
that convert chemical energy from ATP into useful mechanical work. They are
basic organelles of living cells that are found in most animals and many plants.
In mammals they play an important role in the development of an embryo, in
respiration, and in reproduction. How these basic components of living cells
work is still rather poorly understood and the goal of this project. The major
approach is to gather vital physical information about the flagellum and to
incorporate it into a detailed model of flagellar mechanics. To accomplish this
goal, a unique set of tools has been developed. A technique that uses force-
calibrated glass microprobes will be employed to measure the forces actively
produced and the passive mechanical stiffness of flagella. Data will be analyzed
using a unique and detailed computational model of the mechanics of the
flagellum called the "Geometric Clutch model". To date, this model has
successfully duplicated and even predicted much of the behavior of cilia and
flagella. The model will be refined using the experimental data and will provide
a framework to develop a complete picture of flagellar mechanics. The mechanical
and physical information obtained from these studies will complement present
understanding of the flagellum at a molecular level. Specifically, the Geometric
Clutch model will allow mechanical properties of specific flagellar
substructures to be correlated with defined molecular components. Both the algal
model system, Chlamydomonas, with its extensive molecular biological database,
and the mammalian sperm, with which the laboratory already has extensive
experience, will be used for these studies.

Broader impacts. This multidisciplinary project, which will apply physics and
computational modeling to a biological investigation, will be of broad interest
to the mathematics, physics, engineering, and cell biology communities. The
flagellum is an example of an exquisite micro-machine of nature that will help
us understand and harness the forces of molecular motors. The project has an
extensive record of mentoring undergraduate students and introducing them to the
principles and practice of laboratory research. It is expected that
undergraduates involved in the project will be co-authors on scientific reports
from these studies and will be motivated to pursue careers in science, teaching,
and medicine.