* 0918030
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Culture, Policy, and Safe Motherhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Kathleen DeWalt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 14,996.00

Doctoral Student Lucia Guerra-Reyes (University of Pittsburgh), under the
supervision of Dr. Kathleen M. De Walt, will undertake research on how culture
and national policy affect safe motherhood. She will explore these relationships
through analysis of the Peruvian policy of intercultural birth care. This policy
seeks to reduce maternal mortality and at the same time to address the
increasing concerns of a multicultural government by incorporating selected
elements of Andean home birth into health service care. Thus it comprises an
appropriate case study for this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
hypothesizes that three interrelated elements impact both policy implementation
and safe motherhood outcomes in the rural Andes: the existence of regional
cultural differences; the key position of nurse-midwives in the implementation
process and their own conceptions of Andean culture and interculturalidad; and
the experiences and desires of birthing women and their male partners in rural
areas. The researcher will examine these elements and their effects on birth
care through in-depth interviews with regional and local leaders, health service
administrators, nurse midwives, and women and their male partners. The
researcher will also conduct observation of prenatal consultations and will
collect publicly available statistical data regarding use of intercultural
birthing services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The case of the Peruvian birth policy
represents an opportunity to provide a more complex understanding of how
cultural variables come into play in a context where cultural differences are
institutionalized in policy. The results of this study also will provide a
critical analysis of how the process of policy in Peru reflects and impacts
social inequalities. Additionally these results will be significant for the
future policy approaches to safe motherhood in other countries or regions that
seek to use culture as a key construct for health policy. The research also will
contribute to the education of a graduate student.