* 0918552
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Cognition and Measurement with Conceptual Knowledge: Establishing the Validity and Diagnostic Capacity of Concept Inventories
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* James Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 517,541.00

This collaborative research project implements a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary approach to the design and validation of concept inventories
(CIs). The purpose is to braoden and enhance the effective use of concept
inventories in STEM education for formative and summative assessment. To
accomplish this goal the project will focus on a specific concept inventory, the
Thermal Transport Concept Inventory (TTCI). The data will be collected from the
varied undergarduate student samples. The research would develop an explicit set
of facets of understanding for diagnostic measurement and reporting, would
gather multi-level empirical data of student performance on the TTCI (including
student protocol and interview studies, and large scale data for psychometric
modeling), would revise both the items and facets based upon these empirical
data analyses, and would gather further data on the revised instrument. The data
on TTCI will be analyzed in terms of the underlying conceptual knowledge and
skills that it taps in critical areas of science and engineering. Additional
empirical data on student reasoning and performance will be analyzed applying
modern psychometric analysis techniques focused on diagnostic modeling. Research
outcomes expected are: (1) an improved TTCI available through the web and
accompanied by interpretive tools for use by faculty; (2) an in-depth, multi-
level analysis of the assessment validity and diagnostic capacity of the TTCI;
(3) a comprehensive inventory of possible formative and summative uses of CIs,
including what is needed by STEM practitioners to make good use of CIs; and (4)
a research and development framework for designing, developing, evaluating,
improving, and/or implementing CIs in other STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
general, the study will contribute to the better understanding of student
learning and more authentic diagnostic and formative assessment, leading to
better learning and teaching of important concepts in STEM. The use of the TTCI
will elicit student misconceptions in the thermal and transport engineering
sciences such as fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and thermodynamics. The TTCI
particularly focuses on concepts deemed important but difficult for
undergraduate engineering students. Thus, the proposed research is likely to
lead to expanded uses of the TTCI and other CIs for formative classroom purposes
as well as for a variety of summative purposes. This project are both an
expansion of the psychometric modeling and methods for applying diagnostic
models to CIs, and an expanded assessment validity in the area of measurement
and assessment of key concepts in science and engineering.