* 0918308
* ABR/LTREB Renewal:   Reproduction, social networks, and socio-ecology of wild bottlenose dolphins
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2015
* USD 461,606.00

The social, demographic and cognitive features of bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops
sp.) show remarkable parallels with primates, offering a powerful method for
examining how large brains, extensive maternal care, behavioral flexibility and
prolonged developmental periods evolved. In this project the investigators
examine the social and ecological factors related to dolphin female reproduction
and development using innovative techniques in both computer modeling and
biological sampling. The investigators will examine what factors contribute to
female calving success, why dolphins have such a long juvenile period, and what
patterns of information (cultural) transmission in the population favor such
behavioral plasticity. They have also initiated a study that involves collecting
blow samples (fluid exhaled from the blowhole) and have already extracted DNA
from blow. These samples will also be used for hormone and fatty acid assays,
opening up exciting new avenues for the non-invasive study of reproduction,
stress, maturation and diet. The attributes of the project include: (1) the size
and unprecedented detail of the 25-year longitudinal dataset; (2) the creation
of an extensive integrated relational database with a web platform; (3) the
computational modeling for analyzing complex multi-dimensional associations in
the context of a large social network; (4) the natural variation in social,
ecological, and reproductive parameters; (5) the new direction in developing
non-invasive biological sampling techniques; and (6) the scientific value of
studying a species on par with primates. The inter-disciplinary nature of this
collaboration will foster innovation and intellectual exchange across multiple
disciplines, advancing our understanding of complex animal societies. The
project supports five graduate and approximately 22 undergraduate students from
Biology and Computer Science. The database will be broadly accessible through
our website and will serve as an educational tool and as a foundation for design
of similar long-term data warehouses. Thus, the next generation biologists will
be better equipped to integrate computer science approaches and database
technology.