* 0918374
* Computational Studies of Helix and Beta-Hairpin Dynamics and Orientation in Biological Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Wonpil Im, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 479,081.00

Despite considerable advances in both experimental and computational methods to
study biologically-important membrane proteins, it is still challenging to
determine their structures and dynamics in biological membranes. This project
seeks to characterize dynamics and orientation of helix/beta-hairpin in membrane
environments by calculating the potentials of mean force (PMFs) along their
orientations and by performing ensemble dynamics with available orientational
NMR observables. This research will provide novel insights into the following
important biophysical questions. Why does a single transmembrane helix or beta-
hairpin have specific orientations in membranes? What are the roles of hydrogen
bonds, close packing, and beta-hairpin-lipid interactions in beta-hairpin
associations in membranes? What is the dynamic information embedded in NMR data
obtained from aligned samples or what is the influence of helix dynamics on such
observables? The PMF calculations and their decomposition into various
microscopic contributions will enrich our understanding of the molecular basis
of transmembrane helix/beta-hairpin orientation and interaction by determining
the delicate balance of forces governing helix/beta-hairpin interactions with
membranes at the atomic level. The ensemble dynamics with orientational NMR
observables will provide the in-depth understanding of membrane protein
dynamics. Given the abundance of membrane proteins with a single-pass
transmembrane helix, this project will also provide a quantitative approach to
understand their structure and dynamics in membranes.

This project seeks to foster synergistic scientific research and education in
the field of computational biophysics by providing (1) the helix/beta-hairpin
restraint potentials and the orientational NMR restraint potentials as research
tools, and (2) the CHARMM-GUI website (http://www.charmm-gui.org) as an
education/research tool for students and researchers. The restraint potentials
can be applied to various peptides/proteins whose functions involve helix/beta-
hairpin movements. The resulting ensemble dynamics protocol to determine protein
structure and dynamics from aligned NMR sample data will be a useful tool for
the NMR community. The CHARMM-GUI website is open to the public and will be
further developed to provide students and researchers with a web-based graphical
user interface (GUI) for various biomolecular simulation and modeling tools. In
addition to graduate student training, two undergraduate students will be
involved in this project to promote their interests in computational biophysics.
This project will raise the scientific literacy of the public by outreach
activities such as publication of research results and participation of
workshops.