* 0918095
* Maternal effects as a bridge between parental environment and offspring phenotype during range expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Renee Duckworth, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2013
* USD 322,746.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous species
are expected to modify their geographical range in response to climate change.
Predicting the extent and speed with which such range changes will occur is
difficult because we currently have a poor understanding of the mechanisms that
enable species to invade and spread into new areas. The proposed research will
capitalize on the recently discovered large scale range expansion of western
bluebirds (Sialia mexicana) to gain insight into the mechanisms underlying this
process. In this species, during the colonization of new populations at the edge
of the range, breeding females influence the colonizing behavior of male
offspring in response to changes in local resource abundance. When resources are
limited, they produce males that disperse and spread into new areas; whereas,
when resources are abundant, they produce males that remain in their natal
population to breed. However, the proximate mechanisms by which breeding females
influence offspring dispersal are not known. The proposed research combines a
detailed knowledge of the history of western bluebird's range expansion and
long-term tracking of marked individuals with field experiments on maternal
physiology to test alternative hypotheses of how mothers influence offspring
behavior during range expansion. Not only will this work provide insight into
the mechanisms underlying range expansion, but it also provides a unique
opportunity for dissemination of information about species coexistence and
biodiversity in relation to climate change through existing bluebird monitoring
programs which involve collaborations between local ranchers, Native American
tribes and members of the general public.