* 0918611
* Global Proteome and Signal Pathway Phosphoproteome Dynamics during Appressorium Formation in the Rice Blast Fungus Magnaporthe oryzae
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2016
* Ralph Dean, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2016
* USD 544,723.00

Plant pathogenic fungi are responsible for major crop losses. To infect their
hosts many fungi, including Magnaporthe oryzae, the causal agent of rice blast
and the most destructive fungal disease of rice worldwide, have evolved to form
a specialized infection cell, an appressorium. Appressorium formation is
regulated by signal transduction pathways notably the cAMP and MAP kinase
pathways, which results in activation of phosphorylation cascades leading to
changes in gene expression, including genes involved in protein turnover.
However, knowledge of these post-translational protein modifications and dynamic
changes in proteins during appressorium formation is limited. The ability to
conduct large scale analyses of proteins in living cells as well as measure
changes in protein modifications has advanced dramatically in recent years. In
this project, to further define and characterize the processes regulating
appressorium formation, a comprehensive quantitative analysis of relative
changes in protein abundance and phosphorylation patterns during appressorium
formation will be conducted. The integration of gene expression and proteomics
data will contribute substantially to constructing a more comprehensive view of
the cellular processes underlying this fundamental biological process.

Broader Impacts: This project will have broad impact at several levels. The
research will provide cross training in chemistry and fungal biology for the
graduate student and post doctoral scholar involved in this project. An
individualized mentoring program will be developed for the post doctoral
scholar. The PI and co-PI will develop a new colloquium integrating general
concepts in biology and chemistry around the premises of this project for high
school students as well as provide research experience for undergraduates.
Finally, through broad dissemination of the results from these studies,
including an online open-source database, the knowledge will be invaluable for
driving research to find practical solutions to rice blast and other diseases
caused by fungal plant pathogens.