* 0918954
* Dissecting the Relationship between a CHD3 Chromatin Remodeler and the Repressive Epigenetic Mark H3K27me3 in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Joseph Ogas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 330,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The long-term objective of this project is to understand how
the CHD3 class of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling factors contributes to
regulation of gene expression and developmental identity. In animal model
systems, CHD3 proteins have been shown to act through a multisubunit complex
(Mi-2/NuRD) in combination with histone deacetylase to repress transcription of
genes that play a critical role in differentiation and development. In the plant
model system Arabidopsis thaliana, the CHD3 gene, PICKLE, also represses
expression of genes and plays an important role in developmental transitions.
However, there are two key differences between PICKLE function and CHD3 function
in animals. First, PICKLE does not appear to function in the plant equivalent of
Mi-2/NuRD. Second, PICKLE appears to operate through formation of the repressive
chromatin mark, trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). This histone
modification is known to play a critical role in gene repression in both animals
and plants, but is not directly regulated by CHD3 proteins in animals. To
understand how PICKLE regulates gene expression, this project will take
advantage of powerful genetic, biochemical, and developmental tools to explore
how CHD3 proteins contribute to chromatin structure and gene expression.
Specifically, experiments will be aimed at characterizing the remodeling
activity of recombinant PICKLE protein and examining the contribution of various
conserved protein domains to PICKLE function in vitro and in vivo. The results
will shed light on new mechanisms of action for CHD3 remodelers that are
anticipated to be generally applicable to all
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The planned research aligns
well with the education mission of NSF. The project will build on a long
tradition of engaging students in research by providing both undergraduates and
graduate students with opportunities to carry out research. This will provide
the students with a solid foundation in science associated with chromatin
biology, model systems, and genome-based approaches. Finally, the PI will
continue to synergize his experiences in the lab with those in the classroom and
thereby provide a more meaningful educational experience to students.