* 0918241
* Collaborative Research:   RUI:   Measuring reciprocal natural selection in a contact zone in an obligate pollination mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Christopher Smith, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 149,674.00

This project addresses a fundamental question in evolutionary ecology; how does
coevolution between plants and their insect pollinators create biodiversity.
Joshua trees (Yucca brevifolia) are spiny, tree-like desert plants that are an
iconic species of the American West. The trees are remarkable not only for their
bizarre appearance, but also for their highly specialized and unusual means of
pollination. They are pollinated exclusively by two species of Yucca moth in the
genus Tegeticula; the moths, in turn, reproduce solely by laying their eggs in
the flowers. This relationship between the Joshua tree and its pollinators is
one of extreme interdependence; both the moth and the plant are entirely reliant
upon one another for reproduction. The two species of Yucca moth that pollinate
the Joshua tree differ in key features of their anatomy, particularly the size
and shape of the female moth ovipositor, the organ used to inject their eggs
into the Joshua tree flower. Recent work has shown that the particular trees on
which these two moth species lay their eggs differ in features of their floral
anatomy; the path through which the moth must insert her ovipositor is longer in
trees that are pollinated by moths with a larger ovipositor, and shorter in
flowers pollinated by moths with a shorter ovipositor. This anatomical match
between the moths and the plants they pollinate likely reflects a history of
coevolution, but this hypothesis has never been tested. This project will
provide proof of concept that the hypothesis can be tested using reciprocal
transplant experiments to quantify natural selection acting on the insects and
the plants. In addition, the project will assess the feasibility of using
molecular genetic techniques to reconstruct family relationships in the
pollinators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Joshua tree is a keystone species of the
Mojave Desert ecosystem of the southwest USA, and is threatened by climate
change with extinction over much of its range. Results from this project will
inform local and federal conservation efforts to save Joshua trees through
expansion of their range. This project will engage a number of undergraduates
from a predominately undergraduate institution with research training in
molecular genetics and evolutionary ecology.