* 0918064
* Neural mechanisms of color in extrastriate cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Bevil Conway, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2014
* USD 704,000.00

How does the brain determine the colors we see? The retina contains three cone
types, but each cone is actually colorblind: the red-sensitive cone cannot tell
the difference between a dim yellow-green and a bright blue. Theoretically color
can be calculated by comparing the activity of the different cone types, but how
the brain does this remains mysterious. This project will investigate how cone
signals are processed by specialized brain regions thought to be important in
color perception. It will employ functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
generate an overview of regions involved in color in the macaque monkey, a model
of human trichromatic color vision. Microelectrodes will then be targeted to
specific regions identified by fMRI. By correlating the patterns of neural
activity of single neurons with controlled visual stimuli, this project will
test hypotheses about the function of the neurons in encoding color percepts.
One important question that will be addressed is how color-selective neurons
sample the cone signals to achieve color selectivity. This project aims to
reveal not only the neural mechanisms underlying color, but more generally the
principles that govern how neural circuits transform sensory stimuli into
perception and behavior. It will provide a unique opportunity to train
undergraduate women in the use of cutting-edge systems research technology, and
will foster inter-institutional networks and partnerships. The results will have
broad impact: they will be useful to engineers interested building artificial
vision systems, and will engage the general public by tackling important
questions such as how and why color is compelling. Finally, by combining single-
unit electrophysiology and fMRI in the same subjects, this project will further
our knowledge of the neural basis for fMRI, which is still poorly understood,
despite the fact that fMRI is the most widely used clinical tool for assessing
brain function.