* 0918108
* Connecting Dark Matter to Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Graham Kribs, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 09/30/2013
* USD 120,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Cosmological data have established that most of the energy density of the
Universe is made of two mysterious components, dark energy and dark matter. The
most promising candidate for dark matter is a new weakly interacting particle
with a mass near the electroweak scale, suggesting a tantalizing connection with
electroweak symmetry breaking. The PI intends to investigate this connection by
developing and exploring models beyond the Standard Model with unusual particle
dark matter candidates, and calculating the astrophysical detection prospects as
well as their novel collider signals. Remarkable dark matter detection
experiments are now underway which have already provided unprecedented clues to
the properties of dark matter. Very recent results, including the reconfirmation
of the DAMA annual modulation, the PAMELA positron ratio excess, and others, are
strongly suggestive of electroweak scale candidates with unusual properties.
Simultaneously, the start of the large hadron collider this year will
revolutionize our knowledge of the electroweak scale. The PI intends to exploit
these opportunities to actively participate in uncovering the nature and
identity of dark matter. As to broader implacts, the PI plans a series of
integrated outreach programs afforded by the strong public appeal of the physics
of the Universe to broaden the impact of this proposal. The PI has begun a
working relationship with South Eugene High School with plans to expand
students' opportunities for research through advising their Senior Research
Project. The PI is proposing a new public lecture series that will bring
forefront researchers to Oregon. Using the University of Oregon's recently
enlarged Portland facility, the public outreach effort would be directed at
Oregon's largest population center and combined with new opportunities to have
leading researchers visit with undergraduates at traditional liberal arts
colleges such as Reed College. This program allows opportunities for
undergraduates of wide backgrounds to be inquisitive and become excited by
research as well as developing ideas for senior thesis research projects.