* 0918684
* Student Support for the AIED 2009 Artificial Intelligence in Education Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2009,04/30/2010
* Roger Azevedo, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2010
* USD 21,600.00

This is funding to support travel by 18 intermediate and advanced doctoral
students to participate in the AI-ED Doctoral Student Consortium, at the
upcoming International Artificial Intelligence in Education Conference (AI-ED),
to be held to be held in Brighton, United Kingdom from July 6 to 10, 2009. The
AI-ED International Conference is the premier biennial event for promoting
promotes rigorous research and development of interactive and adaptive learning
environments for learners of all ages; AI ED will be the 7th event in the
series. The interdisciplinary areas that AI-ED represents, comprising cognitive
science, computer science, and educational technology, are critical research
domains that enhance the effectiveness and usability of software learning
systems. Active participation of young researchers in this conference is very
important, both for the health of the field and for the researchers themselves.
The AI-ED Doctoral Consortium provides a unique opportunity for PhD students
partway through their dissertation research to receive valuable feedback and
individual mentoring from top researchers in the field. The PI and co-PI both
hold active leadership roles within AI-ED, and both hold over $2 million of NSF
grants in the areas of human-language and advanced learning technologies. The
AI-ED Doctoral Consortium Committee will be comprised of the two PIs together
with two other senior professors/researchers.

Broader Impact: Bringing young and creative researchers to AI-ED will help
advance an important and socially valuable interdisciplinary research field. For
many graduate students, the cost of attending the AI-ED conference exceeds their
travel budget. Thus, NSF funding will significantly impact the careers of the
next generation of AIED researchers, by enabling a number of them to take part
in an important event they would otherwise have to miss; in particular, those
who lack funding from other sources (e.g., advisor's grants). The students will
have an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative
work, and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. Participation will also help foster a sense of community among these
young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. The PI and co-PI have indicated that they will act to assure
participation by members of traditionally under-represented institutions, and
will pay close attention to inclusion of minorities and women.