* 0918037
* Characterization of a regulatory pathway controlling cereal leaf senescence
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andreas Fischer, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of a regulatory
pathway controlling cereal leaf senescence&lt;br/&gt;PI: Andreas M.
Fischer&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #IOS-0918037&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the end of
their life span, most plant leaves turn yellow, a highly visual process known as
senescence. Senescence in annual crops is a gradual process, which starts with
older leaves and, in cereals, progresses from the leaf tip towards the base. Its
importance stems from the fact that a large fraction of the nutrients present in
green leaves are remobilized from senescing leaves and retranslocated to
surviving structures, such as seeds of annual plants. At present, the biological
processes controlling senescence are incompletely understood. This project
focuses on a particular gene (coding for a glycine-rich RNA-binding protein, or
GRP), which is highly upregulated in leaves of early- as compared to late-
senescing barley lines. The biological function of GRP in the control of leaf
senescence will be investigated using a combination of physiological, molecular
and biochemical approaches. Specifically, the investigators will (1) determine
how the control of leaf senescence by GRP is influenced by plant developmental
stage (comparing gene function before and after flowering occurs); (2) use a
modern molecular biology approach to silence the GRP gene to compare leaf
senescence in control plants with plants with reduced gene function; and (3)
determine the three-dimensional structure of GRP, a common approach to advance
our understanding of protein biological function. The investigators anticipate
that this multi-pronged approach will substantially improve our understanding of
GRP function in the control of cereal leaf senescence. Gained knowledge will be
applicable to the development of crops with improved nutrient (fertilizer) use
efficiency, higher quality (higher grain protein from nitrogen remobilization),
and possibly higher yield (later senescence could lead to longer green leaf
duration and photosynthetic carbon dioxide assimilation). This project will also
provide training opportunities for two postdoctoral research associates and a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;