* 0918382
* Sulfur isotope study of Phanerozoic carbonate associated sulfate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* James Farquhar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2012
* USD 148,282.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act&lt;br/&gt;of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). This proposal requests funds to
support research &lt;br/&gt;by a Ph.D. student, who is working to establish a
record of sulfur isotope ratios (involving all four sulfur isotopes) using
carbonate associated sulfate as a proxy of seawater sulfate and using this
record to test a developing hypothesis about the evolution of the sulfur cycle.
Specifically, we hypothesize that there was a change in the magnitude of the
fractionation between sulfate and buried pyrite that occurred in the middle
Phanerozoic, and that points to a change in the biological pathways involved in
sulfur cycling. We aim to test this hypothesis and to explore its implications
for and connections with the sulfur cycle as well as to elucidate the mechanisms
behind the change if such change is confirmed. Preliminary results of analyses
and of model calculations form the basis for the hypotheses that are to be
tested and are described in more detail in the body of this proposal. This
proposal requests funds to support the second two years of research and includes
a request for a graduate stipend, standard benefits, tuition, analytical costs
and travel to two meetings where results will be presented. No funds are
requested to support the PI, but funds are requested to support an undergraduate
researcher. This is done as part of a laboratory policy to involve
undergraduates, which we believe carries benefits for them by integrating them
in high-level research projects, and for the postdoctoral student's professional
development by placing him in the role of mentor as well as researcher. In the
past these projects have resulted in new ideas being developed and independent
projects that may form the basis for University of Maryland senior thesis
projects. Other broader impacts include the ncorporation of research results and
the research model in public presentations and other professional activities by
the PI.