* 0918197
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Political Economy of Language Use
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Michael Uzendoski, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 12,370.00

Florida State University doctoral candidate, Stephanie Litka, working with the
guidance of Dr. Michael Uzendoski, will undertake research on patterns of
language use in multi-language contexts associated with cross-cultural tourism.
As the tourist industry becomes more prevalent throughout indigenous areas in
the world, it provides a research setting for understanding how multilingualism
mediates social networks, inter-cultural relations, and
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out among tourist
workers in the town of Coba, Quintana Roo, Mexico. Tourists who visit this
ancient Maya site have dramatically altered the economic landscape of this
formally agricultural community just over the past few decades. The researcher
will focus on the relationship between language use and settings characterized
by different forms of exchange. She will examine, for example, the contrast
between household (largely centered on interpersonal forms of exchange) and
public spheres of interaction with tourists (largely centered on the market
economy). Methods of data collection will include extensive observations of
conversational content in each setting, semi-structured interviews of local
attitudes and cultural beliefs, and surveys measuring linguistic abilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resarch is important because it will look not only at
how tourism affects local people, but also if language switching helps or
hinders people as they try to reconcile indigenous values with foreign ones.
This will contribute to sociolinguistic theory and to the development of
culturally sensitive tourism planning. The award also supports the education of
a graduate student.