* 0918930
* LIGHT-TRANSDUCTION IN MELANOPSIN-EXPRESSING PHOTORECEPTORS OF AMPHIOXUS Mechanistic analysis and evolutionary implications
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Enrico Nasi, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2013
* USD 535,108.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal vision was
traditionally thought to be comprised of two distinct lineages of sensory cells
that evolved separately in vertebrates vs. invertebrates. These photoreceptors
differ fundamentally in the light sensor structure and the biochemistry to
convert captured photons into electrical signals. Such view was challenged by
the discovery of additional light-detection schemes and by clues pointing to a
likely common origin for all photoreceptors. One pivotal finding was the
identification of novel light-sensitive mammalian cells, which regulate the
biological clock via a photon-capturing molecule, melanopsin, akin to those of
invertebrates. However, the enormous divergence between these groups of animals
makes comparative analysis arduous, exacerbated by the difficulties to
characterize melanopsin-signaling in mammalian cells, owing to their scarcity.
This impasse could be alleviated by examining some precursor of modern
vertebrates, to bridge this evolutionary chasm. Amphioxus offers unique
advantages, because genomic research established that it is the most basal
living chordate and has remained close to its ancestral condition. It thus
provides a favorable window to examine biological mechanisms as they may have
existed when the vertebrate branch separated. Melanopsin has been detected in
some identifiable amphioxus cells, but no functional study had been conducted;
the investigators will capitalize on their initial results, demonstrating the
feasibility to isolate these cells and measure light-induced electrical
responses. The project will recruit and train graduate students at the Marine
Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole. The Marine Biological Laboratory provides
an outstanding environment for this work. A multi-pronged approach will
characterize the photoresponse mechanisms, identify intermediate steps of
stimulus-response coupling, and initiate their molecular characterization. The
benefits will be two-fold: help clarify the evolution of light-sensing, and
elucidate melanopsin signaling mechanisms, which remain largely elusive. The
multi-disciplinary nature of the project provides a fertile ground to train
young investigators, exposing them to issues ranging from evolutionary biology
to sensory physiology and cellular biophysics; the technical arsenal will be
correspondingly diverse, encompassing electrical and optical recording,
molecular and immunological identification, and bio-informatics tools.