* 0918970
* Collaborative Research:  Cyberinfrastructure for Transformational Scientific Discovery in Arkansas and West Virginia  (CI TRAIN)
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas
* Cooperative Agreement
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,370,951.00

EPS-0918970, University of Arkansas, Amy W. Apon, linked to EPS-0918949 (WV
Higher Education Policy Commission) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: Cyberinfrastructure for Transformational Scientific Discovery in
Arkansas and West Virginia (CI-Train)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership between Arkansas (AR) and West
Virginia (WV) builds on common research in geosciences, virtual environments,
and computational sciences while leveraging technical expertise within the two
states: WV leverages expertise in the deployment and operation of shared high
performance computing resources while AR leverages expertise in visualization
and modeling. This consortium seeks to create a nationally competitive
computation and visualization environment; to provide visualization display
devices at each partnering institution; and to procure a suite of hardware and
software for data capture and content creation that can enable a broad range of
research and education activities across several science and engineering
domains. The consortium seeks to build the needed cyberinfrastructure to advance
the frontiers of knowledge in several scientific domains, and to transform
information technology services for enabling discovery and innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together,
access to CI resources will enable transformative research in a number of domain
areas across the CI-TRAIN consortium. The areas are chosen because of their
importance to the participating jurisdictions and include multi-scale geomatics
and geosciences; scalable virtual world technology; nanoscience, including low-
dimensional multiferroics and atomistic simulation of defects in nanocrystalline
materials; real-time image guided surgery; discovering new physics and phenomena
in nanostructured materials; plant secondary cell wall reconstruction; near
field scanning optical microscopy; and performance models of large scale
clusters that can be applied to TeraGrid resources. Although the topics span
vastly different disciplines, they all share a number of common elements,
namely, very large data sets, complex computational systems, and interactive
visualization needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each domain area provides intellectual
merit. For example, the geomatics area team seeks to create a ?smart world?
defined as a visually immersive environment rich with real-world content and
real-time responses to real-world events, bringing a better sense of presence to
mirror world applications and a better sense of place and time to virtual world
applications. The researchers seek to use this ?smart world? to overcome
shortcomings of virtual environments that inhibit realistic modeling of air and
water (and other fluids).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through enabling access to the TeraGrid and other
national NSF-funded cyberinfrastructure resources, the consortium?s participants
will gain the needed computational support for science and engineering research
not available locally. Access to computational infrastructures will enable
insights into nanostructures that can in turn be used to guide the design and
improvement of devices such as actuators and sensors. The resulting research
products in visualizations, geosciences, and virtual world will provide a
powerful environment for managers, planners, emergency response personnel, and
others to quickly plan and manage communities, emergencies, and other complex
processes. In addition, CI-TRAIN will be a tested for the development of
approaches to real-time image-guided surgery that will allow safe obliteration
of solid tumors anywhere in the human body. Finally, innovative studies that
explore the 3-D structures of plant cell walls will assist in understanding how
to cost effectively recover components of the cell wall for use in bio-based
product development.&lt;br/&gt;