* 0918661
* Understanding plant cell wall structure
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Allan Showalter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2012
* USD 261,206.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant growth depends crucially on the
action of glycosyltransferase enzymes designed to build an extracellular cell
wall matrix around plant cells. Yet we lack a comprehensive description of these
enzymes and how they construct such an intricate supramolecular structure which
is important to plant biology and industry, particularly agriculture, forestry,
and renewable energy. The U.S. is capable of producing substantial amounts of
biofuel in the form of ethanol by microbial fermentation of plant cell wall
material; however, optimization of these procedures will require a deep
understanding of the synthesis of cell wall components. Arabinogalactan-proteins
(AGPs) are one such component; they are highly glycosylated hydroxyproline-rich
glycoproteins. AGPs are implicated in many physiological processes including
plant somatic embryogenesis, programmed cell death, wound responses, and hormone
signaling pathways. Identifying AGP glycosyltransferase genes will facilitate
crop improvement and plant-breeding programs. However, no AGP
glycosyltransferase genes have been identified. The objective of this proposal
is to identify and analyze the function of AGP-galactosyltransferase (AGP-GalT)
genes involved in the first steps of AGP O-linked glycosylation. The approach
builds upon an AGP-GalT assay we developed, which will enable purification and
testing of candidate AGP GalTs. This project will lead to an understanding of
cell wall biosynthesis and biomass growth to meet needs of the wood, paper,
textile, fuel, and food industries. It will also allow for designing new AGP-
based bioproducts including benign non-antigenic drug delivery products.
Finally, it will provide valuable training opportunities at the undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels to create a diverse work force that will be
able to pursue these needs in the future for the benefit of the U.S. economy and
the environment. The investigators believe strongly in the mission of research
in science education and make every effort to incorporate research activities
and current literature into their teaching mission at the university.