* 0918074
* Excavation of Middle and Later Stone Age Sites at Erfkroon, South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Bousman, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 105,260.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Britt Bousman and James
Brink from Texas State University and a team of colleagues from American,
British, South African and Australian universities and museums will conduct
archaeological investigations at Erfkroon an archaeological site located in the
western Free State of South Africa. The team brings together archaeologists,
geologists, soil scientists, paleontologists, paleobotanists and dating experts
to examine the evolution of modern human behavior and cognition during the
Middle Stone Age period. By approximately 200,000 years ago anatomically modern
humans had appeared in Africa, but 100,000 years passed before reliable evidence
of modern human behavior is documented. Also, there appears to be a difference
between events on the coast of Southern Africa and the interior grasslands with
earlier evidence for modern human behavior along the coasts. This time lag and
geographic discontinuity present a significant puzzle for paleoanthropologists.
If human anatomy and cognition evolved together, why would there be such a vast
disjunction between the development of anatomically modern humans and modern
human behavior? These excavations promise to provide unique evidence of the
transition to modern human behavior in the interior, a poorly studied region of
Africa that could play a critical role for solving this puzzle.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In order to address these disjunctions in human development,
excavations in Middle and Late Pleistocene terrace deposits in the Modder River
valley at Erfkroon will undertaken. Preliminary investigations demonstrate that
Erfkroon can provide a highly detailed record, and this record can be compared
to the much better known coastal regions of Southern Africa. The Erfkroon
research will 1) excavate occupations dating to the Middle and Late Pleistocene
spanning the last 165,000 years, 2) affix these occupations within a firm
geochronological framework based on well stratified terrace deposits, 3)
reconstruct past environments with geological, soils, phytolith, paleobotanical
and stable isotope data, 4) analyze the faunal remains to determine the nature
of animal exploitation and hunting preferences and methods, 5) document the
nature of technological strategies during the MSA, and 6) integrate these
various sources of evidence to assess the nature of human behavior and cognition
during the period when modern humans first emerged in Africa.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Erfkroon excavations may provide critical information on the mode
and tempo of human evolution during the Middle and Late Pleistocene period in
Africa. The intellectual merit of this project rests on the testing of four
specific models of human evolution and cognition. These models link or reject
links between human cognition and anatomical evolution in early populations of
Homo sapiens sapiens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study
will address evolutionary questions of human behavior and cognition. These
issues are significant to paleoanthropologists and evolutionary psychologists.
South African, British and U.S. archaeology, geology and environmental sciences
students will take part in this project. This will contribute directly to their
training in their respective fields and dramatically increase our knowledge of
modern human evolution in Southern Africa.