* 0918482
* A Novel Experimental and Modelling Study of C and N Dynamics Between Litter, Soil and the Atmosphere as Affected by Soil Fauna and Litter Quality
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* William Parton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 858,675.00

The decay of dead plant material (litter) is a key process in terrestrial
ecosystems. For example, as nutrients essential for soil fertility are released
into the soil through decomposition, carbon (C) is released back to the
atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide (CO2), or stored belowground in stable
forms. Annually, the CO2 released to the atmosphere by decomposition processes
is an order of magnitude higher than the CO2 released by anthropogenic
activities. Climate, litter quality and soil animals are key factors controlling
litter decay. Current limited knowledge of litter decomposition processes is
hampering model predictions of future changes in atmospheric greenhouse gases.
The proposed research will result in novel understanding about the influence of
soil animals on decomposition. It includes an innovative litter decay experiment
in the field, using cutting-edge and traditional methods to unravel questions
about carbon and nitrogen (N) transfers from litter to soil and atmosphere. A
well designed experimental plan will result in clear demonstrations of the
effect of litter quality and soil animals on decomposition processes. The
mechanistic understanding of carbon and nitrogen fluxes during litter
decomposition will improve ecosystem models and, ultimately, the ability to
predict the impact of climate change on soil carbon budgets, nitrogen trace gas
fluxes and net greenhouse gas fluxes from ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be conducted at the Konza prairie, a Long-Term Ecological Research
(LTER) site, and thus will contribute to a long-term database on climate change,
biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. A graduate class on potential uses of
the tracers in ecology will be taught, and additional field and lab
opportunities for training for post-doctoral associates, graduate and
undergraduate students will be promoted. Further, a discussion group and lecture
series on Soil Sustainability and Climate Change to integrate disciplines as
part of the School of Global Environmental Sustainability will be initiated.
This research will also contribute to the established NSF K-12 activities
ongoing at Colorado State University's Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory
(NREL).