* 0918362
* Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Proteins by NMR and Computation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Rafael Bruschweiler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 608,782.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed information on protein dynamics
at an atomic level and its thermodynamic implications is of fundamental
biophysical importance for understanding protein stability and function. The
overall goal of the project is the development of new methods for a
comprehensive description of complex dynamics and thermodynamics of proteins and
to demonstrate their applicability to biologically important molecular systems.
The recent advent of increasingly long molecular dynamics simulations will be
used to close the time-scale gap between simulations and experimental nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) parameters, in particular residual dipolar couplings
and rotating frame relaxation rates. Very long simulations into the ms range
will be performed to make quantitative comparisons with experiment both for the
protein backbone and the side chains. This information, on the one hand, will
yield a comprehensive assessment of the accuracy of molecular mechanics force
fields and guide their further optimization. On the other hand, it provides a
realistic microscopic approach to the interpretation of these experimental NMR
parameters. These simulations also allow analysis of statistically significant
correlated motions between soft degrees of freedom, such as dihedral angles, and
thereby permit the accurate extraction of configurational entropies. These
concepts will be tested on model protein systems and applied to the experimental
and computational analysis of the entropy transfer mechanism of the protein MDM2
when it interacts with inhibitors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will produce new computational, statistical thermodynamic, and NMR
spectroscopic concepts for the characterization of proteins, which will enhance
the understanding of protein behavior and function and serve as input for the
engineering of proteins with new properties. The results will be disseminated in
form of publications and will be made available to the biophysics and
biomolecular NMR communities in terms of public web servers. The project
provides interdisciplinary training and research opportunities for graduate
students at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State
University (FSU), at the Institute of Molecular Biophysics at FSU, and at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), which count significant numbers
of students from demographically underrepresented groups. Research methods and
results will be incorporated into advanced undergraduate and graduate courses on
biophysics and biomolecular spectroscopy. The P.I. participates in NHMFL's
strong outreach programs for undergraduate and graduate students and at the
annual Open House, which is open to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;