* 0919974
* Effects of macromolecular crowding on protein structure, folding, and interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Margaret Cheung, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 232,219.00

Protein folding is an important biological process because proteins are required
to fold into unique structures for proper functionality in cells. Experiments on
living specimens are difficult to perform because of the interference from
complex interactions in a cell. The aim of this project is to investigate
statistical and kinetic properties of protein folding in the presence of
crowding agents using a combined experimental and computational approach.
Studies of such complex systems covering several orders of magnitude in spatial
and temporal scales require techniques from coarse-grained molecular simulation
and fine-grained atomistic simulations. These methods will be strategically
integrated into a multi-scale approach which enables the investigation of
protein dynamics in realistic conditions. The knowledge obtained from the
research will be used to discover physical principles of protein folding in vivo
and predict new phenomena that can only be seen in the interior of a cell. An
integrated multi-scale modeling and simulation approach will be applied to
enhance knowledge of complex protein dynamics in living systems. The project
will advance international research collaboration with the experimental group of
Dr. Pernilla Wittung-Stafshede in Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve training of undergraduate and graduate students through hands-on
research in the interdisciplinary fields of physics, chemistry and biology at
the University of Houston, one of the most ethnically diverse research
universities in the country. Students will learn about paradigms for high-
performance computing, algorithms for molecular simulations, and physical
principles to better understand biological systems at a molecular level. Newly
developed multiscale modeling and simulation software will be made available to
the scientific community through the internet. The PI plans to include the use
of this software in her regular visits to high schools in the Houston area and
to continue encouragement of women and underrepresented groups to pursue careers
in sciences and engineering. The PI also plans to host summer educational
workshops for undergraduate students and high school teachers that will provide
participants with hands-on experience in applying this software to biophysics
research as an effective teaching and learning approach to impact science
education.