* 0919195
* EAGER:  Femtosecond Virus Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Uwe Weierstall, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2011
* USD 299,084.00

Intellectual Merit: The long-term goal of this project is to determine the
three-dimensional structure of viruses at atomic resolution. An accurate
knowledge of viral structure is necessary to understand the mechanism of
infection at the molecular level. Many viruses cannot be crystallized for
structure analysis by standard crystallographic methods. Using the high
intensity X-ray radiation pulses generated at the X-ray free electron laser
facility LCLS in Stanford, diffraction patterns from single virions can be
obtained. Due to the short X-ray pulse duration of 10-100 fsec, each virus
particle generates a diffraction pattern before radiation damage destroys the
particle. The virus particles will be injected into the X-ray beam via two
methods: 1. An electrospray or nebulizer aerosol injector with aerodynamic
particle focusing, which has been developed at LLNL. 2. An aerojet source
developed at ASU, which provides a monodirectional beam of droplets containing
the viruses. The electrospray source delivers dehydrated particles at low
particle density, whereas the aerojet source delivers fully hydrated samples
with high particle density to the X-ray beam. After each X-ray pulse a single
particle diffraction pattern is read out. These patterns from many particle
orientations will be classified, sorted, merged and phased to form a three-
dimensional electron charge density map of the virus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The work will be made available in
simplified form to the existing "Science is fun" program at ASU, administered
through the LeRoy Eyring Center for Solid State Physics at ASU. In addition, the
material will be presented at the Central Arizona Science and Engineering Fair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will form the basis for a new
generation of instrumentation that may rapidly solve virus structures, which are
difficult to crystallize. This interdisciplinary research will bring together
elements of biochemistry, molecular biology, fluid dynamics, coherent X-ray
imaging, classification and phasing algorithm development and in doing so will
promote research and learning in integrated science areas that will greatly
benefit its participating students and postdoctoral associates. The results of
this research will be disseminated in the form of peer reviewed papers and
posters/talks at conferences.