* 0919897
* Collaborative Proposal: CCLI Phase II:  Diverse Partnership for Teaching Quantum Mechanics  and Modern Physics with Photon Counting Instrumentation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michael Noel, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,600.00

Physics (13) Recent developments in quantum optics and quantum information
physics along with the associated progress in photon-counting instrumentation
have opened the opportunity of introducing the most difficult concepts in
quantum mechanics to a much broader audience than previously. Undergraduates
from a variety of majors and even the general public are fascinated by news of
quantum computing and "quantum weirdness." These sophisticated concepts can be
clearly and dramatically demonstrated by means of a series of experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is built on a previous smaller project. Four
teaching experiments on photon quantum mechanics were developed and taught as a
laboratory course (see course website
http://www.optics.rochester.edu/workgroups/lukishova/QuantumOpticsLab). They are
adapted to the main challenge (the lack of space in the curriculum) by
developing a series of modular experiments and demonstrations based on an
elective laboratory that can be incorporated into a number of courses ranging
from freshman to senior level, in both physics and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop and test various
versions of teaching experiments and supporting materials to facilitate
understanding of the concepts of superposition, interference, complementarity
and non-locality in quantum mechanics by students with diverse backgrounds. A
further goal is to acquaint the students with these concepts using the recently
developed instrumentation of quantum information technology that can be used in
other areas (e.g., in nanotechnology or biomedicine). A collaboration among a
diverse group of schools (universities, community and liberal arts colleges, and
a technical institute) is developing a combination of lecture courses on modern
physics, quantum mechanics, and nanotechnology with experimental demonstration
and hand-on experiments for undergraduates at all levels, including first year
students. New compact equipment (e.g., a single photon source coupled with
optical fibers) is being developed for sharing among institutions in a quantum
optics teaching network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project
addresses one of the most challenging concepts of modern physics in science and
engineering education that is now being applied to important technological
problems. Enormously powerful computers and total communication security are the
future goals of quantum information technology. It is important to familiarize
the future workforce with these new ideas as well as to provide them with hands-
on experience in photon-counting instrumentation widely used in many
technological areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project directly
impacts a variety of science and engineering students with diverse backgrounds
including under-represented groups. Dissemination of the results is by a
constant development of a project website, building a national network with
collaborative activities with similar course instructors from other
universities, presentations and publications in educational journals, and by
student publication and presentations at regional and national professional
meetings. NSF Summer REU and RET programs and interactive workshops provide
students and teachers from other institutions with an opportunity to learn about
teaching experiments, and compact equipment may be borrowed from Rochester. A
book on quantum optical teaching experiments is being prepared for publication.