* 0919617
* Effects of Genetic Background and Gene Sharing on the Evolvability of a Promiscuous Enzyme Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Shelley Copley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2013
* USD 895,017.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

New enzymes can evolve by recruitment of enzymes that have a promiscuous ability
to catalyze a newly needed reaction. This project addresses the early stages of
evolution of a new activity using the promiscuous N-acetyl glutamyl phosphate
(NAGP) reductase activity of E. coli glutamyl phosphate (GP) reductase. The
experiments will combine in vitro evolution methods for generating and
identifying enzymes with enhanced NAGP reductase activities with classical
enzymological approaches for characterizing the catalytic abilities of the
improved enzymes. The first objective is to examine how the potential for
evolution of promiscuous activities depends on both the level of the promiscuous
activity and its evolvability - i.e. whether there is an evolutionary trajectory
to an improved enzyme that avoids intermediates that decrease the fitness of the
organism. The second objective is to explore how a requirement to maintain GP
reductase activity constrains the emergence of NAGP reductase activity before
gene duplication provides a gene copy encoding an enzyme that can evolve to
specialize in the new function. The third objective is to dissect the
mechanistic reasons for improvements in NAGP reductase activity in evolved
variants using kinetic approaches that allow measurement of rate constants for
individual steps in the overall reaction.

Broader Impact. This work will provide new insights into the processes that have
governed the evolution of new enzymes in microbes since the origin of life and
continue to affect the evolution of new enzymes in microbes exposed to novel
environmental stresses such as the presence of toxic pollutants or antibiotics.
In addition, work on the evolvability of promiscuous activities in homologous
enzymes will be of great interest to protein engineers who aim to evolve new
green catalysts for industrial purposes. Other broader impacts of this work
include development of a workshop for high school teachers on molecular
evolution, development of a lab on microbial evolution for a summer camp for
minority middle school and high school girls, and training of undergraduates.