* 0919908
* RUI: Characterization of the Manganese Centers of Oxalate Oxidase from Ceriporiopsis subvermispora
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Ellen Moomaw, Gainesville College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2010
* USD 201,070.00

This project seeks to elucidate how protein environment modulates the chemistry
of oxalate degradation in recombinant oxalate oxidase from Ceriporiopsis
subvermispora. Oxalate oxidase catalyzes the carbon-carbon bond cleavage of
oxalate to yield carbon dioxide and hydrogen peroxide. Although there is
currently no structural information available for oxalate oxidase from C.
subvermispora (CsOxOx), sequence data and homology modeling indicate that it is
the first manganese-containing bicupin enzyme identified that catalyzes this
reaction. The best characterized oxalate oxidases are from barley and wheat.
These enzymes, also known as germins, contain a single cupin domain and are
therefore classified as monocupins. Interestingly, CsOxOx shares greatest
sequence homology with the bicupin microbial oxalate decarboxylases. The short
term goals of this research are to 1) to characterize the manganese-dependence
of oxalate oxidase from C. subvermispora and 2) to identify the active site of
the enzyme. This research is expected to contribute to the understanding of how
subtle structural changes effect remarkable functional variation in
evolutionarily related proteins. Characterizing the manganese-dependence of
CsOxOx is significant in order to place this enzyme in the context of other
oxalate degrading enzymes and that of other cupin proteins. Identifying the
active site of CsOxOx is an important problem. If only one of the manganese
centers mediates catalysis, critical questions are raised concerning the
function (if any) of the second Mn-binding domain and the extent to which local
protein structure in each domain results in differential reactivity.

Broader Impacts This project is transforming Gainesville State College (a two-
year unit of the University System of Georgia) from an institution that provides
excellent coursework in the sciences into one that also provides students the
opportunity to participate in meaningful and important laboratory research.
Undergraduate students carry out most of this work at Gainesville State College
(GSC), but also have the opportunity to work with collaborators at the
University of Florida and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in
Tallahassee, FL. Student researchers are expected to communicate their research
experiences to broad audiences through diverse media. Student researchers also
are expected to publish their results and report research findings at
professional meetings and to the regional educational community. Funds from this
project are used to acquire, operate, and maintain research equipment that is
not otherwise available at GSC.