* 0919070
* Collaborative Research (RUI):   Burial of organic carbon in temperate, shallow lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Kyle Zimmer, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 446,655.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is worldwide concern over
increasing concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and its influence
on global climate. Managing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide
requires understanding how ecosystems process carbon, and identifying systems
that potentially store carbon for long periods of time. Carbon dynamics of the
ocean are critical to atmospheric carbon remediation, but recent work has
suggested that storage of carbon in freshwater systems is also important to the
global carbon cycle. Understanding the controls of carbon storage in lake and
wetland sediments represents a potential regulatory mechanism for increasing
atmospheric carbon removal through management practices. This project will
assess the role of shallow lakes and wetlands in the global carbon cycle and
determine if they can be managed to store carbon in sediments more efficiently.
Shallow lakes are dominated by either submerged aquatic plants or algae, and
this study will test the hypothesis that shallow lakes dominated by submerged
plants store more carbon in sediments than do lakes dominated by algae. It is
hypothesized that submerged plants facilitate higher carbon storage because they
are more resistant to decomposition relative to algae. These hypotheses will be
tested using both modern day measurements and records from lake sediment cores
to estimate carbon storage rates over scales of decades to centuries. Modern-day
measurements will involve both comparative and experimental approaches,
including observations on lakes that are manipulated to shift from algae to
submerged-plant dominance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many shallow lakes and wetlands
are already heavily managed, but not necessarily for carbon removal. This
project will increase fundamental knowledge regarding sources and controls of
carbon storage in these systems, and determine whether shallow lakes can be
managed to increase uptake and storage of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Research
efforts will be strongly directed at undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate
training, with results available in traditional scientific literature and on the
web. In particular, scientists will coordinate with the Science Museum of
Minnesota to develop a website explaining the relevance and results of this work
to the general public.