* 0919173
* RUI:   Integrating the Effects of Sea Level Rise on Tidal Freshwater and Salt Marsh Stability in the Delaware River Estuary
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2012
* Nathaniel Weston, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 283,589.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Tidal marshes must grow vertically to keep pace with sea level rise, or risk
permanent flooding. This research focuses on the processes that regulate
vertical accretion in coastal marshes. These processes are tightly
interconnected and are influenced by changes in climate and land use. As
suspended sediment from watersheds declines, the projected increase in the rate
of sea level rise put into question the ability of marshes to keep pace with
rising sea levels. This project will examine how marsh plant production, rates
of sediment delivery and changes in marsh surface elevation vary spatially in
the Delaware River Estuary, a large mid-Atlantic estuarine system. Field
experiments will also be used to determine how both tidal freshwater and salt
marsh plant production and sediment delivery respond to changing sea levels and
salinity. This will lead to a more predictive understanding of ecosystem
responses to climate change, a major challenge that is of interest to
scientists, land managers and planners, and the general public.

Villanova University is a primarily undergraduate institution with solid
commitment and history of educating undergraduate students through active
involvement in research. In this case, two students a year will participate in a
summer internship to learn techniques, design and conduct their own research
project, and learn about other fields of study from active researchers. Focused
recruitment of women and minorities will increase involvement of
underrepresented groups in the sciences. Additional undergraduate student
involvement in the proposed research will be attained through employment and
Senior Thesis research credits, with results incorporated into several courses.
Results will also be disseminated in the scientific literature, through talks at
international scientific meetings, and to managers and stakeholders in the
Delaware River and other coastal regions.