* 0919190
* Evolution, Genetics and Development:   The Origin of Adaptive Pigment Alleles in Beach Mice
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Hopi Hoekstra, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

The proposed research aims to understand the evolutionary, genetic and
developmental processes responsible for adaptation in nature. Whereas most mice
have dark brown coats, beach mice that inhabit Florida's coastal shores have
light coats as an adaptation for camouflage in their sandy habitat. Using a
combination of fieldwork, genetic crosses and modern molecular biology, the
proposed project will: (1) understand the origin of the genetic variants that
cause adaptive coloration, (2) elucidate how these genes act during development
to produce color variation, and (3) functionally test the individual and
combined effects of these genes to reconstruct the step-by-step evolution of
color differences in these mice.

The proposed project uses several approaches to study the ultimate and proximate
causes of adaptive change, providing a framework for the evolution of biological
diversity. The project's integrative nature provides an ideal training
environment for students. Moreover, because the relationship between color and
natural selection are so straightforward, the proposed work is an appealing
example of adaptation. As such, there are two specific outreach goals. First, a
series of teachable units for high school teachers will be designed as
downloadable lesson plans, slides and accompanying materials to convey basic
evolutionary principles to students. Second, in conjunction with Harvard's
Museum of Natural History, a short video seminar and self-tour activity will be
produced for visiting school groups. This presentation will highlight both the
research process as well as basic lessons in evolutionary biology.