* 0919218
* RUI:   Transcriptional Regulation of INO1 in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Chang-Hui Shen, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 276,480.00

Several phospholipids, particularly inositol-containing phospholipids, have been
implicated in many complex signaling processes, which play a role in controlling
cell growth and proliferation in higher eukaryotes. The mechanisms by which
eukaryotic cells control the synthesis of membrane lipids in coordination with
ongoing membrane biogenesis are not yet fully understood. The first step in
understanding these complex phenomena is to examine the regulation of
phospholipid gene expression. In order to understand this regulation, the
precise details of the chromatin structure and relevant factors involved in the
transcriptional activation process must be unraveled. Yeast cells synthesize a
typical eukaryotic mixture of phospholipids, using pathways which are similar to
those in higher eukaryotes. The goal of this research is to use the genetic and
biochemical tools available for Saccharomyces cerevisiae to investigate the
mechanism of INO1 expression. INO1 encodes inositol-1-phosphate synthase, which
catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of inositol. INO1 expression
is required for the de novo synthesis of phosphatidylinositol, which has been
implicated in complex signaling processes, such as mRNA export, vesicular
trafficking, and cell growth and proliferation. This project addresses questions
pertaining to the possible roles of the transcriptional activator, Ino2p, during
INO1 activation. These experiments will examine how chromatin remodelers and
histone modifying enzymes are recruited to the INO1 promoter, and identify the
functional residue(s) in Ino2p, which is/are responsible for recruiting
remodelers and/or histone modifying enzymes. Therefore, this research will
provide new insight into the mechanism of gene regulation and the signal
transduction pathway of phospholipids.

Broader impacts: This project will provide an excellent opportunity for
undergraduate students to be actively engaged in cutting-edge research. Students
will be trained to perform experiments, leading to new discoveries related to
gene expression. During the course of study, undergraduate researchers will gain
experience in biochemical and genetic techniques, creative problem solving, and
working together as a team. The ability to integrate the knowledge they have
acquired in the classroom with hands-on, exciting scientific research will
provide an invaluable experience for undergraduate students. Furthermore,
laboratory research experience can provide students with the opportunity to
develop and acquire rigorous scientific methodologies. Thus, these students will
be equipped with both fundamental and comprehensive knowledge that they may then
apply in solving other biological questions.

