* 0919886
* SHB1 regulates seed development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Min Ni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Litt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 459,053.00

PI: Min Ni&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: IOS-0919886&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
"SHB1 regulates seed development in Arabidopsis"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Double
fertilization in angiosperms leads to the formation of a diploid embryo and a
triploid endosperm. In Arabidopsis, seed development undergoes an initial phase
of active endosperm proliferation followed by a second phase in which embryo
grows rapidly at the expense of the endosperm. Since mature seed size is largely
attained during the initial phase, seed size is coordinately regulated by the
growth of the maternal ovule, the endosperm, and the embryo. The mechanisms
underlying seed size control are still not well understood, yet seeds form the
bulk of the diet of human population. The gene SHB1 is a positive regulator of
Arabidopsis seed development that operates through regulation of both cell size
and cell number. shb1-D, a gain-of-function allele, increases seed size and
shb1, a loss-of-function allele, reduces seed size. The increase in seed size of
shb1-D is associated with the timing of endosperm cellularization, enlargement
of chalazal endosperm, and subsequent embryo development. SHB1 regulates the
expression of the genes MINI3 and IKU2, which encode a WRKY transcription factor
and an LRR receptor kinase respectively. SHB1 associates with MINI3 and IKU2
promoters in vivo, and directly interacts with MINI3. The goal of this project
is to test if SHB1 is recruited as a co-activator by a WRKY transcription factor
to control gene expression required for endosperm development. Various cellular,
biochemical, and molecular approaches will be used to investigate the
interaction of SHB1 with MINI3 and the biological consequence of SHB1-MINI3
interaction. Understanding the mechanisms of seed size regulation has the
potential to generate a potential increase in seed yield and a concomitant
increase in the amount of protein and oil produced per
seed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide excellent opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows to gain significant
research experiences, and most importantly, to develop their ability to
critically analyze and solve scientific problems. Seed size is a yield trait
that traditional plant breeding has limited success in improving. Seed
development in major seed crops such as soybean and canola follows a very
similar path to Arabidopsis. Enhancing the potential for large seed size
represents one of the most promising and least explored avenues for generating a
significant increase in agricultural yield.