* 0919707
* ER stress transducing transcription factors in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Stephen Howell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Stephen H. Howell&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number IOS-0919707&lt;br/&gt;ER stress
transducing transcription factors in plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant stress
tolerance is a highly valued trait given the demands for producing crops for
food and fuel under all kinds of environmental conditions, particularly those
exacerbated by climate change. The goal of this project is to better understand
the mechanism by which plants perceive adverse environmental conditions and how
they protect themselves from the stress caused by these conditions. This project
will focus on two factors called transcription factors that "turn on" the
expression of stress response genes. These transcription factors are unusual in
that they are "dormant" and attached to membranes in the cytoplasm of plant
cells under normal conditions, but are activated and released from the membranes
and enter the nucleus under stress conditions. The two transcription factors are
activated by different stresses -- one by heat and the other by salt stress --
and each turns on a different set of genes. The investigators will determine how
the factors are activated, how they distinguish different stresses and how they
are relocated from one compartment of the cell to another. The factors turn on
different sets of genes, and so the investigators will also examine how the
factors selectively activate different target genes. This system represents a
newly discovered stress response pathway in plants and has prospects for
manipulating plants to achieve greater stress tolerance. The project will also
provide the opportunity to train George Washington Carver interns in the area of
plant stress research.&lt;br/&gt;