* 0919723
* Collaborative Research: ciHub, a Virtual Community to Support Research, Development, and Dissemination of Concept Inventories
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Paul Steif, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 08/31/2014
* USD 167,906.00

The project is a collaborative effort involving engineering education faculty
and learning scientists from Purdue University, Texas A&amp;M University,
Carnegie Mellon University, the Colorado School of Mines, and the University of
Illinois at Chicago. It is focused on creating a repository of concept
inventories in engineering education (ciHUB ) and on developing a community of
users, developers, and researchers. Concept inventories measure students'
conceptual understanding and enable instructors to evaluate the effectiveness of
instructional approaches. The project is building on a strong foundation of
existing concept inventories development and research and on a proven HUB
cyberinfrastructure (the nanoHUB). The project goals are (1) to leverage a
unique cyberinfrastructure to migrate existing concept inventories to a single
accessible location and support a collaborative community of faculty members and
students; (2) to engage and equip a growing community of active users of concept
inventories in targeted fundamental engineering courses; and (3) to conduct
research to guide concept inventory refinement and community implementation. The
project has a National Review and Evaluation Board that meets annually to assess
progress and provide formative feedback and it uses an external evaluator along
with assessment staff in Purdue's learning center to gather data indicating
progress toward the expected outcomes. Faculty development activities,
advertisements in Prism magazine, a connection with a prominent publisher, links
with the NSDL, journal articles, conference presentations, and the ciHUB itself
are being used to expand the number of users and developers and to make the
materials and results available. Broader impacts include the extensive
dissemination of project products, faculty professional development activities,
and a focused effort to engage faculty members from minority serving
institutions.