* 0919189
* Collaborative Research:  ETBC--Exploring Forest Ecosystem Response to Water Availability and the Impact on Biogeochemical and Water Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Russell Monson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2013
* USD 1,000,000.00

The study aims to identify and quantify linkages between the biogenesis of
aerosols that can function as cloud nuclei and the feedback through altered
precipitation patterns on vegetation processes that generate more aerosols. The
approach combines experiments, field measurements and laboratory investigations.
Each represents a key component of the overall cycle: 1) surveys of important
sources of biogenic volatile organic compounds along a broad transect of sites
in the Southwestern U.S.; 2) atmospheric surveys of biological aerosol
particles, which will take place at one of the sites and include the interesting
idea of DNA sequencing of particles to identify their sources; 3) two field
studies to manipulate water and investigate impacts on vegetation, one involving
imposition of drought in individual ponderosa pine trees and an investigation of
their VOC emissions and the other on a separate (but nearby) set of plots to
impose different moisture regimes to quantify the impact of moisture on
soil/litter VOC emissions; 4) studies of biogenic ice nuclei and cloud
condensation nuclei. These four investigations will be linked together in a
fifth activity involving a model: Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from
Nature (MEGAN).

One of the principal broader impacts of this work will occur through the
improvement of a coupled surface-atmosphere model that is available to the
broader scientific community from the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR) web site, and is capable of supporting future studies involving plant-
cloud interactions. The project will also support diversity in science
initiatives at NCAR and the University of Colorado by involving at least six
underrepresented-group undergraduate students in the research project. To extend
the impact of project into the public sector and the K-12 community, web-based
educational materials will be developed that will explain the impact of climate
change on the forest ecosystem, and will include real-time data from the Manitou
Forest Observatory. Ultimately, the results will lead to new strategies for
assessing the impact of regional climate change on ecosystems in the Western
U.S. and managing those impacts through recognition of the role ecosystems play
in amplifying or dampening further climate change.