* 0919063
* Collaborative Research:  MSB: Microbial control of litter decay at the cellulose-lignin interface
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Andrew Grandy, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2012
* USD 118,926.00

The key scientific significance of this work is the integration of microbial
community and chemical interactions during the long-term degradation and
stabilization of plant litter because there has not yet been a working synthesis
of this knowledge expressed in a comprehensive quantitative framework. Plant
litter decomposition is the main control on soil fertility and carbon (C)
sequestration. There is growing interest in understanding the conditions under
which soils gain or lose C, in part, because soils contain more C than the
atmosphere and could play either a moderating or exacerbating role in global
warming. An integrated field, laboratory, and modeling study of the biochemical
mechanisms driving interactions between soil C sequestration, plant litter
chemistry, and microbial community composition and activity during decomposition
is needed to define these relationships. Moorhead and Sinsabaugh (2006)
developed a new model that incorporates microbial dynamics into the
decomposition process, the Guild Decomposition Model (GDM), which has generated
a series of specific hypotheses about the mechanisms controlling the
interactions between plant litter chemistry, C stabilization and microbial
community composition and activity during decomposition. The proposed research
will evaluate these hypotheses experimentally by monitoring changes in plant
litter chemistry and microbial community composition and function during
decomposition, with and without added N to mimic N deposition. Stable C isotope
(13C) labeling will further determine the community composition of active
microorganisms capable of metabolizing specific chemical components of plant
litter. This research will provide mechanistic insight into the impacts on plant
litter decomposition and soil C sequestration from N deposition, elevated CO2,
plant community composition shifts, and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integrated education and outreach program will complement this research,
assisted by the University of Toledo's Center for Creative Instruction (CCI).
For this project, the CCI will develop an online interactive Model Of Leaf
Decomposition (iMold) to provide educational outreach about decomposition for
grades 5-12. Visitors will be able to visualize the progress of the
decomposition of litter as a whole, or different individual litter chemical
constituents, along a time line to see how time, litter type, and environment
relate to how quickly or slowly something decays. Teachers and students will be
able to network between researchers and classrooms at other schools, enabling
them to share data, ask questions, and collaborate on experiments. A
communication center will be created so that the researchers and classrooms can
share ideas and results, as well as ask questions in a blog-like environment.
Additionally, this project will provide training for several undergraduate and
graduate students. University of Toledo and Kent State University serve
significant populations of underrepresented groups in science, and they will be
recruited to this project.