* 0919554
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grants: Creating Transnational Kinship
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2010
* Louisa Schein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2010
* USD 14,998.00

Rutgers University doctoral student, Chigusa Yamaura, supervised by Dr. Louisa
Schein, will undertake research on the emerging phenomenon of transnational
marriages and their effects on traditional forms of kinship, nationalism, and
international relationships. She will focus her research on the growing trend of
brokered transnational marriages between Japanese men and Chinese women. In
particular, she will investigate how social and familial obligations, gender
ideologies, Sino-Japanese historical relations, and current economic
inequalities influence the production and navigation of new forms of family
organization at a transnational level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surprisingly,
preliminary research suggests that participants in these marriages frame their
relations as a form of intra-community (rather than inter-community) marriage.
To do so, they draw upon racial, cultural, regional, and even genealogical
discourses in an effort to create similarities and obscure power inequalities
and historical antagonisms. To further investigate how participants, brokers,
and family members conceptualize these marriages in the context of economic
disparities and contentious national discourses, the researcher will conduct
field research in both Japan and China. She will employ multiple social science
research methods, including participant observation, in-depth interviews,
clientele surveys, and media analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
important because it will contribute to social science theory about the
relationships between globalization and social change. While it is clear that
globalization is not, as once predicted, making all societies the same, it is
also clear that globalization is producing hitherto unknown forms of kinship and
family. Comparative local-level ethnographic research will help social
scientists better understand what these new forms are and how they are produced.
The research also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.