* 0919819
* Chemotaxis And The Regulation Of Multiple Cellular Functions In A Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Gladys Alexandre, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2013
* USD 587,546.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009(Public Law 111-5).

Intellectual Merit Organisms use signal transduction pathways to sense and
process information from the environment. Cellular response to the information
is critical to the survival and growth of all organisms. Microorganisms possess
two-component signal transduction systems, which regulate numerous cellular
behaviors in response to changes in the surroundings. One of these behaviors is
directed movement mediated by a chemotaxis signal transduction pathway (Che1).
Molecular mechanisms that direct the swimming pattern of bacteria during
chemotaxis have been characterized in detail in model microorganisms, and have
focused on flagellar mediated directed motility. Chemotaxis in the soil
bacterium Azospirillum brasilense involves directional movement but also is
coordinated with changes in cell length and the tendency of cells to form
aggregates. These changes in the morphology of a unicellular organism may
represent the simplest response to shifting environmental conditions. However,
the exact molecular mechanisms controlling motility and cell morphology in
bacteria are not known. This project focuses on establishing the molecular basis
of the coordinated control of chemotaxis, aggregation, and cell length mediated
by the chemotactic pathway (Che1) in A. brasilense. The research will
characterize in molecular detail changes in cell surface properties during
aggregation (objective 1). The project will characterize the structure of the
oligosaccharides specifically produced by aggregating cells and their
interaction with outer membrane proteins. Whole-genome microarray and
mutagenesis experiments will be used to identify the genes responsible for cell-
to-cell interactions. The project will also test the hypothesis that interaction
of the response regulator (CheY) with the polar flagellar motor complex results
in cell length changes and aggregation via an effect on other molecular
target(s) (research objective 2). The identification of the subset of
chemoreceptors that relay sensory information to Che1 will be carried out by
developing a novel experimental approach to assign genetically unlinked
chemoreceptors to the Che1 pathway (research objective 3). Results from this
research are expected to shed light into the strategies used by bacteria to
integrate sensory information into a coordinated framework of cellular
responses. The research will reveal how a chemotaxis signal transduction pathway
modulates multiple cellular responses which will refine understanding of complex
signal transduction used by bacteria to adapt to the environment.

Broader Impact Sensing and behavior in bacteria are uniquely suited for
broadening the educational experiences of college students and enabling the
development of research-based educational materials for K-12 students.
Undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups in the
sciences, will participate and contribute to all aspects of the on-going
research activities. These students will be recruited from several existing
programs at the University of Tennessee. Outreach activities aimed at promoting
science education are included. In particular, undergraduate and graduate
students will be partnered with middle and high school science teachers to
disseminate research to K6-12 level classrooms by developing and implementing
appropriate hands-on exercises that align with the science curriculum. The
activities developed will be made available to other science teachers by posting
on the College of Arts and Sciences outreach website, which will broaden the
impact of these activities.