* 0919686
* Cyber-Enhanced Student Investigations in Biology and Ornithology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* David Winkler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jose Herrera
* 02/29/2012
* USD 249,928.00

Biological Sciences (61). Growing efforts to reform undergraduate science
education call for engagement of students in scientific processes, including
designing investigations and analyzing data. This project is helping to meet
this need by creating, piloting, and promoting use of a suite of web-based
curriculum resources designed to engage undergraduates in research. These
curriculum resources allow undergraduates in biology, ecology, environmental
science and ornithology courses to learn how to access and use the wealth of
scientific data accumulating in online databases, and guide faculty through all
steps of facilitating student research using data from several rich and ever-
growing online collections of data about birds and other organisms. Initially
designed investigations focus on two themes central to undergraduate biology:
population ecology and animal communication and behavior. In the investigations,
students pose questions and conduct investigations using two types of web-
accessible databases. Investigations focusing on ecology use bird population
data assembled through citizen science projects such as eBird
(http://ebird.org), which contains over 21 million records of bird observations
submitted by more than 31,000 individuals throughout the western hemisphere. To
address questions related to animal communication and behavior, students analyze
recordings from Macaulay Library, the world's largest online archive of animal
sounds and videos (http://macaulaylibrary.org). Students are guided through all
steps of research - from devising relevant questions, to designing feasible
investigations, to presenting and critiquing the results. As a consequence,
undergraduate research becomes feasible in all types of academic settings, and
students build skills that can enrich their future studies and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project advances STEM learning
through development of a model for provision of authentic research experiences
to undergraduates in a diversity of settings, including distance-learning
courses, institutions with no lab facilities, and large classes. The Cornell Lab
of Ornithology is uniquely qualified to carry out this work because of the close
working relationship it has established among database developers, information
scientists, and end users, including research scientists, educators, and
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project leverages the
impacts of numerous NSF-sponsored citizen science projects, digital libraries,
and visualization tools by making their products accessible to undergraduate
students from a full range of academic institutions - community colleges,
liberal arts colleges, research universities, and distance education.
Collaborations are being established among a faculty network poised to implement
innovative web-based research experiences in their science teaching, leading to
increased success in achieving the science process goals delineated in
undergraduate science education reform initiatives.