* 0919626
* RUI: Pokeweed Antiviral Protein selection of mRNA; Effects of mRNA structure and initiation factors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Diana Friedland, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 415,665.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant pathogens (viral, fungal,
bacterial, or pest) affect a significant number of food crops worldwide, often
indiscriminately. The impact is considerable and far-reaching, particularly as
these agents have numerous invasion strategies. One important plant defense
mechanism employs ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs), which are naturally
occurring cytotoxic agents. Their biochemical activity is to depurinate the
universally conserved sarcin/ricin loop (SRL) of rRNA, resulting in the
cessation of protein synthesis in the infected cells. Pokeweed Antiviral Protein
(PAP) is a type I RIP with broad-spectrum antiviral activity against plant and
animal viruses. In addition to the canonical rRNA depurination activity, PAP
also possesses mRNA recognition, cap binding, and depurination activities that
are distinct from other RIPs. Thus, PAP has demonstrated dual access to the
translation machinery and is a model for agents that disrupt eukaryotic
translation. The goal of this project is to characterize the mechanism by which
PAP selects RNA targets for depurination. The PI will employ a combination of
biophysical and biochemical approaches to (1) determine the extent and affinity
of eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) participation in selection of RNA and (2)
identify the essential mRNA structural elements that affect PAP affinity and
enzymatic activity. Oligonucleotides of capped and uncapped mRNA with differing
secondary structure will be used in this study to elucidate these structural
requirements. This research will increase our understanding of viral infections
and how they affect protein synthesis, potentially leading to new anti-viral
approaches. Such insight into plant defense mechanisms will guide practical
strategies to reduce crop losses due to pathogen infection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will be performed primarily
by undergraduate science majors at John Jay College of the City University of
New York (CUNY). CUNY is the nation's largest urban public university system,
serving over 450,000 students. Notably, the training will be conducted on a
campus that enrolls more than 60% Hispanic and African American students and is
the largest Hispanic-Serving Institution in the northeastern U.S. and the fourth
largest in the nation. During her first five years in the Department of
Sciences, the PI has trained a total of 22 students in her research laboratory;
this number includes 12 undergraduates. The majority of these students have been
of a minority demographic and all but two have been women. The educational
impact of this project includes training in modern biophysical and biochemical
techniques that are an extension of laboratory classroom skills. The research
includes approaches that are suitable for the involvement of students at many
levels (high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate), thus providing
comprehensive training while producing scientifically literate citizens. Upon
completion of their training, students will be well-equipped for advanced degree
programs and/or careers in the STEM fields. The research relies heavily on peers
as co-researchers in its approach; thus cooperativity and teamwork skills are
naturally incorporated into the students' training. In addition to providing
research opportunities for undergraduates, this project allows participating
students to travel annually to a national conference. This will give them an
opportunity to interact with the broader scientific community, to present
experimental results to other researchers, to network with peers from other
institutions, and meet with prospective graduate school representatives. Through
this project, the students will learn how high quality basic research
contributes to larger areas of science and society such as improved agricultural
practices, more robust agricultural crops, secure food supply protection, and
the nation's economy. &lt;br/&gt;