* 0919452
* Genetic mechanisms of rapid adaptive evolution in an outbred natural population
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2009,09/30/2016
* Jeffrey Conner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2016
* USD 940,228.00

Recent studies clearly show that evolution can be very rapid, with substantial
genetic change in traits occurring in as little as five to 10 generations. Rapid
evolution occurs in response to major environmental changes, both natural and
human-mediated. However, the genetic mechanisms underlying the rapid evolution
of traits are unknown. Wild radish flowers represent an excellent model system
to investigate these genetic mechanisms. Previous NSF-supported projects on this
species have produced both abundant genome sequence data and demonstrated rapid
evolution of floral traits that are essential to plant reproduction. This
project will determine the genetic mechanisms underlying the extremely rapid
evolution of adaptive floral traits in wild radish by combining traditional
approaches from plant breeding with cutting-edge molecular genetic and genomic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving our overall
understanding of adaptive evolution, the proposed project will provide new
insights into the mechanisms of successful reproduction in wild radish, one of
the world's most damaging agricultural weeds. It will also produce fundamental
genetic knowledge. Most genetic studies use highly inbred laboratory strains,
but most animals (including humans) and many plants occur naturally in highly
outbred populations. To fully understand the genetics of any trait, including a
genetic disease, the effects of the genes need to be studied in their naturally
outbred state; this project will develop and test new methods for this purpose.