* 0919065
* RIG: The ecological constraints of methane production by microbes in natural environments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Luis Rios-Hernandez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 187,856.00

This project examines the ecological constraints that govern the ability of
different microbial taxa to form close partnerships with one another, in order
to increase the energetic efficiency of anaerobic degradation of organic
compounds. These mutualistic partnerships, referred to as syntrophy, appear to
involve an active selection process by the microbe partners, but little is known
about the mechanisms by which this occurs. This project will study the selection
process by which the syntrophic bacterium, Syntrophus aciditrophicus, selects a
particular methanogen partner from a natural environment. This project combines
classical methods of enumeration, cultivation, enrichment, and isolation of
strict anaerobic prokaryotes with a culture-independent molecular DNA based
technique. This approach will be used to determine if S. aciditrophicus selects
for a particular syntrophic partner, if that partner is the same regardless of
the environmental context, and the range of methanogens that are capable of
sustaining this mutualism. Results from this work will allow predictions about
the potential ecological distribution of this syntrophic organism.

This project has significant broader relevance to the global carbon cycle.
Describing the key process of selection among syntrophic microbe partners will
contribute to a better understanding of energetic processes and carbon flux in
anaerobic environments. This project will also enhance the quality of
undergraduate education at a minority serving institution. Participating
students will acquire hands on experience in laboratory and field research, and
will be closely mentored on how to pursue successful career paths in the STEM
disciplines. The project will also support the training of a graduate student in
microbial ecology.

