* 0919599
* Development of a Technical Design for the Germanium Observatory for Dark Matter at DUSEL
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Blas Cabrera, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,299,462.00

This proposal, from the California Institute of Technology, requests funds to
develop a Preliminary Design for the Germanium Observatory for Dark Matter
(GEODM), a 1.5 ton active mass WIMP search experiment with a WIMP nucleon
elastic scattering cross section reach of 2 × 10 to the power of minus 47 cm**2
at 60 GeV WIMP mass using the technology of the CDMS II and SuperCDMS
experiments. The detectors will be operated at the DUSEL 7400 foot level within
a cryogenic, shielded apparatus designed to provide a zero-background raw
exposure of 4.5 ton year over 4 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award, through
a Cooperative Agreement, will fund the California Institute of Technology and
collaborators to produce a Preliminary Design for such an experiment to be
constructed and run at the DUSEL underground laboratory. The case is made that
(1) recent technical innovations improvements are a moderate risk evolution from
current performance and thus are largely an engineering effort appropriate to
the DUSEL S4 solicitation; (2) prior efforts on CDMS and SuperCDMS provide
empirically verified technical performance and cost baselines, placing these
estimates on a solid foundation; and (3) the team undertaking this effort has a
proven strong track record of such evolutionary gains in background reduction,
background rejection, increased target mass, and scientific reach. Because of
these characteristics, GEODM provides an extremely promising path to significant
gains in WIMP sensitivity or to detailed study of a possible WIMP signal at
DUSEL. Further, the CDMS collaboration has contributed many novel technologies
now in use by other groups and in other fields. GEODM will address the cost
challenges of cryogenic detectors, which will likely broaden even further their
use (e.g., for homeland security). Dark matter research provides students and
postdocs with a diverse education and range of career avenues, as evidenced by
the recent granting of six PhDs based on CDMS II work and the impressive number
of former students and postdocs now in faculty and senior level laboratory
positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future of germanium technology in dark
matter searches, and in the search for neutrinoless double-beta decay, rests on
the development of time and resource-saving techniques for detector production.
&lt;br/&gt;