* 0919678
* RUI:   Analysis of the Role of a Family of Putative E3 Ubiquitin-Ligase Target Adapters in Phytochrome Signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Derek Gingerich, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to perceive and respond to
light is vital to plant growth and development. Previous work has identified two
genes (LRB1 and LRB2) in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana that have roles in
light responses. Plants with disruptions of these two genes are more shade
tolerant, a result of increased sensitivity to red wavelength light. Analysis of
the sequences of the LRB genes suggest that they act by regulating the breakdown
of other proteins, therefore the likely role of the LRBs in plant cells is to
modulate the levels of a protein or proteins that participate in red light
perception/response. This project will use a variety of standard molecular,
genetic, and biochemical approaches to more fully elucidate the role of LRB
genes in plant shade responses by determining where in red light-response
pathway the LRB genes act, identifying the proteins that are regulated by LRB1
and LRB2, and investigating the structure of the molecular complexes of which
the proteins which are encoded by the LRB genes are a part.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shade responses are important in agriculture, as shading
can reduce agronomic performance by increasing lodging (falling over) or
decreasing yield, therefore the information obtained in this project may help
guide future work on light responses in crop plants. Also, the majority of work
in this project will be conducted by undergraduate students at the University of
Wisconsin-Eau Claire (a four-year public comprehensive university),
significantly enhancing their education and making them more competitive and
better prepared as they enter graduate/professional school or the workforce.