* 0919119
* REVSYS:  Phylogeny and Revision of Artocarpus (Moraceae) with a Focus on Understanding the Origins and Diversity of Cultivated Members of the Genus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Nyree Zerega, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 319,361.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
distribution and evolution of an economically important group of plants in the
southeast Pacific region. Artocarpus is the third largest genus in the plant
family that contains figs and mulberries (Moraceae). The greatest number of
species are distributed from Southeast Asia throughout islands in the Pacific
Ocean. Artocarpus contains numerous economically important species that are
grown in their native region for timber or fruit. Two species, jackfruit and
breadfruit, are cultivated throughout the tropics and are under threat of
genetic erosion that can leave them more susceptible to environmental stresses
such as disease or droughts. The relationships among Artocarpus species and the
genetic diversity within jackfruit and breadfruit cultivars are incompletely
understood. Such information is necessary for explaining the evolution and
distribution of the genus and identifying the closest wild relatives of
cultivated species. Wild relatives as well as genetically diverse cultivars can
then be targeted for conservation on-farm and in germplasm collections. The
research funded by this grant will combine fieldwork, morphological assessments,
and genetic studies to produce a comprehensive revision (available in hard copy
and online) of Artocarpus, describing its ecology, evolution and distribution,
and including identification keys and information about the origins and genetic
diversity of jackfruit and breadfruit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will
reach a broad audience and be a significant contribution to the understanding of
the evolution of an important genus with economic and subsistence value
throughout large parts of the tropics and subtropics. The work will involve
collaboration with international scientists and will enhance the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the US and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;