* 0919690
* Aegean Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ANN) Workshop; Rhodes, Greece; July, 2009
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Efstathios Meletis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Robert Carter
* 03/31/2010
* USD 49,970.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aegean Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Workshop
has two main objectives: (i) to bring together a group of US researchers and
their foreign counterparts to address, discuss and identify common priorities
and approaches for collaboration on four specific nanoscale research areas: (i)
Nanoelectronics and Nanophotonics; (ii) Nanofabrication, Nanoscale Sensors and
Devices; (iii) NEMS and Nanosystems; and Nanotechnology Applications (Bio,
Energy, Environment, Human Health). The second objective is to provide an
opportunity to several US graduate students to gain international research
experience, meet, discuss and present their work via poster presentations and be
exposed to such an interdisciplinary environment. The presentations and follow
up discussions will present knowledge, identify bottlenecks but also priorities
and opportunities and nurture interactions between US and foreign researchers.
The workshop can stimulate new research ideas leading to novel concepts and
applications that will be of utmost importance to US graduate students and
junior researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provides an excellent
venue and environment for the exchange of ideas and open discussions that allow
for the presentation of the researchers? latest work, augmenting efforts to
advance the research frontiers in this field via international collaborations.
The workshop will provide a significant opportunity for human resource
development and graduate education, training and exposure to an
interdisciplinary international environment. An elite volume will be published
with all invited presentations, poster student presentations and discussion
summaries. In addition, participants can submit manuscripts based on their
presentations for consideration for publication to a number of referred
journals. Attraction of underrepresented minorities will be pursuit through the
Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers (housed on UT Arlington campus). The
theme of the proposed workshop also impacts fields of critical technological
importance to the U.S. including microelectronics, nanotechnology, and
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;