* 0919131
* Collaborative Research:  Landscape and regional scale studies of nitrogen gas flux
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Joseph Yavitt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 328,517.00

Understanding the nitrogen cycle at landscape, regional and global scales is a
great current challenge in environmental science. Large amounts of so-called
missing nitrogen dominate nitrogen balances at all scales and have complicated
efforts to address the effects of excess nitrogen pollution on tropospheric
ozone levels, coastal eutrophication and drinking water quality, and to
determine critical loads for atmospheric nitrogen deposition to watersheds.
Uncertainty about nitrogen balances has led to increased interest in nitrogen
gas fluxes as a potential fate of excess nitrogen. However, these fluxes are
difficult to quantify because of problematic measurement techniques, high
spatial and temporal variability, and a lack of methods for scaling point
measurements to larger areas. A particular challenge is that small areas
(hotspots) and brief periods (hot moments) account for a high percentage of
nitrogen gas flux activity. There have been recent improvements in the methods
for measuring nitrogen gas fluxes and in prospects for scaling and modeling the
hydrologic and biogeochemical controls on nitrogen cycle processes at landscape
and regional scales. Thus, the time is ripe for a critical re-assessment of the
importance of nitrogen gas fluxes to ecosystem nitrogen balances. This research
will produce information relevant to a pressing and globally important
environmental problem (nitrogen pollution), will involve graduate students and
underrepresented groups, and will be coupled to education and outreach efforts
in University, management and policy arenas.