* 0919459
* Evolutionary Plasticity:  Is Remodeling Key to Cichlid Pharyngeal Jaw Diversification?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* C. Darrin Hulsey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2011
* USD 166,555.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The independent evolution of the same
traits in different organisms is strongly indicative of adaptation. However,
similarities can also exist because of common genetic, developmental, scaling,
and functional constraints and could only rarely arise because of similar
genetic changes to a shared environmental challenge. Traits might also come to
resemble each other because of plastic, or non-genetic change, in response to
the same environmental stimuli. This proposal will test the relative importance
of jaw plasticity for the convergent evolution of molluskivory, eating hard-
shelled snails and clams, in cichlid fishes. Plasticity in the cichlid jaw that
results from bone growth in response to the mechanical stress of crushing could
contribute to the success of these fishes. If jaw remodeling results in more
similar phenotypes than expected by chance, this would implicate plasticity as
key to cichlid trophic adaptation. The outlined approach integrates phylogenetic
reconstruction, experimental lab studies of phenotypic plasticity, finite
element analysis, and the generation of null models of phenotypic evolution to
test how phenotypic plasticity contributes to structural convergence in the
cichlid jaw. In this series of studies, we will determine: 1) How has trophic
specialization on mollusks evolved during the Heroine cichlid diversification?
2) Is plasticity more important than non-plastic divergence in adapting the jaw
to crushing forces? and 3) Does force-induced plasticity increase morphological
convergence in the cichlid jaw? This work will support several undergraduate and
graduate students and contribute to our understanding of how the mechanical
strength of bone changes during evolution. Increasing our understanding of how
bone remodels during evolution could ultimately shed light on degenerative bone
conditions such as osteoporosis.&lt;br/&gt;