* 0919284
* Reduction &amp; reversal in the Funariaceae:   phylogenetic perspective on sporophyte complexity and role of the calyptra
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Cynthia Jones, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2013
* USD 599,242.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution typically leads to organisms
that are increasingly complex in the way they look, the sorts of chemicals they
produce, or the way their cells function. However, complex and costly characters
can also be lost. For example, many lineages of birds have lost the ability to
fly. Are very simple organisms evolutionary cul-de-sacs? By looking at the spore
producing structures in mosses, this research will examine whether complexity
can be lost and then re-evolve. The evolutionary history of the moss family
Funariaceae will be assessed through analyses of DNA sequences. Meanwhile,
morphological complexity will be quantified through electron microscopy and
morphological measurements. In particular, this research will assess the
evolutionary history of species that look quite simple, such as Physcomitrella
patens, a new model organism in genomic research. The research will also test
whether more complex spore-bearing structures help to keep the spores from
drying out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their ecological and evolutionary
significance, mosses receive no attention in K-12 education. Educational
materials will be developed with high-school teachers to promote curricular
integration of mosses and to increase general literacy in plant biology. The
project provides training opportunities for one post-doctoral researcher, one
female graduate student, and undergraduates.