* 0919609
* Metabolism of Aromatic Ring Precursors in Coenzyme Q Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Catherine Clarke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 645,325.00

Scientific Merit: ATP, the cell's energy currency, is largely produced in
mitochondria, membrane-bound bodies within cells that couple ATP formation to
the controlled burn of carbohydrates or lipids (fat). Coenzyme Q (also known as
ubiquinone or CoQ) is a complex organic molecule essential for mitochondrial
energy production. CoQ is also a crucial antioxidant that can protect membrane
lipids from oxidative damage. The CoQ molecule has two parts: (1) a long "tail"
that anchors it in the membrane, and (2) an aromatic ring structure
(benzoquinone) with properties that allow it to ferry electrons and protons
essential to ATP formation. Cells are generally thought to synthesize the
benzoquinone ring from the precursor 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (4-HB). Although nine
genes essential for CoQ biosynthesis have been identified in yeast, plants and
animals, none are required for 4-HB synthesis. Therefore, major questions remain
unanswered regarding the generation of the aromatic benzoquinone component of
CoQ. 4-HB has been believed to be synthesized in bacteria and yeast via
coumarate from the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway, a pathway used by
plants to produce a wide variety of metabolites, or in animals by using the
amino acid tyrosine. Recent observations indicate that yeast can also use
4-aminobenzoic acid (pABA) as a ring precursor in CoQ biosynthesis. This is
surprising because pABA is a well-known precursor of folate, one of the B
vitamins, but has not previously been connected with CoQ. The utilization of
pABA as a ring precursor represents a novel biosynthetic pathway for the
production of CoQ. This research utilizes yeast to define how pABA is converted
to CoQ, how tyrosine is converted to 4-HB, and how coumarate is converted to
4-HB. This research, therefore, addresses the basic biochemistry required for
energy generating processes in living cells. Results may also lead to
applications in agriculture and medicine, as the enzymes involved are potential
targets for both herbicides and antimicrobials.

Broader Impacts: This project affords undergraduate students, particularly
underrepresented minority students, the opportunity to do cutting edge research.
UCLA undergraduate students generated the results identifying pABA as a ring
precursor to CoQ biosynthesis in yeast. Construction and characterization of
yeast deletion mutants, characterization of yeast growth, determination of CoQ
content, isotopic labeling of yeast cultured in different types of minimal
media, and preparation and HPLC analyses of yeast lipid extracts are all carried
out by undergraduate students working on independent research projects. The PI
is Chair of the Diversity and Leadership Committee in the UCLA Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, and both the PI and Co-PI are active in advising and
mentoring women and under-represented minority undergraduate and graduate
students.