* 0919614
* Comparative strategies of ion trafficking and antioxidant physiology in stream insects:   A phylogenetic approach
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* David Buchwalter, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2013
* USD 485,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic insects play critical
ecological roles and are of practical importance due to their widespread use in
biomonitoring programs. Nevertheless, their use as ecological indicators is
limited in part, because the fundamental physiological processes that determine
their responses to environmental challenges are poorly understood. Because there
are so many aquatic insect species, it is impossible to perform the types of
physiological experimentation required to characterize species-specific
responses to common environmental problems. This project will explore whether
the evolutionary relatedness of species can be used as a predictor of their
physiological performance in response to trace metal pollution. The
physiological systems under study include ion regulation (fluxes of calcium,
zinc and cadmium) and antioxidant physiology. This novel marriage of
ecophysiology with modern phylogenetic comparative methods in evolutionary
biology has the capacity to fundamentally change the study of aquatic insects
and their responses to changing environments. Traditionally, the study of
aquatic insects has focused on guild school approaches and has largely ignored
physiology. This research will make predictions of species performance based
upon both physiology and phylogeny. This program will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups as it includes support for summer undergraduate
interns from Shaw University, the oldest Historically Black College in the
South, and a workshop for high school biology teachers from rural and Native
American communities in the Appalachians. This workshop will assist teachers in
the development of inquiry-based programs that explore themes of ecology and
evolution in stream environments. Finally, the results of this program will be
broadly beneficial to society, as aquatic insects are commonly used to evaluate
the ecological conditions of surface waters worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;