* 0919799
* Ontogeny of Avian Locomotion:   Aerodynamics, Skeletal Kinematics, and Neuromuscular Control
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Kenneth Dial, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2011
* USD 317,878.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flight is the defining characteristic
of birds, yet the mechanisms through which flight ability develops are virtually
unknown. The research in this proposal will use different modes of locomotion
for exploring the aerodynamic, skeletal, and neuromuscular development that
leads to the capacity to fly. The experiments are designed in a comparative
context using a representative precocial species (chukar partridge, born
feathered and relatively independent) and an altricial species (rock dove, born
naked and dependent on its parents for warmth, protection, and food provision).
Through this effort, the stages of development will be compared with
hypothesized ancestral forms (bipedal theropod dinosaurs) to address the origin
and evolution of flight. The intellectual merit of our research is multifaceted.
It shall provide novel insight into how aerodynamics, skeletal motion,
neuromuscular control and muscle mechanical work and power integrate during
drastically different forms of vertebrate locomotion (wing-assisted incline
running and level, ascending and descending flight). Furthermore, these data -
for the very first time - will be obtained over a complete range of age classes
during post-hatching avian development. The broader impacts of this work are
also multi-fold. The work will provide new data for engineers to utilize in
constructing autonomous robots that are capable climbing as well as flying.
Heretofore, efforts appear to focus upon terrestrial, swimming, or flying
robots, and engineers appear to have overlooked the efficacy offered by a robot
that can accomplish both terrestrial and aerial locomotion. Pectoralis
development in galliform birds will ultimately inform practical questions in the
human biomedical, veterinary and human-food industries. Galliform birds (turkey,
chicken) and pigeons are model systems for aspects of medical research, and the
pectoralis and other muscle tissue of galliform birds is an important food item
for humans. The investigators will continue their outreach to diverse
populations to explain research results.