* 0919080
* Collaborative Research:  Controls Over Nitrogen Loss from Very Wet Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Cory Cleveland, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 171,044.00

Humans have changed the global nitrogen cycle to an extraordinary degree. Such
changes have brought clear benefits to society, but increasingly, the excess of
nitrogen now present in many ecosystems is causing a litany of environmental and
public health concerns. Thus, it has become critical to understand how
ecosystems gain, store and lose nitrogen, and to do so in an increasingly varied
range of ecosystems as changes in the nitrogen cycle become truly global in
scope. This project seeks to understand the nitrogen balance of a tropical
rainforest, in part because current and predicted future changes to the nitrogen
cycle are most pronounced in the tropical portions of the world. The project
explores why the wettest of tropical forests, as typified by a field site in
southern Costa Rica, seem to exhibit a much different nitrogen cycle than do the
drier portions of the tropical biome. A variety of techniques will be used -
ranging from watershed nitrogen balance, to isotopic measurements, to
experimental fertilizer plots - to explore how nitrogen is cycled within this
ecosystem, and what forms of nitrogen dominate losses to the surrounding
environment. Key aspects of the carbon and phosphorus cycles will be measured in
tandem with a focus on nitrogen, because prior work in this site suggests that
both elements may play important roles in determining the size and forms of
nitrogen loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wettest of tropical forests remain one
of the more poorly studied ecosystems of the world, and yet they appear to be
hotspots for carbon storage and for nutrient export to coastal oceans, as well
as key regions for tropical forest conservation. This project will shed light on
how such forests work on an ecosystem scale, thereby aiding the ability to
predict how they may respond not only to a changing nitrogen cycle, but also to
changes in climate and land use. The project will also provide support for
numerous junior scientists, including an early stage assistant professor and
several undergraduate and graduate students. Finally, the project will support a
new collaboration between the P.I. and a professional journalist that is aimed
at communicating the importance of tropical forests to a broader audience.