* 0919440
* Collaborative Research: An EPSCoR Desktop to Teragrid Ecosystem
* O/D,EPS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Rosemarie Booze, South Carolina Research Authority
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelvin Chu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,324,669.00

EPS-0919440, South Carolina Research Authority, James R. Bottum, linked to
EPS-0919436 (University of Tennessee
Knoxville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: An EPSCoR Desktop to
Teragrid EcoSystem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The partnership between South Carolina (SC) and Tennessee (TN) is
based on existing and planned collaborations in advanced materials and systems
biology research, and in knowledge domains where computational science is
driving new approaches and insights. The project?s goal is to build
cyberinfrastructure (CI) linked community specific knowledge environments that
embody the desktop to TeraGrid ecosystem. In this ecosystem, the campus-based
cyberinfrastructure at regional research institutions is an essential bridge for
connecting faculty investigators to national resources such as the TeraGrid. The
proposal aims to develop models that successfully bridge the current gap between
desktop and TeraGrid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will create a model desktop to TeraGrid ecosystem anchored by a
campus-based CI layer that eventually designated a ?Track 3? regional research
resource bridging campus investigators to TeraGrid. The need for such a model
has been identified by the EDUCAUSE Campus Cyberinfrastructure Working Group and
the Coalition for Academic Scientific Computing (unpublished report from
workshop, July 2008). The researchers define and demonstrate how campuses can
successfully leverage the TeraGrid program by enabling the systems biology and
advanced materials applications. It is expected to achieve progress in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) diversity through partnerships
with undergraduate and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The
researchers plan to advance a TeraGrid Track 2 site?s experience with, and
understanding of, the national middleware program while building mechanisms to
access regional and TeraGrid resources seamlessly through a Science
Gateway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Solving technical and
communication challenges is essential to scaling use of the TeraGrid. This
effort will significantly contribute to increasing the TeraGrid?s active user
base above its current 1,000 user plateau. The SC/TN consortium includes partner
undergraduate universities (College of Charleston, the Citadel) and HBCUs
(Claflin University and South Carolina State University) engagement and training
outreach opportunities for the region, and an innovative dissemination plan.
This proposal leverages &gt;$100 M in combined federal, state and private
funding in cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed objectives focus on
domain-specific collaborations with adequate computational support personnel,
and a regional organization and communication plan, to achieve research-faculty
led discovery outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;