* 0919227
* Collaborative Research:   Arctic to the Amazon:  Physical Processes Controlling Gas Exchange from Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Scott Miller, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,266.00

Estimates of carbon dioxide and methane emissions indicate inland aquatic
ecosystems play an important role in carbon balances across multiple scales
ranging from the local ecosystem scale to regional and global scales. Given
ongoing changes in biogeochemical cycles due to global warming and human
activities, studies are being conducted worldwide to more accurately assess the
role of lakes and reservoirs in regional and global carbon cycles and to
estimate metabolic activity in lakes. Essential to these efforts are accurate
estimates of gas fluxes at the air and water interface, yet current models do
not include all the physical processes which mediate gas exchange. This
multiscale modeling research includes field measurements of gas exchange and of
processes controlling gas exchange across a range of freshwater bodies from
small arctic lakes to the large floodplain lakes of the Amazon. These data will
be used to develop gas exchange models for freshwater ecosystems that include
not just wind speed but the full range of physical processes that enable fluxes
across the interface between air and water. They will also take into account the
differences in dominant processes in warm versus cold water lakes. The new
models, combined with improved understanding of the underlying dynamics enabling
gas exchange, will enable improved estimates of greenhouse gases fluxes from
individual freshwater bodies worldwide and accurate scaling up of estimated over
broad regions.

Results will inform procedures at Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network
sites worldwide and proposed lake sites within the National Ecological
Observatory Network. Postdoctoral fellows and graduate students in the United
States and abroad will receive training in micrometeorology, limnology and
biogeochemistry. The principle investigators will contribute to or conduct
workshops on techniques for field courses and at national meetings in the United
States, Sweden and Brazil.