* 0919241
* RUI:  Investigation of the mechanisms that regulate interactions between the transcription elongation factor Spt16 and chromatin.
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* Andrea Duina, Hendrix College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Peterson
* 11/30/2013
* USD 473,089.00

The genetic information carried by all living cells is contained within long
molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). In eukaryotic cells, most of the DNA
is localized within a cellular compartment referred to as the cell nucleus. In
order to fit within the small confines of the nucleus, DNA associates with a
number of proteins to form a highly compacted structure known as chromatin.
Whereas this compaction is essential for life, it also represents a physical
barrier to those factors that bind DNA and that are required for the initial
steps in the conversion of genetic information into specific biological events,
a process more generally known as gene transcription. In recent years it has
become clear that cells utilize a number of chromatin-altering proteins that can
interact with and change the structure of chromatin to make the DNA more or less
accessible to factors needed for transcription. In this project a combination of
genetic and biochemical strategies will be used to elucidate the mechanisms that
regulate how one of these chromatin-altering proteins, known as Spt16, interacts
with chromatin during the process of gene transcription. Because accurate
regulation of transcription is crucial for the proper function of all cells and
organisms, these studies promise to provide new insights into a basic biological
process of general importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This
project will provide an excellent opportunity for undergraduate students to be
actively involved in cutting-edge genetic and biochemical research. During this
project, undergraduate students will be trained on important aspects of
scientific research, including the proper design and execution of experiments,
accurate analysis and interpretation of experimental data, and the development
of scientific writing and oral communication skills. In addition, undergraduate
students involved in this project will have the opportunity to present the
results of their research at regional, national and international scientific
meetings. These combined experiences will not only introduce undergraduate
students to the exciting world of scientific research, but will also better
prepare them for making informed decisions regarding their career paths
following graduation from college.