* 0919559
* Roles of substrate, herbivory and competition in the generation of edaphic endemics:   Experimental and historical approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2014
* USD 597,094.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Ecological specialization, the process by which species
adapt to a certain environment, has been central to understanding two important
drivers of biodiversity: speciation (the evolution of new species) and
extinction. Edaphic specialists, or species that only occur on particular soil
types, contribute greatly to overall biodiversity. In California, serpentine
soil outcrops (with high concentrations of heavy metals and low concentrations
of essential plant nutrients) make up only 1% of the land but contain 14% (312
taxa) of the state's plant taxa. Adaptation to stressful substrates explains why
plant species are found on these substrates, but does not explain why such
species are restricted to them. One hypothesis suggests that adaptation to odd
substrates decreases the ability to live on more typical substrates, but many
edaphic specialists can grow on common soils when planted. Interactions with
other species may thus be preventing edaphic specialists from colonizing more
common soil habitats. The goal of the proposed work is to evaluate whether
combined selection from soil components, herbivores and plant competitors has
generated species limited to stressful substrates. Soil properties, growth on
different substrates, and interactions with herbivores and plant competitors
will be measured for the species in the genus Streptanthus, members of the
mustard family. The evolutionary relationships among the species will be
accounted for in the analyses to gain insight into past speciation events and
their relationship with adaptation to serpentine soils.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several species of Streptanthus are listed as rare or
endangered. A website will be created with information on soils and all stages
in the life of these plant species (seeds through fruits). Such information will
be useful for land managers in surveying populations of these plants. Some of
these soil specialists have unique properties, like the ability to
hyperaccumulate metals in their leaves, and have been used to reclaim metal-
contaminated soils and for phytomining, thus this research will better inform
such bioremediation efforts. Undergraduate, graduate students and technicians
will be trained.