* 0919064
* RUI: SBBI: Phylogenetic effect on host use within generalist herbivores: a case study using marine amphipods in the family Ampithoidae (Crustacea: Amphipoda)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Erik Sotka, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 339,999.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amphipods are common herbivorous
crustaceans found in both marine and freshwater habitats. As a rule, all
herbivores consume a restricted subset of available plants, and our ability to
predict herbivore impacts on natural systems depends on understanding the
evolution of these diet choices. Although most marine herbivores and many
terrestrial insects are diet generalists, the influence of evolutionary lineage
on plant choices are tested rarely. The current project will generate DNA data
to examine evolutionary relationships of amphipod herbivores in the family
Ampithoidae in order to assess the evolution of diet and anatomical features in
this group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will have several broader impacts.
First, the work advances the systematics of an ecologically-important group of
marine invertebrates. Second, the grant will train and employ several young
scientists, including four undergraduate students and a Masters student from the
College of Charleston, in biodiversity research. With limited numbers of staff
in museums worldwide, there is an urgent need for training scientists in the
molecular tools of taxonomic research. Third, this proposed work extends
international collaborations with developing and developed countries. We plan to
disseminate our data within peer-reviewed journals and the web, including a
globally important center of taxonomic information for crustacean biologists
(http://crustacea.net), and to add taxonomic information for ampithoids from the
geographic regions that remain under-
represented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;