* 0919021
* Combinatorial Control of Photomorphogenesis by Auxin and Brassinosteroids
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Jennifer Nemhauser, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How living systems integrate
information in complex and changing environments is a central unsolved puzzle of
biology. Plant form is continuously modified in response to environmental,
developmental, and metabolic cues. Simple chemicals called phytohormones are the
means by which information from these diverse sources is encoded, transported,
and ultimately translated into life-or-death decisions. Light-directed seedling
growth (photomorphogenesis) is one of the best-studied processes in biology, and
the phytohormone auxin plays a central role in its regulation. Previous work by
the investigators revealed that brassinosteroids, another class of
phytohormones, modulate cellular sensitivity to auxin. The goal of this project
is to achieve a mechanistic understanding of how these two essential growth-
regulatory pathways function together. The investigators will use biochemical,
physiological and molecular genetic techniques, in combination with high
resolution time-lapse growth analysis, to reveal how specific molecular
interactions give rise to exquisitely-calibrated growth control. Auxin and
brassinosteroids, and their coordinated action, have been documented in a wide
range of species. A likely benefit of this research for the general public is
the means to increase human control over plant biomass. By uncovering the master
regulators of plant growth, increases in biomass could be engineered in a wide
array of commercially-relevant plants, such as key agricultural and biofuel
crops. The Principal Investigator is committed to working at the laboratory,
department, and community level to foster the development of future scientists
and increase scientific literacy. This project will provide broad training for
three graduate and at least six undergraduate students. Seven undergraduates
have gained hands-on research experience in the laboratory of the Principal
Investigator within its first three years. Among the outreach activities of
project researchers, several act as docents for the University of Washington
Greenhouse and Medicinal Herb Garden, which hosts tours for more than 10,000
K-12 students, undergraduates, and community members every year.&lt;br/&gt;