* 0919184
* Long-term Research in Environmental Biology (LTREB): Rapid evolution of a Threespine Stickleback Population
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2010,04/30/2013
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2013
* USD 49,726.00

Evolutionary history is generally studied by comparing species that shared a
common ancestor thousands to millions of generations ago, but evolutionary
processes are studied over relatively few generations. Hence, conclusions from
studies on processes must be extrapolated through time and among species to
interpret history. This project makes use of a unique study system involving the
stickleback fish, in order to directly integrate evolutionary history and
process. A sea-run stickleback population colonized an Alaskan lake in the
1980's and subsequently underwent rapid evolution. When first sampled in 1990,
it closely resembled sea-run sticklebacks in body shape and size, the shape of
the gill cover, armor plates, feeding structures, and the genes that control
armor and regulate the salt concentration in body fluids. Annual sampling
revealed progressive evolutionary change of every trait towards those of older
lake populations, from which it is now almost indistinguishable. This project
will continue the long term study of this lake population, and expand the work
to study the evolution of fish immunity to disease agents that are prevalent in
freshwater lakes. This project also initiates new research on additional sea-run
stickleback populations that are at the earliest stages of colonization of
freshwater lakes. Evolution of these sea-run populations simulates the history
by which countless freshwater populations have evolved since the last ice age.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has broader relevance to predicting the
adaptability of fish species in the face of global climate change and intensive
fishing pressure on commercial species. It will also provide valuable
information on the evolution of immune response to emerging infectious disease.
The project gives undergraduate students hands-on research experience. Data from
this project will be posted annually on a publically accessible website, and the
time series of fish collections documenting rapid evolution will be deposited in
the Yale Peabody Museum for further study.