* 0919420
* LTREB:   Ecological Dynamics in an Experimentally-Tractable Natural Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* John Wootton, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2015
* USD 439,744.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core challenge for ecologists is to
develop frameworks to predict how complex natural communities and ecosystems
will respond to environmental impacts such as species extinction and global
change. Because ecological interactions are comprised of complex networks,
meeting this challenge requires an integration of mathematical frameworks with
empirical data. In this project, the investigator will extend several long-term
multi-species data sets for marine rocky intertidal organisms and environmental
conditions, and use these data to estimate species interaction strengths in
dynamic, multi-species models. These results will then be used to test for
general patterns of interaction strength and to generate predictions for
different potential environmental impacts. Long-term species manipulation
experiments in this intertidal habitat will be used to validate predictions
generated by multi-species models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study
will significantly enhance the ability to address an urgent societal need - the
prediction of natural ecosystem responses to global change, including climate
change. In the process, the study will increase collaboration and data sharing
among university researchers and governmental management agencies (Tribal and
NOAA National Marine Sanctuary staff), provide advanced training for Ph. D.
students, and facilitate research experience for undergraduate in ecological
science. Data associated with the project will be publicly available through the
University of Chicago, the Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity, and through the
Ecological Society of America's Ecological Archives.