* 0919271
* The accumulation of reproductive isolation in a diverse genus of fish (Percidae: Etheostoma)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,11/30/2016
* Tamra Mendelson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2016
* USD 486,000.00

Biological diversity in any given community is maintained by reproductive
barriers, or factors that prevent interbreeding between species. Multiple,
distinct reproductive barriers may prevent interbreeding between species and a
central question concerns the chronological order in which these different
barriers evolve. Theory predicts that behavioral isolation, or the absence of
interbreeding due to differences in courtship behavior, will be the first
reproductive barrier to evolve among populations characterized by the strong
action of sexual selection. Through the co-evolution of male courtship traits
and female preferences, females are predicted to recognize only the courtship
traits of males of their own species. Few studies test this prediction directly
and evidence that sexual selection plays a primary role in the origin of species
remains largely indirect. Darters are a colorful group of North American
freshwater fish with diverse and highly exaggerated male courtship signals and
this project quantifies the relative rates of evolution of different
reproductive barriers and tests, in particular, whether behavioral isolation
evolves earliest. Results will provide one of the few direct tests of the
fundamental hypothesis that sexual selection drives the origin of species
through the co-evolution of male signals and female preferences. Training of
undergraduate and graduate students from groups underrepresented in advanced
biology is integral to the project. Results will also be presented to area
secondary schools, specifically targeting schools with a high representation of
minorities and underprivileged students.