* 0919891
* Hox regulation of wingless expression sculpts morphogenesis of the adult Drosophila abdomen
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* John Yoder, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yoder laboratory studies genetic
control of events that shape animal form. Patterning animal bodies requires
integration of genetic signals that converge on otherwise similarly fated parts
of the developing body conferring unique identities. Likewise, development of
sex-specific characters relies on gene regulation that propels initially similar
regions of organisms down very different paths. Sex-specific characters of the
adult fly Drosophila melanogaster afford an excellent opportunity to investigate
how initially similar structures, both within an individual organism and between
the sexes, are sculpted into their ultimate forms. Importantly, many of the same
genes that pattern the fly are functionally conserved across all animals.
Investigating such developmental processes in model organisms, like Drosophila,
provides foundational knowledge for human developmental genetics and avenues
into disease research. &lt;br/&gt;Hox proteins are transcription factors,
proteins that regulate expression of numerous target genes to pattern the
regions of the body in which they are expressed. The Yoder lab will investigate
how one Hox protein, Abdominal-B, controls regional and sex-specific differences
in the segments of the adult fly. How does the same protein lead to different
expression of target genes in adjacent tissue and in the same tissue between the
sexes, ultimately generating regional and sex-specific fates? Combining
molecular and genetic analyses, the Yoder lab will dissect interactions between
Abdominal-B, other regulatory proteins and DNA control elements necessary for
differential activation and repression of genes critical for regional and sex
specific identity. This work will broaden understanding of how subtle
differences in gene regulation lead to large-scale differences in form. This
award will provide opportunities for several undergraduate students, in addition
to graduate researchers, to participate in scientific research and explore the
fundamental basis and genetics of organismal development.