* 0919881
* Thirteenth and Fourteenth Annual Meetings for the Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology to be held 06/25-27/09 East Lansing, Michigan and 07/18-20/10 Toronto, Canada
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2012
* Emilie Rissman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 05/31/2012
* USD 53,622.00

The award will support trainee-related activities at two annual meetings of the
Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology (SBN). The annual conference brings
together a diverse group of scientists studying the integration of genetic,
cellular and molecular concepts into functional frameworks that improve our
understanding of behavior. This grant supports significant initiatives to foster
participation by undergraduate, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows at
society meetings. Funds will support the following: (1) Young Investigators
Symposium. A selected group of graduate students and/or post-docs including
substantial numbers of women present talks in a dedicated symposium. This format
recognizes the accomplishments of trainees, facilitates their movement into more
advanced positions, and motivates younger trainees. (2) Career Development
Workshops. Workshops educate trainees on important career development topics and
retain trainees in the sciences. (3) Travel Awards. Funding for travel to
meetings is provided for the best trainees. This allows trainees to present
their work in a supportive environment and gain exposure to the breadth and
depth of the field. (4) Mentor-Mentee Lunches. Based on the professional and
personal needs of the trainee, trainees will be matched with a senior Mentor.
The pair will establish a long-term mentoring relationship. Trainees thus
acquire a mentor outside of their advisor and local environment that will give
them new insights into the research enterprise, how to balance life and work,
and consult on career choices and options. (5) Trainee Poster Competition.
Posters presented by undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral
fellows are judged, based on the scientific merit of the research, the
effectiveness of the presentation and the trainee role in the research. The
competition provides an opportunity to encourage and reward success at each
level. Funding for trainee events at the SBN meeting will play a key role in the
attraction and retention of the brightest and best-trained interdisciplinary
scientists.