* 0919569
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Dynamics of plant-soil feedbacks in changing environments
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Katharine Suding, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 311,085.00

Human activities have increased nitrogen (N) availability throughout the world.
Nitrogen enrichment commonly results in increased plant productivity in
terrestrial ecosystems. A large amount of work also indicates that anthropogenic
nitrogen enrichment can lead to reduced plant species richness. Reductions in
plant diversity have most commonly been attributed to plant resource
competition, but other mechanisms may contribute to the observed loss of plant
species in fertilized plots. The goal of this research is to include the 'unseen
majority' - belowground microbial interactions - in understanding how N
enrichment alters plant community structure aboveground. Plant interactions with
microbes (e.g., soil parasites, symbionts, decomposers) could be an even more
important determinant of plant diversity decline in response to N enrichment
than simple plant resource competition. Utilizing microbial surveys of long-term
fertilization plots, tissue culture experiments, and field manipulations in the
moist meadow tundra and other grassland systems, previous hypotheses of
diversity loss with N enrichment will be extended to include belowground
microbial interactions. In addition, this research will promote the teaching,
training and understanding of issues related to biodiversity and environmental
change through virtual field trips accessible on the web, hands-on microbial
activity sets distributed to high school classrooms, and the training of women,
particular Hispanic women, scientists. Ultimately, the inclusion of belowground
microbial interactions will improve predictive abilities regarding how
environmental change factors such as N deposition may affect terrestrial
biodiversity.