* 0919434
* Preferential Allocation of Photosynthate toward Better Mutualists, Spatial Structure, and the Maintenance of the Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Bever, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2013
* USD 474,486.00

Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form beneficial associations with the roots of
most plant species, including most crop plants. These fungi increase plant
access to immobile soil minerals and receive plant carbohydrates in return.
While this interaction can be mutually beneficial between plants and fungi, the
extent to which the fungi increase plant growth varies across soil environments
and fungal isolates. Moreover the benefit has been observed to increase and
degrade over time. Currently, there is little basis for predictive understanding
of these dynamics. Recent work has demonstrated that plants can allocate their
carbohydrates preferentially toward the most beneficial fungus. This
preferential allocation allows the effective fungus to increase in the face of
competition from non-beneficial fungi provided that there is sufficient spatial
separation between the fungi within a plant's root system. Preferential
allocation may form a foundation on which to understand the persistence of
beneficial fungi and change in their abundance over time. The proposed work will
test resource triggers and environmental dependence of preferential allocation
and test patterns of preferential allocation across plant and fungal species.
Finally, fungal population response to manipulation of spatial mixing of the
fungi within the plant root system will be evaluated. These results will be used
to develop predictions for changes in abundance of beneficial fungi across
environmental gradients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will train
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral scientists in techniques used
to measure and manipulate beneficial AM fungi. In addition, this research will
create opportunities for independent undergraduate research. In particular, an
experiment testing how mycorrhizal fungi may benefit restoration of a native
prairie on the campus of Indiana University will be initiated as part of a non-
majors course in environmental biology. Students will thus be exposed to
multiple aspects of ecological research related to this project.