* 0919178
* Community consequences of aphid genetic diversity and interactions with ants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 134,977.00

Ecologists have historically adopted the simplifying assumption that
interactions among species are sufficiently homogeneous that variation within
species can be ignored. In other words, differences among individuals of the
same species are largely assumed to be unimportant to understanding the
interactions among species. At the same time, evolutionary biologists base their
research on the fact that this assumption is false, i.e. that there are
genetically based differences among individuals that have consequences for the
fitness of that species. This project will examine this discrepancy, and
contribute to the synthesis between ecology and evolutionary biology, by
answering two fundamental questions: How do individuals within a species vary in
their influence on the surrounding community based upon genetically based
differences in an ecologically important trait? Does the amount of genetic
variation in a population for an ecologically important trait have detectable
consequences for the surrounding community? This project will address these
questions by measuring the ecological consequences of population genetic
variation in the aphid Aphis varians that engages in a mutualism with ants on
the plant species fireweed (Epilobium angustifolium). Field experiments will
test for aphid genetic variation in attractiveness to mutualist ants and measure
the natural selection imposed by ants on specific aphid traits. This trait-based
understanding of aphid-ant relations will be used to mechanistically
characterize how aphid genetic variation influences both ants and the broader
community in which this mutualism is embedded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the significant broader impact in that it will be conducted at, and support,
the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory. This institution enhances intellectual
exchange and collaboration among biologists from around the world. This project
will provide research training for undergraduate and graduate students in
evolutionary ecology. This project will also include an outreach effort to
students and teachers in science classes in K-12 schools serving
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;