* 0919192
* Role of the Arabidopsis thaliana TPS11 gene and trehalose metabolism in defense against green peach aphid
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jyoti Shah, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2014
* USD 652,000.00

Aphids are a large group of phloem-feeding insects that cause extensive damage
to plants and vector important viruses. However, our understanding of plant
defense against aphids is limited. The interaction between Arabidopsis thaliana
and Myzus persicae, commonly known as green peach aphid (GPA), has uncovered a
role for the Arabidopsis TPS11 gene, which exhibits homology to trehalose
metabolism genes, in plant defense against aphids. The goal of this project is
to characterize the involvement of TPS11 in trehalose metabolism, and the role
of trehalose metabolism in plant defense against aphids. A combination of
biochemical, molecular, genetic and genomic tools combined with insect bioassays
and behavioral studies will be utilized to accomplish these goals. Since
trehalose and its metabolites are present at low levels in plants, it is
anticipated that this study will uncover a regulatory function of trehalose
metabolism in plants. The proposed activity will enhance understanding of plant
defense against GPA, which is a pest of >50 plant families and vectors several
important viruses. In addition, it will fill important gaps in our knowledge of
trehalose metabolism and its involvement in plant stress response.

Broader Impacts: This project will benefit a graduate student and a post-
doctoral fellow who will receive training in biochemistry, molecular biology and
genetics. In addition, through the PI's instructional activities this project
will bring current knowledge of plant signaling, carbohydrate metabolism and
stress response into the classroom. This project will also provide an
opportunity to train undergraduates and high school students and broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in research. Results from this project
will also have potential benefits to society at large, because they will
identify steps in plant metabolism that mediate defense against insects. In the
future, manipulation of these steps may augment aphid resistance and enhance
quality and productivity of plants.