* 0919878
* Concentration gradients of activator and inhibitors of cellular differentiation in a filamentous cyanobacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Sean Callahan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Alexander McClure
* 08/31/2011
* USD 233,789.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The cyanobacterium Anabaena differentiates specialized cells called heterocysts
that supply a form of nitrogen that can be used for growth to the remainder of
the cells of the organism. Heterocysts occur at approximately every tenth cell
position on unbranched filaments that can be hundreds of cells in length. In
this project, a molecular genetic approach will be used to investigate the
interactions of an activator of differentiation with two inhibitors of
differentiation. Degradation of the activator in response to varying
concentrations of the inhibitors will be measured, the protease(s) involved in
degradation of the activator will be identified, the molecular activity of one
of the two inhibitors will be determined, and concentration gradients of the
activator that governs formation of the pattern of heterocysts along filaments
will be visualized. The activator ? inhibitor model has been proposed to
describe the formation of many patterns seen in a wide variety of organisms. The
simplicity of the Anabaena developmental system makes it ideal for testing many
aspects of the model. In particular, this project will demonstrate for the first
time inhibitor-dependent degradation of the activator of differentiation. This
project is narrowly focused on the genetics of heterocyst differentiation in
cyanobacteria, but the broader biological impact will be on the types of
molecular mechanisms that control specification of cells for differentiation in
many organisms. In addition to the research findings, this project will also
promote teaching, training and learning by funding the research training of
graduate students and undergraduate students, by enhancing sections of an
undergraduate genetics laboratory course, by providing funded graduate students
with teaching opportunities and by allowing their participation at national
meetings. Mentoring of undergraduate students for research credit will
potentially broaden the participation of students of Pacific Islander descent in
the biological sciences.