* 0919304
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Advanced Bacterial Genetics Course
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 466,639.00

In this project, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will continue its highly
successful postgraduate laboratory short course in Advanced Bacterial Genetics.
This intensive and heavily over-subscribed course has a long pedigree of
advanced training in cutting-edge, modern microbial genetics, with its roots in
a laboratory course started by Nobel laureate Max Delbruck in 1945. The three-
week summer course prepares each participant to enter directly into research
that makes use of advanced techniques and concepts in the molecular genetics of
bacterial systems. Because the course experiments address real research
questions, in addition to exposing students to different techniques, they
provide training in experimental design, trouble-shooting and real data
analysis. Daily discussion periods cover the methodology, experimental design
and analysis and invited speakers introduce students to diverse areas of modern
microbial research. The course stimulates interaction among new investigators
with diverse backgrounds and interest and provides training towards research in
modern microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training scientists in the latest techniques in
bacterial genetics is important for our greater understanding of many living
systems, since bacteria are omnipresent in our environment and essential to
human life, at times representing significant or potential threats in terms of
infectious diseases, environmental imbalance and even bioterrorism. Each year,
this course trains a new generation of young scientists in state-of-the-art
techniques in how to probe the inner workings of bacteria, and how to use this
understanding in a variety of applications in biotechnology and agriculture.
Given the relative simplicity of the bacterial cell compared to that of
multicellular organisms, scientists are now attempting to model the entire
system of the cell, using a combination of genetics and computer modeling to
understand the fundamental operation system of these organisms. The course
provides fertile ground for students and faculty to meet and discuss the
intricacies of the science in a relaxed but intensive environment, which many
subsequently cite as some of the most significant and formative of their
scientific careers, enabling collaboration and interactions that are maintained
and strengthened for years into the future.&lt;br/&gt;