* 0919526
* COUPP-500 kg: Design of a large-Mass Bubble Chamber for Dark Matter Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2015
* USD 1,440,000.00

This proposal will fund the COUPP (The Chicago-land Observatory for Underground
Particle Physics) collaboration through the University of Chicago. The proposal
is to employs moderately superheated liquids in the form of room-temperature
bubble chambers, to search for dark matter particle candidates. A small
engineering prototype containing 2 Kg of CF3I, has been successfully deployed
and operated at a shallow depth resulting in an improved limits on spin-
dependent WIMP-nucleus couplings. The collaboration has over the past year,
introduced measures against radon percolation into the active volume, this
together with longer exposures have improved the estimated reach of the
technique by approximately two orders of magnitude. COUP WIMP search advantage
over other detection technique is its sensitivity to spin dependence couplings.
In parallel to these studies the collaboration has completed two larger
chambers, one containing 15 kg of target mass, and the second 60 kg. After a
short commissioning period in the NUMI gallery at FNAL the second chamber will
be deployed during 2009 at the 6000 meter water equivalent depth at
SNOlab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The next step funded by this proposal is for the
collaboration to initiate a conceptual design of a 500 kg module. The design is
to be based on a modest extrapolation of the system already developed and tested
in the 60 kg chamber. The ultimate target mass is only limited by the commercial
availability of large synthetic silica vessels. This is not considered to be an
impediment, since for other reasons of convenience, safety and cost, a possible
extension into the multi-ton experiment at DUSEL can very well take form as a
small array of such modules. An initial 500-kg module shielded by a modest
thickness vertical water tank would be a perfectly adequate as part of the
initial set of DUSEL experiments. The relatively low cost of this approach to
dark matter detection leaves an option of larger masses as a realistic
possibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boarder impact of this proposal will
include new opportunities for undergraduate participation in research in
addition to graduate student and postdoc education. On the technical front, the
application of the COUPP technique to cargo screening for fissile materials
could have an significant impact. The whole field of dark matter search itself,
the broad impact of a truly low-background detector technique would be very
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;