* 0919745
* Molecular mechanisms of ABA biosynthesis under drought stress
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Jianhua Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Slocum
* 07/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigator (s): Jianhua Zhu
jhzhu@umd.edu (principal investigator)&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
0919745&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title: Molecular mechanisms of ABA biosynthesis under
drought stress&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought
resulting from soil water deficit is one of the most common environmental
factors that lead to substantial losses in productivity of crops worldwide. The
phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) is a very important factor in controlling
abiotic stress responses in plants. Therefore, ABA is referred to as a stress
hormone. While ABA accumulation itself is a well known response to drought
stress, the molecular factors that control ABA accumulation and connect ABA to
downstream responses are largely unknown. This project includes work that aims
to understand the molecular mechanisms regulating ABA biosynthesis under drought
stress by using forward genetic analysis of Arabidopsis mutants defective in
drought stress-induced ABA accumulation and drought tolerance. These mutants
were originally isolated based on altered expression of the 9-cis-
epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase 3 (NCED3) gene. In Arabidopsis, NCED3 is a rate
limiting enzyme in drought stress-induced ABA synthesis and proteins that
control expression of this gene are likely to play important roles in early
events of the sensing and signaling pathways that regulate ABA biosynthesis. The
research undertaken as part of this project will significantly advance our
understanding of how ABA biosynthesis is regulated at the molecular level, and
perhaps lead to the identification of additional ABA sensors. This could assist
in designing and implementing new strategies for engineering drought tolerant
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have important impacts on education
and outreach. The education and outreach is composed of two parts: a) Delivery
of knowledge of functional genomics to graduate and advanced undergraduate
students in courses which the Principal Investigator is currently teaching at
the University of Maryland; b) Offering one summer internship per year to a
student enrolled at a historically black undergraduate institution. The goal of
education and outreach is to provide current and future scientists with
understanding and research expertise in molecular genetics of plant abiotic
stress responses.&lt;br/&gt;