* 0919179
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny, Diversification, and Evolutionary Trajectories in the "Terebinthaceae" (Anacardiaceae and Burseraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrea Weeks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2013
* USD 171,185.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowering plants (angiosperms) are the
most diverse group of plants on Earth (&gt;280,000 species) and include almost
all of our agricultural crops, yet little is known about the interplay of
biological and environmental factors that have fostered this diversity. The
proposed study will explore the impact of historical events on rates of
diversification in two related groups of economically and ecologically important
angiosperms, the cashew (Anacardiaceae) and frankincense and myrrh (Burseraceae)
families, by 1) reconstructing their evolutionary relationships using molecular
genetics techniques and 2) investigating morphological innovations, ecological
specializations, and episodes of geographic range expansion or contraction in
these plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project results will directly contribute to
the understanding of how living organisms succeed or fail to diversify in
response to biotic and environmental change. Six U.S. principal investigators,
two of whom are women and four of whom are at early stages in their careers,
will collaborate on this cross-disciplinary project that will expand our ability
to manage and conserve tropical plant species, build museum collections of these
organisms, and provide professional development opportunities to students from
under-represented groups. Student participants will obtain research skills that
have broad application in fields such as medicine, forensic science, and
conservation biology.