* 0919073
* The Role of Innate Immunity in the Regulation of Cnidarian-Dinoflagellate Mutualisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Virginia Weis, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2012
* USD 230,180.00

Symbiotic partnerships between unrelated organisms are prevalent in all
environments and are a driving force in evolution. Many cnidarians, including
corals and anemones, engage in a symbiosis with photosynthetic single-celled
algae that live within their tissues. These partnerships are of global
significance as corals form both the trophic and structural foundation of coral
reef ecosystems. The partners in coral-algae symbioses have a series of complex
cellular and molecular conversations that regulate and maintain this intimate
association. In this project, the investigators will examine the role of host
coral and anemone immune systems in recognizing and regulating their symbiotic
algal partners. Animal immunity is comprised of many different genes and
cellular pathways that are set up to detect and regulate both detrimental and
beneficial invaders. This project will identify specific immunity genes,
proteins and pathways in corals and anemones and experimentally test their role
in the symbiotic partnership. These studies will include examinations of the
collapse of the partnership that occurs when corals are stressed by elevated
temperatures associated with climate change, a phenomenon termed coral
bleaching. During bleaching, the symbiotic algae exit the host, leaving the host
undernourished and susceptible to disease. Bleaching is threatening the health
of reefs worldwide. Insight into the basic biology of corals is critical to gain
a full understanding of whether or not corals have the capacity to adapt to and
survive climate change. This project will contribute to the education and
training of graduate students, undergraduates and high school students. Students
will be executing the majority of the work and in doing so they will gain
training in fieldwork on a coral reef and laboratory work using state-of-the-art
cell and molecular biology techniques. This training will prepare these young
scholars for futures in science, technology and education.