* 0919200
* LTREB:   Long-term behavioral and genetic analyses of a wild primate population
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2015
* Susan Alberts, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2015
* USD 449,980.00

The long-term objective in this study is to develop a comprehensive picture of
how behavior shapes population dynamics and individual life history outcomes in
one population of wild mammals, the savanna baboons of the Amboseli basin in
east Africa. The overall conceptual framework is concerned with how behavior
affects survival and reproduction across the life time, as well as how behavior
affects physiology and population genetics. Throughout their long-term work, the
investigators have focused on a series of short-term goals that represent
components of their long-term objective. With this LTREB project they overtly
reach toward one longer-term goal. Specifically, they will follow the ongoing
process of genetic admixture (hybridization) between a study population of
primarily yellow baboons and neighboring populations of anubis (olive) baboons
(a separate subspecies) in order to understand the way in which behavior
impacts, and is in turn affected by hybridization. Their previous work has
documented rather dramatic differences between hybrid and yellow baboons. This
represents a unique opportunity to follow a natural process of population
admixture over time, and to test hypotheses about its behavioral causes and
consequences. This project is relevant to understanding speciation because of
the role that hybridization can play in speciation. It is also relevant to
understanding human evolution because of the close ecological parallels between
baboons and humans, and the similarity between the baboon radiation in Africa
and the evolutionary history of various human species. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will continue the investigators' long history of training American and
Kenyan students, activities that are intimately connected with the research
goals. Recent integration of research and education has focused on training for
13 post-doctoral fellows, 12 doctoral candidates, 5 Master's Degree students, 34
undergraduates, and 2 high school students. The investigators also actively
collaborate with Kenyan scientists and are working with them on in-country
capacity building.