* 0919783
* Theta and gamma coherence: entorhinal cortical influences on the septotemporal axis of the hippocampus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Chrobak, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,306.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;The hippocampal formation (hippocampus and
entorhinal cortex) is essential for making episodic memories in the mammalian
brain. The physical substrate of memory resides in the connections among groups
of cells (ensembles) and their dynamic activity (electrophysiological) patterns.
This project will use a rodent model to address: 1) whether different parts of
the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex interact as a single functional group or
alternatively work as separate functional groups and 2) the role of specific
electrophysiological patterns (theta and gamma rhythms) in defining the activity
of a group. Previous studies demonstrated that changes in theta and gamma
coherence, a measure of temporal synchrony among neurons, relates to the
strength of episodic memory formation and memory retrieval. A key component of
the these studies will be how manipulations of the environment (e.g., novelty)
alter theta and gamma coherence and whether theta and gamma coherence varies
throughout different parts of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. This
project will provide knowledge about functional interactions between different
parts of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex and how theta and gamma patterns
either bring different parts together or segregate them in relation to specific
sensory events. This project will also provide; 1) integrative biology training
to high school, undergraduate and graduate students interested in psychology,
neuroscience and biomedical engineering and 2) a large in vivo
electrophysiological database for experimental and computational neuroscientists
interested in hippocampal physiology and memory formation.