* 0919007
* RUI: The interaction of scale, habitat, and dispersal limitation in Great Lakes shoreline plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Erin Girdler, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2012
* USD 135,000.00

Local environmental factors (e.g., soil chemistry, light) interact with the
characteristics of plants to influence the abundance of species in a community.
Dispersal can also influence species composition, but may be much more
stochastic in its effect if it is a relatively uncommon event. The relative
importance of environmental factors and dispersal, and the way that their roles
may change at different spatial scales, is not well known. Plant communities on
islands in Lake Michigan will be used as a model system to test the relative
importance of environmental factors versus dispersal in determining plant
community composition at a variety of spatial scales. Individuals of three
clonal 'phytometer' species will be planted into the native shoreline
environment and monitored for two growing seasons. The degree to which plant
performance varies with distance will indicate the plant?s eye view of habitat
heterogeneity in the environment. Species-area relationships will be analyzed
for breaks in the slope, an indication of changes in plant-relevant (instead of
human-defined) habitat factors. To complement field studies, a simulated plant
community with known degrees of habitat sorting and dispersal limitation will be
sampled using a variety of designs, and analyzed using several methods currently
debated in the literature. The project will establish methods for similar
approaches in other ecological communities to facilitate comparison and
generalization of this important ecological question.

The broader impacts include research experiences for about ten students at an
undergraduate institution. The scientific results will be available via
electronic appendices and posted on-line for comparative analyses, as well as
educational uses. A plant community simulation program will be developed and
made freely available to ecologists for use in teaching and research.