* 0919735
* Investigating Gibberellin Phytohormone Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2013
* Reuben Peters, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2013
* USD 719,606.00

Scientific Merit The gibberellins are a large group of complex diterpenoid
natural products, among which several have potent biological activity in plants,
where they serve as hormones. Intriguingly, these phytohormones are made not
only by the plants in which they serve to regulate growth and development, but
by certain plant-associated fungal and bacterial microbes as well. While
gibberellin phytohormone biosynthesis has been largely elucidated for higher
plants and fungi, which seem to have independently evolved/assembled the
corresponding metabolic pathway, the basis for such biosynthesis in bacteria
remains enigmatic. Even in higher plants, the origins of gibberellin metabolism
remains obscure. Further, there have been recent discoveries demonstrating the
existence of novel gibberellin metabolism (particularly catabolism) in higher
plants, which have unexplored implications in plant biology. Building on
previous NSF-supported studies, this project will both further investigate
gibberellin metabolism in higher plants and also define the analogous
biosynthetic pathway in bacteria. The bacterial pathway appears to represent yet
a third example of a convergent evolutionary solution to the puzzle presented by
such complex natural products biosynthesis. These studies will also provide
insight into the evolutionary origins of gibberellin metabolism in plants. Thus,
the planned wide-ranging studies will provide a comprehensive overview of
gibberellin phytohormone metabolism in a phylogenetically diverse group
organisms. Gibberellins have played an important role in agriculture, as it was
alterations in such phytohormone metabolism that led to high yielding semi-dwarf
varieties of rice and wheat, which were a critical component of the "Green
Revolution". The biosynthesis of gibberellin phytohormones by plant growth
promoting bacteria that are commonly applied to legume crop plants offers
additional agricultural significance. Further, the absolute requirement for
gibberellin production in higher plants has provided a genetic reservoir of
biosynthetic genes, duplication of which has led to a vast super-family (~7,000
known) of related diterpenoid natural products, exhibiting various biological
activities and physiological roles (e.g., as defensive antibiotics). Hence, this
project, while specifically directed at gibberellin metabolism, will offer
insights into a much broader group of natural products. Broader Impact On-going
broader outreach efforts also will be continued and expanded. Beyond the
inclusion of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students in research, work
will be continued with high school students and those from under-represented
groups. In addition, the project includes presentations to junior and senior
high school science teachers to provide concrete examples of how basic research
underlies and informs technological advancements that improve the human
condition. An important example is the relationship of gibberellin to the "Green
Revolution" as noted above.