* 0919682
* Sulfide Metabolism and Toxicity in Chlorobaculum Tepidum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2012
* USD 650,864.00

Hydrogen sulfide, the most reduced species of sulfur known, is an important
intermediate in the global sulfur cycle, and is also both a potent toxin to and
signaling molecule for humans. The research that will be supported by this grant
will increase our understanding of a key enzyme that oxidizes sulfide either as
a key part of energy metabolism and for detoxification, sulfide:quinone
oxidoreductase (SQR). Genes encoding homologs of SQR are found in organisms from
all three domains of life ranging from small genome size bacteria and archaea to
humans, but few members of this enzyme family have been studied in molecular
detail. This study will utilize a model system, Chlorobaculum tepidum, which is
the only organism known to contain three genes that encode SQR homologs.
Prelimary data indicate that all three genes are expressed and that two of these
genes encode active SQRs while the activity of the third gene product remains
cryptic. C. tepidum is an anoxygenic, phototrophic bacterium that utilizes
sulfide and other reduced sulfur compounds as electron donors for photosynthesis
under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic sulfur oxidizers like C. tepidum help to
maintain low sulfide fluxes from anaerobic environments like sediments and
hydrothermal systems thereby helping to maintain the aerobic biosphere. The
specific goals of this research are to understand the roles of the C. tepidum
SQR homologs in the context of the biology of this organism and help to define
specific relationships between sequence and functional diversity in the SQR
family. All three of the homologs are from clades of SQR that have not
previously been studied in biochemical detail. SQRs from two other strains of
green sulfur bacteria that are thought to represent low sulfide and high sulfide
adapted ecotypes relative to C. tepidum will also be examined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A powerful combination of
electrochemical, biochemical, and molecular genetic techniques will be employed
in the course of this program that will provide highly interdisciplinary
training for the undergraduate and graduate students involved. The laboratory
has a very successful history of mentoring undergraduates who present data at
national meetings and serve as co-authors on published papers. Plans are also in
place to disseminate information to the general public and to K-12 educators
through numerous ongoing outreach programs at the University of Delaware. These
activities include helping the public construct their own microbial gardens and
view samples on a phase contrast microscope and providing materials and
experiments for incorporating microbiology into K-12 science curriculum.