* 0919830
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: GEOCHEMICAL DETECTION OF ANCIENT MAYA EXCHANGE ENVIRONMENTS
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Timothy Beach, Ancient Maya Environmental Studies Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 70,877.00

The Classic Maya are remarkably absent from comparative study of archaic state
economies, despite them being one of the most intensively studied archaic
states. The Maya have long been perceived through the lens of an outmoded
perspective on pre-capitalist complex economies. There is also generally an
insistence that economic exchanges were almost exclusively transacted by
exacting taxes and tributes and redistributing them back down the social ladder,
as rewards for service etc., primarily in public ceremonies often associated
with feasts. The picture is also complicated by the fact that the overwhelming
majority of Maya artifacts, including those obtained through trade, were made of
perishable materials and are therefore missing in the archaeological record.

This research project will address this latter problem by analyzing permanent
soil residues left by artifacts and ecofacts after they decomposed. Geochemical
analyses of soils have helped delineate activity areas within households, but
this limited context cannot tell how artifacts which the soil residues represent
were obtained; soil surfaces must be analyzed where artifacts were brought -
marketplaces - before they reached their household destinations. Mapping
patterns of soil chemical residues in other public spaces will also help
identify economic exchanges effected through redistribution and feasting.

Pilot studies at a modern market developed geochemical signatures of marketplace
activities; almost identical geochemical distribution patterns were then found
at three select ancient Maya sites. Geochemical patterns in auspicious ritual
loci at these sites were then discriminated and interpreted as redistribution
and feasting activities. The current research will extend use of geochemical
techniques to three of the largest and most heavily urbanized Maya cities
(Calakmul, Chichen Itzá, and Cobá) and one town-sized site (Sayil); if time
permits, Caracol and Maax Na in Belize will also be sampled. Emphasis will be
placed on phosphorus as it is a component of all living matter, its residues in
soils are permanent, and it represents the greatest share of goods that
prehistoric populations used and possibly obtained through exchange. Sampling
units will be nondestructive as representative chemical traces remain in the
uppermost 10 cm. Grid samples will be placed over select plazas and around
interesting features such as rock alignments reminiscent of kiosks. Background
values of phosphorous and metals will be developed from on- and off-site soil
profile pits. Post-depositional factors that might affect soil enrichment, such
as ancient and historic land use practices, will be controlled through
interviews with local farmers and our on-site collaborators, analyses of soil
stratigraphy, and possibly subsequent excavation if the latter seems warranted.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, market exchange may have been critical in
sustaining Maya populations, stimulating craft specialization, and freeing
people from domestic self-sufficiency. Markets also help shape social and
political institutions in ways that redistribution could not. Therefore,
positive geochemical identification of marketplaces promises an important
breakthrough. Poor artifact preservation is not unique to the Maya, and thus the
methodology has the potential to contribute to an understanding of economic
systems in other archaic states.

The project will bring together U.S. and Mexican scientists to collaborate in
interdisciplinary research. Students will benefit by gaining important research
experience in the field and laboratory.