* 0919135
* Symposium on Systems Biology: Integrative, Comparative, and Multi-Scale Modeling: International Symposium at Iowa State University June 11-14, 2009
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2010
* Marit Nilsen-Hamilton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

An international symposium, Systems Biology: Integrative, Comparative, and
Multi-Scale Modeling, will be held at Iowa State University, June 11 - 14, 2009.
The Symposium will emphasize integrative and comparative systems biology, with
sessions on modeling in contexts that include genomics and network control of
transcription, protein interactions and metabolism in plants, animals and
bacteria. The integration of biology, computation and technology is critical for
further advances in understanding complex biological processes such as
organismal physiology, ecosystem sustainability and biomass and livestock
production. The Symposium is organized to maximize communication at both formal
(plenary talks) and informal (poster sessions, roundtable discussions, social
events) levels for speakers and Symposium attendees. Broader impacts include a
session for scientists and students to examine multidisciplinary educational
issues related to training in bioinformatics. Participants will evaluate types
of bioinformatics training being used to educate undergraduate and graduate
students at small colleges, doctoral granting institutions, as well as through
peer-to-peer interactions and on-line learning. The majority of the budget will
be used to fund travel grants for students and postdoctoral associates, with an
emphasis on encouraging members of under-represented minority groups to
participate.