* 0919090
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary genomics of rapid adaptation in threespine stickleback
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* William Cresko, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2013
* USD 364,756.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists are making significant
progress in understanding how changes in single genes allow organisms to cope
with changing environments. However, it is still unknown how entire genomes -
the total genetic information encoded in an organism?s DNA - respond to novel
conditions. In particular, when independent populations adapt to similar
environments, it is unclear what proportion of genomic changes occur in the same
way. Studies of threespine stickleback fish provide an excellent opportunity to
address this problem. Repeatedly, the ocean form of stickleback has invaded and
become isolated in freshwater habitats, which has resulted in replicated
patterns of divergence in traits such as bone size, body coloration and mating
behavior. The goal of this research is to analyze patterns of divergence across
entire genomes of multiple populations of Alaskan oceanic stickleback that
colonized freshwater ponds formed during a massive earthquake in 1964. Using
cutting-edge sequencing technology and newly developed techniques for evaluating
genome-wide patterns of genetic variation, this project will evaluate the
similarity of genomic responses of each population to their new freshwater
habitats. This research provides a case study of the genomic changes that occur
during the responses of organisms to both natural and human-caused environmental
changes. In addition, the results of this work will provide a better
understanding of the genomic basis of how organisms respond to climate change,
another environmental perturbation that could stimulate rapid evolution.
Graduate students and undergraduates including Alaska Natives will be part of
the research, and a website provides elementary-school level materials about the
project.&lt;br/&gt;