* 0919377
* Structure-function Studies of the Allosteric Mechanisms of Protein Switches
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Joel Tolman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2013
* USD 654,924.00

The activity of switch proteins can be turned on and off based on the binding of
a signal molecule. Such effects are central to how cells carry out complex
functions. Protein engineers are motivated to build switches of their own design
to test their understanding of natural switches, to test hypotheses concerning
the molecular basis of protein form and function, to create tools for
elucidating cellular function and behavior, and to create switches for sensing
and biomedical applications. The PI has created switches through fusing the
genes encoding maltose binding protein (MBP) and TEM1 beta-lactamase (BLA).
Understanding this switch's mechanism would inform the study of how such effects
emerge through evolution and would facilitate future switch construction for
applications. The objectives of this research effort are to develop an
understanding of switch proteins as well as to establish design principles by
which switches can be constructed. A structural model for MBP-BLA switch RG13
will be developed using a combination of NMR, computational modeling and
crystallography. This model will be used to propose hypotheses on the switching
mechanism and will then be tested experimentally using biophysical, biochemical
and mutagenesis techniques.

Broader Impacts The NMR and computational modeling work will provide tools for
the study of large proteins. A senior undergraduate/graduate course combining
computational protein design and directed evolution approaches will be co-taught
and include a module on the protein switch work, in part to illustrate how
interdisciplinary approaches are synergistic for addressing scientific problems.
Graduate students supported by this grant would serve as teaching assistants in
this course. Graduate students trained would have co-advisors from different
scientific fields, receive interdisciplinary training and participate in
meetings of professional societies. Undergraduates and high school students will
participate in the planned research, increasing the three professors'
participation in existing programs that provide research experience to high
school students from a high school with a predominantly African American student
body.