* 0919944
* Developmental regulation of estrogen receptor-alpha by epigenetic modification
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Melinda Wilson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 591,929.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This study investigates the molecular mechanisms by which critical genes are
regulated in the developing brain. Exposure to the hormone estrogen during
development is critical for establishing long-term structural and functional
aspects of the brain. Estrogen acts through receptor proteins inside cells that
mediate its action. Estrogen receptor gene expression is developmentally
regulated, but the molecular mechanisms that regulate this expression are not
known. In this study, the effects of epigenetic modification of DNA on the
developmental expression of estrogen receptors will be examined in a mouse
animal model. Molecular biology techniques are used to identify these changes.
It is hypothesized that estrogen receptor gene expression is shut off by DNA
methylation during development. The results of this study will enhance the
understanding of the regulation of gene expression in the brain at different
developmental stages, as these changes can have long-lasting consequences in
brain function in adulthood. This study combines the fields of
neuroendocrinology with the rapidly growing field of epigenetics. In addition to
the answering fundamental questions in the field of developmental neuroscience,
the impact of this study is enhanced by the involvement of multiple
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students over the course of the study
that provides a fundamental scientific background and training for these
students. The students will be involved in all aspects of this project from
performing experiments to presenting the findings at University events as well
as at other regional and national meetings. Students will also have the
opportunity participate in community events such as those associated with Brain
Awareness Week with the Society for Neuroscience. These events allow students to
interact with the public to educate children and parents alike to the importance
of understanding how their brains function.