* 0919880
* Adaptation of RanGAP localization and function for plant-specific development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Iris Meier, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 699,540.00

Intellectual merit The long-term goal of this project is to understand the
molecular mechanism, biological function, and evolutionary history of
subcellular positioning of signaling molecules in plants and animals. In
particular the project here is to characterize subcellular position and function
of RanGAP in plant cells. Ran is a small GTPase that controls multiple cellular
processes and plays a central role in the spatial and temporal organization of
vertebrate cells. Key to this role is a dynamic gradient between the two forms
of Ran, RanGTP and RanGDP, acting as a cellular positioning system. In animal
cells RanGAP functions in nucleocytoplasmic transport, spindle organization, and
post-mitotic nuclear assembly. In a previous study the PI showed that in plants
RanGAP functions in phragmoplast-based cytokinesis which suggests a separate
evolutionary history for the spatial organization and function of RanGAP in
plants than that in animals. This project will focus on the specific role of
RanGAP in plants using Arabidopsis as the model system. There are three specific
aims. In vivo methods for intramolecular fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) adapted from applications in animal systems will be used to test
hypothesis one that a gradient of RanGTP::RanGDP is established during mitosis
in plant cells. Bimolecular fluorescence complementation will be use in specific
aim two to define the minimal RanGAP anchor at the plant nuclear pore. For
specific aim three mutant RanGAP derivatives will be tested for functional
complementation of RanGAP depleted plant lines to dissect the different regions
of RanGAP and determine if there are separate protein domains with separate
functions. This work has evolutionary implications in that it suggests that
multiple methods have evolved to spatially organize the highly conserved Ran
protein, both in interphase cells and during mitosis. This suggests larger
underlying differences between plant and animal nuclear pore architecture, and
identifies a previously unrecognized connection in plants between the nuclear
pore, Ran and cytokinesis.

Broader impact Postdocs, graduate-students and undergraduate students will be
trained on this project. Based on this ongoing research project, the PI has
developed a new Plant Cell Biology course for advanced undergraduate and
graduate students, currently the only Plant Cell Biology course of this type
offered at Ohio State University. Through prior NSF funding, the PI has
developed a searchable database for Arabidopsis coiled-coil proteins and has
used it for a computational module in a local Functional Genomics Summer Course.
Student-created data will be used as the basis for parallel coiled-coil
databases for rice and Chlamydomonas. These data are currently improved and
validated in collaboration with two undergraduate institutions to use them as a
teaching resource for computational biology courses. The research proposed here
aids in the functional annotation of the computationally identified coiled-coil
proteins and in sharing new data for the activities at the undergraduate
institutions. The PI is involved in an outreach activity, offering a 10-module,
online course for the general public on Plant Biotechnology. This in turn
resulted in the publication of a paper on outreach in science, to communicate to
other researchers the need for and approaches to academic outreach activities.
These and comparable activities are ongoing and expected to continue for the
duration of the current award period.