* 0919413
* Transcriptional Regulation by Two-Domain HLH Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Casonya Johnson, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 516,632.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In multicellular organisms, members of
the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family control the ability of a single cell
type to give rise to many different cell types. They also influence the
development of the brain and other sensory organs. Within the bHLH family, REF-1
proteins of the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans use cellular and
environmental signals to control development by regulating gene expression. This
project addresses how members of this family carry out their functions, and
whether the mechanism of regulation is significantly affected by their unique
structure. There are three specific aims in this project. First, Dr. Johnson and
the members of her laboratory will identify other proteins that act with the
REF-1 family proteins to control C. elegans development. Second, they will
identify genes that are regulated by members of the REF-1 protein family. Third,
they will determine if the REF-1 proteins control gene expression by binding to
DNA. This research will help to establish a baseline for the mechanisms of
developmental regulation by the REF-1 family members. It will also further the
current knowledge of how major cell signaling pathways act through cell- and
tissue- specific proteins to control major developmental
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: 1) The research described will be
carried out at Georgia State University, an urban university that currently
serves a large population of minority students and students traditionally
underrepresented in sciences and mathematics. 2) These activities will be used
to formulate training projects for three graduate and two undergraduate
students, for high school teachers during summer internship and professional
development experiences, and for middle school students in the greater Atlanta
area. 3) All members of the Johnson laboratory, including undergraduates and
K-12 teachers, will continue to participate in local, national, and
international research symposia. This will serve to increase the laboratory
members' exposure to a broader scientific community and to disseminate the
research and educational activities of the laboratory.