* 0919052
* Genetic Architecture and Evolution of Reproductive Caste Determination in Harvester Ants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Sara Cahan, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2013
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of development
is surprisingly plastic, resulting from an ongoing interaction between genes and
environment. This flexibility allows organisms to develop characteristics
appropriate to environmental conditions and buffers development from stressors
and toxins. Ants display extreme forms of plasticity that make them an excellent
model system for the study of gene-environment interactions during development,
yet little is known about the genes involved or how they function. In this
project, the PI will investigate mechanisms and evolution of plasticity in an
ant species that has secondarily lost the ability to respond to environmental
cues. Controlled breeding experiments will allow the PI to map regions of the
genome responsible for developmental plasticity. The PI will test hypotheses for
why responsiveness to the environment should vary across species by comparing
species with and without flexible development. This work will contribute to a
unified understanding of the developmental process, ultimately leading to
identification of genes controlling developmental plasticity more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ants are a valuable model system in a number of
different disciplines, from aging research to invasive species management. To
facilitate communication among researchers, the PI will collaborate on a public
genomics database, where data can be accessed by the entire research community.
The PI will develop a summer program for high school students and teachers
designed to expose students to a research career in genetics, targeted toward
underserved Native American and urban school districts. The research will also
involve multiple undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a post-doctoral
researcher who will receive mentorship in developing an independent research
laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;