* 0919185
* Phylogenetic and Comparative Studies of Tiger moths (Lepidoptera: Noctuoidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Susan Weller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 583,552.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess evolutionary
relationships among tiger moths and the evolutionary associations of moth
feeding behavior with plant chemicals that serve to protect moths from
predators. Relationships among tiger moths will be assessed using DNA data and
this information will allow specific questions of life history and morphological
evolution in this moth lineage to be answered. One such question involves the
association of particular mouthpart structures with adult feeding on potentially
protective plant chemicals. Another question examines whether ultrasound-
producing structures used in defense against bat predation and in moth courtship
are evolutionarily correlated with changes in feeding
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results could provide valuable insights
into the evolution of animal behavior through examination of a novel system that
likely evolved under unique ecological and physiological constraints. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will be trained as part of the work and
additional scientific products of this study will include a web-based tutorial
on the evolution of butterfly and moth mouthparts and adult feeding strategies.
Contributions to scientific infrastructure will include deposition of data in
Morphbank, Genbank, and the All-Leps Barcode of Life project database. This
information will be valuable for educational outreach and future studies in
physiology, ecology, and evolutionary biology.