* 0919983
* Achieving Long Timescale Sampling in Biomolecular Simulations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Wei Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 443,588.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop and apply efficient simulation methods to quantitatively describe
complex biomolecular phenomena that usually occur in longer timescale than what
conventional methods can achieve. Molecular recognition such as protein-ligand
recognition and large conformational transition are two key elements in
biomolecular machines. Due to timescale limitation, quantitative understanding
of these events via computer simulation has been very challenging. In this
project, efficient generalized ensemble simulation methods will be developed and
employed to enhance the sampling power of biomolecular simulations. The promise
of this project is particularly ensured by a recent methodological development
in the PI's lab: the orthogonal space random walk (OSRW) algorithm, which can
uniquely realize collective environmental relaxation in a robust and efficient
manner. Specifically, three aims will be targeted: (1) understanding protein-
protein interactions and protein electrostatics via OSRW based free energy
simulations; (2) developing a hybrid quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical
(QM/MM) based OSRW sampling scheme to more accurately describe protein-ligand
interactions; (3) developing OSRW based conformational sampling methods to
predict protein functional dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, the
PI has made tremendous efforts in organizing workshops and meetings to connect
computational biophysics and experimental biophysics and to bridge method
developments and biological applications. Some of these workshops, for instance,
Telluride workshop on sampling enhancement, have become standing ones. In
particular, the PI has been putting enormous emphasis in building multi-layered
environments for young scientists so that they can receive suitable education to
carry out multi-disciplinary research. In order for the advanced methods that
are recently developed in the groups of PI and others to be quickly absorbed by
the scientific community, the PI edited a special issue on free energy
simulation in Journal of Computational Chemistry in early 2009 and is co-writing
a book that is focused on modern simulation methods and their hand-on
application. In addition, the developed methods through this project will be
released in the program CHARMM, which can be widely employed by general
scientific community.