* 0919181
* Collaborative Research:  The missing anthropogenic  N - assessing denitrification at the watershed scale
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Thomas Fisher, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 759,830.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lakes, estuaries, and coastal marine
waters throughout the world have been degraded by over-enrichment with plant
nutrients such as nitrogen (N) that cause algal blooms, and eventually deplete
dissolved oxygen. Nitrogen exports to aquatic ecosystems have been increased by
agricultural runoff, sewage discharges, and air pollution. Studies of these
nitrogen sources have found less N exported by rivers than is expected from the
amount of N added to the the rivers by human activities. The N that does not
enter rivers is either stored within the watersheds as soil or plant materials
or converted to N gases by the microbial process of denitrification and lost to
the atmosphere. A better understanding of the fate of N in ecosystems would help
manage N pollution, but N storage and denitrification have never been adequately
measured within an entire watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous
research, this project will apply new methods to assess denitrification in
agricultural watersheds. Denitrification consumes nitrate, the main form of N
exported from N-enriched watersheds, and produces dinitrogen (N2) and nitrous
oxide (N2O) gases. The project will measure accumulations of N2 and N2O gases in
groundwater and soils, and changes in the isotopic composition of nitrate that
are indicative of denitrification. The study will identify locations within
watersheds where denitrification is hypothesized to have high rates, primarily
in damp areas such as stream buffers and wetlands. The NSF-funded project will
collaborate with a USDA-funded project in assisting farmers to select better
agricultural practices by supplying information on areas with high
denitrification potential for capturing N lost from croplands. Knowing the fate
of agricultural N will help improve the management of the Choptank River
watershed and other basins. The research efforts will also include participation
of local high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;