* 0919043
* Collaborative Research: Landsliding, land-use change, and carbon dynamics in a Central American mountainscape
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2014
* Carla Restrepo, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 11/30/2014
* USD 401,491.00

Landsliding is a complex process that influences carbon budgets in
mountainscapes worldwide. This interdisciplinary project seeks to understand the
relative contribution of landsliding and deforestation to land-cover change and
ultimately, their role in transferring and storing organic carbon in the Sierra
de Las Minas, Guatemala. Using a set of contrasting watersheds - dry and wet -
this project will address three primary goals: 1) quantify the contribution of
deforestation and landsliding to land-cover change, 2) examine the coupling
between landslides and streams, and 3) estimate carbon fluxes associated with
landsliding and deforestation. Land-cover data obtained from remotely sensed
images taken at many points in time, and carbon-content data obtained from field
sampling of vegetation, soil, and water, will be combined in a geographic
information system (GIS) to model carbon storages and fluxes.

This project will contribute to the education of a new generation of scientists
in an emergent field that recognizes important links between Ecology and Earth
Sciences. This goal will be accomplished by engaging students traditionally
under-represented in science across educational levels in a variety of
activities, including field work, satellite image analysis and modeling, and
laboratory analyses. Students will also benefit from the cross-cultural aspects
of interdisciplinary scientific research in international settings. Results of
this project will improve the knowledge base needed for carbon mitigation
projects in tropical regions, and will enhance our understanding of carbon
cycling and sequestration in the context of climate change, hazard assessment,
and forest conservation.