* 0919931
* Formation and characterization of the Agrobacterium T-complex in plant cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual merit: This project will investigate the formation, composition,
and sub-cellular site(s) of localization of the Agrobacterium T-complex as it is
assembled in and transported through the plant cell. Agrobacterium transfers
single-strand DNA (T-strands), covalently linked to VirD2 protein, through a
Type IV Secretion System (T4SS) into plant cells. Several other effector
virulence proteins, including VirE2, are separately transferred to the plant via
the T4SS. VirE2 is a single-strand DNA binding protein that, in vitro, can
complex with and coat T-strands. A current favored hypothesis is that in plant
cells, VirE2 coats also helps target T-strands to the nucleus, where T-strands
become double-stranded and integrate into the plant genome. Targeting T-strands
through the cytoplasm and into the nucleus is likely directed by plant proteins
such as importin-alpha and VIP1. In vitro and in plant cells, importin-alpha
interacts with VirD2, VirE2, and VIP1, and these proteins have been hypothesized
to form a mature or super-T-complex with T-strands in planta. However, these
studies have all investigated protein-protein interactions in plant cells in the
absence of T-strands. In addition, expression of VirE2 has been from a strong
plant promoter, resulting in high levels of protein that forms aggregates.
Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation (BiFC) technology can be used to track
VirE2 as it exits Agrobacterium and interacts with proteins within the plant
cell. BiFC fluorescence technology, along with a modified T-DNA
immunoprecipitation assay, will be used to monitor the assembly and intra-
cellular trafficking of T-complexes in living plant cells. Under these
conditions, the various putative T-complex components are synthesized at natural
levels, and in their native organisms, prior to assembly in the plant cell. The
results of these studies are important to resolve much conflicting data in the
literature regarding the roles of various putative T-complex components in T-DNA
trafficking through the plant cell. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
proposed research: Horizontal gene transfer has been recognized as a major
component of evolution, and Agrobacterium represents one of the best studied
examples of horizontal gene flow. Agrobacterium-mediated genetic transformation
is also the major mechanism to generate transgenic plants for basic research and
for agricultural biotechnology purposes. Understanding how T-DNA traffics
through the plant cell is important for understanding how extra-cellular
protein-nucleic acid complexes (including viral genomes) target the nucleus
after entering a cell. Because many of the steps in nuclear targeting may be
rate-limiting, understanding the process will be important for preventing
disease (such as Crown Gall caused by Agrobacterium, or viral diseases), and for
improving the transformation of recalcitrant crop species. In addition to
training research scientists and graduate students, this project will be used to
conduct a vigorous outreach program with Brooklyn College to identify
undergraduate students from under-represented minority groups and introduce
them, through summer and academic year collaborations, to the conduct of
scientific research. Multi-year training of these students will be encouraged to
solidify their interest in pursuing a career in science. When they return to
their home institution, they will expose additional students to the techniques
learned in our laboratory. The under-represented minority students trained
during the summer will continue the projects at their home institutions, thus
broadening the number of their peers who will come into contact with scientific
research. These efforts will encourage undergraduate students to select a career
in science.