* 0919845
* Identification of underlying mechanisms for decision-making and behavioral choice in crayfish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Jens Herberholz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 08/31/2014
* USD 509,882.00

The consequences of decision-making can change personal fate, influence social
interactions and ultimately affect whole societies. Gaining a better
understanding of decision-making processes and behavioral choice, and especially
the underlying neural mechanisms, is of great interest to ethologists,
neuroscientists, psychologists and the general public. One of the most important
decisions all organisms have to make is how to respond to a life-threatening
event, because failure to respond appropriately could be fatal. This project
investigates the behavioral and neural basis of anti-predator behavior in
crayfish. Crayfish make discrete and easily quantifiable choices when exposed to
simulated predator attacks (they either freeze or quickly swim away), and their
decisions are controlled by nerve cells that are large, identifiable and
accessible. They therefore provide an excellent model system to study both the
behavioral and the neural aspects of decision-making in the laboratory. This
project combines behavioral analysis, neurophysiological and
neuropharmacological methods, and a novel neuroimaging technique to determine
(a) how the crayfish's behavioral response to a potential predator attack is
influenced by its developmental stage, motivational state and social history,
(b) how neural circuits in the nervous system of crayfish are anatomically and
physiologically organized to produce different forms of anti-predator behavior,
and (c) how neuromodulators like octopamine (a biogenic substance related to
adrenaline) affect the activity patterns of "decision-making neurons" that
control behavioral output. The project provides opportunities for students at
different stages of their careers (from high school to the postdoctoral level)
to learn and apply a variety of established and recently developed scientific
techniques.