* 0919991
* Molecular genetic analysis of a novel feedback inhibition mechanism in the cytokinin response pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jan Smalle, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Name: Jan
Smalle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: IOS-091991&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Molecular genetic analysis of a novel feedback inhibition mechanism in the
cytokinin response pathway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytokinins are
hormones vital for plant growth. They control cell division, the development of
water and nutrient transport systems and the aging process of leaves and stems.
This project aims to investigate how plant cells respond to cytokinin, and it
will focus on a negative control mechanism known as feedback-inhibition.
Feedback-inhibition is an essential part of a hormone response pathway because
it allows cells to limit the strength and the duration of a response, allowing
rapid readjustments to changes in hormone concentration. Previous research has
shown that cytokinin sensing leads to the activation of a family of cytokinin
response activator proteins, the type-B Arabidopsis Response Regulators
(B-ARRs). The investigators have found that one member of this group is rapidly
degraded upon its activation. The main goals of this project are to develop a
detailed understanding of this feedback-inhibition mechanism, and to determine
to what extent it controls different members of the B-ARR family. The proposed
research is predicted to yield novel insight into the fine-tuning of an
essential plant hormone response pathway and thus will be valuable for the
broader area of hormone regulation biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination
of genetics, biochemistry, molecular biology and physiology makes this project
an attractive training environment for a postdoctoral scientist, technician and
undergraduate students. This work also has potential implications for
agriculture since cytokinins control several processes that impact crop yields.
Therefore, an improved understanding of cytokinin signaling will provide new
tools for the engineering of crop species aimed at introducing beneficial
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;