* 0919335
* Genetic analysis of metapopulation processes in the Silene-Microbotryum host-pathogen system
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Janis Antonovics, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2013
* USD 441,703.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Most organisms exist in populations that are distributed in irregular and often
ephemeral patches. This research explores two fundamental consequences of this
fact: the forces that create and destroy patterns of genetic variation across a
landscape and how these spatial genetic patterns affect responses to disease
epidemics and climate change. The research applies high throughput genomic tools
to understanding the demographics and genetic dynamics in more than 800
spatially distributed populations. Objectives are to understand how the
distribution of organisms in nature affects the establishment, persistence and
proliferation of isolated populations, with a particular focus on disease
epidemics and host resistance.

Understanding the genetics and ecology of interconnected networks of populations
is of applied importance for conservation biology, management of genetically
modified crops, invasion biology, and understanding the potential of species to
respond to global change. The emphasis on disease dynamics and resistance also
contributes to understanding the dynamics of human pathogens. The research
involves training 10-15 undergraduate and graduate students in the
interdisciplinary fields of ecology, genomics, and informatics, with training
opportunities designed to enhance participation from members of under-
represented groups.