* 0919333
* REVSYS:  Phylogeny, revisionary taxonomy & the fossil record of asiloid flies (Diptera: Apioceridae, Asilidae, Mydidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* David Yeates, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2013
* USD 382,628.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The study of biodiversity has immense scientific and social value, especially
today as it is under serious threat. This project deals with the species
diversity, biogeography, and evolutionary relationships of three families of
true flies (Diptera): flower-loving flies (Apioceridae), robber flies
(Asilidae), and mydas flies (Mydidae). The focus of this project are those
species which are restricted to the arid environments in the southern Hemisphere
and western North America, areas that are part of global biodiversity hotspots.
Particularly flower-loving flies and mydas flies are rare and have not received
the scientific attention they deserve. Field work in Australia, Chile, South
Africa, the USA and other countries will allow the investigators to collect and
preserve specimens for morphological and molecular research techniques that will
be used to describe newly discovered species as well as provide hypotheses of
the evolutionary relationships and biogeography and propose a timeline of
evolutionary divergence. Previous hypotheses of relationships and biogeography
will be tested by incorporating additional recent species and newly studied
fossil species.

This project will help to understand the diversification of these flies during
the Cretaceous period coinciding with the diversification of flowering plants.
In addition to scientific journals, the investigators will publish their results
online on the project web-site and in the Encyclopedia of Life, both of which
are openly accessible. Tools will be developed and made available online to
allow future scientists to identify species of all three families. Four
undergraduate students will be trained in the taxonomy of true flies and
molecular laboratory techniques. A graduate student from Brazil will spend part
of her dissertation studies at the Field Museum of Natural History working on
taxonomic and phylogenetic projects on an entirely New World group of mydas
flies.

