* 0919157
* MSB: Do cheaters ever win? Examining microbial competition and extracellular enzyme production
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Adam Martiny, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2011
* USD 135,001.00

Microorganisms are highly diverse and perform critical functions in all
ecosystems. One of these functions is the cycling of carbon and nutrients from
dead plants and animals back into forms that living organisms can use. Microbes
catalyze this process by producing extracellular enzymes that operate outside
the cell and release small molecules that serve as a food source. However,
enzyme production is expensive, and evolution may favor microbes that ?cheat? by
intercepting resources from their neighbors without paying the cost of enzyme
production. The aim of this project is to determine whether cheater microbes can
outcompete enzyme producers, and whether competition depends on environmental
factors. The researchers will address this question with Pseudomonas bacteria
and bacterial isolates from the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
important because global carbon and nutrient cycles depend on microbial enzyme
producers. Extracellular enzymes supply nutrients to crop plants, forests, and
marine plankton that support land and ocean food webs. If human activities alter
microbial communities in ways that promote cheater microbes, these critical
functions could be affected. Enzyme production also controls the fraction dead
plant and animal carbon that returns to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.
Therefore, the results from this research could help predict future
concentrations of greenhouse gases.&lt;br/&gt;