* 0919935
* Mechanism and Regulation of Core Promoter Recognition and Promoter Escape during Transcription by RNA Polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Goodrich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 520,331.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;The expression of genes that are encoded by DNA is
essential for sustained life. The first step in gene expression is making an RNA
copy of the gene through a process known as transcription. During this process,
the enzyme RNA polymerase II, using DNA as a template, synthesizes mRNA
molecules. The broad goal of this research is to arrive at a detailed
understanding of the factors and the mechanism of the transcription reaction and
how they can be controlled. Such an understanding is important because
transcription is a principal control point for regulating gene expression during
growth, development, and normal cellular metabolism. Specifically, this research
will identify and characterize the function of a factor in human nuclei that can
accelerate the rate of the slow step in transcription, hence defining a new
mechanism of regulation. This research will also investigate how large complexes
containing proteins and DNA, which are required for transcription to occur,
assemble at genes which are poised to be transcribed. The methods used in these
studies center on a well-established human transcription system that is
assembled in vitro from highly purified proteins. The experiments utilize
detailed quantitative assays specifically developed to study the early steps of
transcription and the assembly of proteins on DNA. The research will impact the
understanding of how protein-DNA complexes assemble at genes, and how the early
steps in RNA synthesis might be regulated in cells. The knowledge derived from
this project has the potential to stimulate new studies of transcriptional
regulation in complex biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research described above, the project will
involve development of an experimental module for an undergraduate biochemistry
laboratory. This module will provide students with experience in designing and
implementing a hypothesis-driven experiment investigating protein-DNA
interactions. Moreover, students will be exposed to new experimental techniques,
thereby enhancing the scientific infrastructure of a teaching laboratory course.
Developing an experimental module for an undergraduate laboratory underscores
the importance of integrating research and education in order to promote
teaching, training, and learning. In addition, implementation of the research
plan will provide opportunities to devote a significant amount of time to the
training of graduate students in experimental design, interpretation of data,
creative thought, preparation and writing of manuscripts, and giving formal and
informal oral presentations.