* 0919871
* The plant hydraulic continuum from root to leaf:   avoidance of catastrophic xylem failure under dynamic conditions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Johnson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Plant growth and survival are ultimately constrained by the supply of water to
leaves. Even under adequate moisture supply, photosynthesis is restricted by the
stomatal pores in leaves as well as the efficiency of water movement through the
plant. If the stomatal pores in leaves do not tightly coordinate water loss with
changes in water supply, large negative pressures (tension) will develop in the
plant's water conducting system (xylem), causing entry of air bubbles and
ultimately catastrophic hydraulic failure and plant death. Air bubbles are
catastrophic because a bubble will break the water column and cause that part of
the xylem to be nonfunctional. Few studies have considered dynamic conditions
under which water stored in plant tissues is released into the transpiration
steam, buffering fluctuations in xylem tension. The overall objective of this
research is to elucidate the relative roles of both dynamic and static
properties of the plant hydraulic pathway from root to leaf in avoiding
hydraulic failure. The researchers hypothesize that there is a continuum of
relative reliance on different mechanisms conferring hydraulic safety: species
and plant organs with low water storage capacity rely primarily on xylem
structural features to avoid transport failure, whereas species and organs with
higher water storage capacity avoid transport failure due to a transient release
of stored water. A comprehensive understanding of how plants react to the
dynamic stresses they experience on a daily basis is critical for identifying
mechanisms allowing them to cope with variation in moisture supply under current
and future climate regimes. Because water is typically one of the most important
limiting factors to plant growth, the results will have broad implications for
agriculture, forestry and management of ecosystems experiencing altered moisture
regimes as a result of changes in land-use, climate change and other factors.
The project involves training of two postdoctoral scholars, one masters student,
and several undergraduate students. The project will involve both graduate and
undergraduate students from Penn State University, AgroParisTech (France) and
Panama.