* 0919821
* Molecular Mechanisms of Non-coding Bacterial Small RNAs in a Model Quorum Sensing System
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Brian Hammer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2013
* USD 511,310.00

Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of this research is to understand the role
of non-coding small RNAs (sRNAs) in controlling cellular processes in bacteria
including survival in the environment. The bacterium, Vibrio cholerae, uses
cell-cell communication, or quorum sensing (QS), to synchronously regulate
expression of four Qrr RNAs (quorum regulatory RNAs) in response to the density
of the bacterial population. Recent studies demonstrated that the Qrr sRNAs,
like other bacterial sRNAs, can regulate multiple target genes. Although V.
cholerae is a transient human pathogen, it is a common inhabitant of the aquatic
estuarine and marine ecosystems. This research project is designed to exploit
the understanding of the model V. cholerae QS system to discover the role of the
Qrr sRNAs in influencing microbial behaviors in diverse environmental settings.
Specifically, this project will address the following aims. Aim 1: To identify
genes controlled by the quorum sensing-regulated sRNAs. Aim 2: To define the
molecular mechanism of sRNA regulation using genetic, biochemical, and
computational methods. Aim 3: To assess the conservation of QS circuitry and
function in V. cholerae strains isolated from diverse locations. Because sRNAs
are involved in important biological functions in all domains of life, defining
the mechanism by which these sRNAs act will have fundamental implications for
understanding regulatory circuitry of all cellular systems. Moreover, bacterial
cell-cell communication systems are widespread in environmentally, commercially,
and clinically significant microbes. An understanding of how these signaling
pathways function, and how they control bacterial survival in the environment
can ultimately engender strategies to curtail world-wide problems of
environmental, human, animal and plant health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The applicant engages in teaching and service activities aimed at
disseminating modern scientific discovery and fostering interactions between
members of the academic community and broader society. Training of students
includes teaching an undergraduate lecture course and a course for upper level
undergraduate Biology majors and graduate students in Prokaryotic Molecular
Genetics. Collaborations initiated with researchers within the United States and
in India promote international scientific and cultural exchange. Dr. Hammer has
also developed an outreach program to engage ethnically diverse urban K-12
students in stimulating hands-on scientific activities that will be shared with
local educators who teach under-represented minority students in the metro-
Atlanta area. He is a volunteer for science outreach events at Georgia Tech and
in the surrounding community, an ad hoc reviewer for multiple journals. He is an
active teacher and mentor currently of three undergraduate and two graduate
students, and one postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;