* 0919893
* The role of sister-chromatid cohesion in heterochromatin-mediated association of achiasmate homologues in Drosophila oocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Sharon Bickel, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2013
* USD 422,800.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt; Meiosis is a specialized type of cell division
that is required for the production of eggs and sperm. A physical connection
between each pair of homologous chromosomes is necessary for their accurate
segregation during the first meiotic division. If this association is not
established or maintained, homologues can missegregate resulting in aneuploid
gametes and in most cases, inviable offspring. Therefore, analysis of the
mechanisms that ensure proper homologue association will yield critical
information about sexual reproduction and species propagation. Normally, meiotic
recombination in conjunction with sister-chromatid cohesion establishes a
physical connection that holds each pair of homologous chromosomes together
until anaphase I. However, some organisms utilize an alternative mechanism that
ensures the proper segregation of homologue pairs that fail to recombine. In
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) oocytes, accurate segregation of non-
recombinant homologues depends on heterochromatin near their centromeres. In
addition, recent work in the principal investigator's laboratory has uncovered
an unexpected link between sister-chromatid cohesion and heterochromatin-
mediated pairing of homologues. These data suggest that sister-chromatid
cohesion proteins not only maintain the association of recombinant homologues
but also play an important role in promoting the physical association of non-
recombinant homologues. This project will define the relationship between
sister-chromatid cohesion and heterochromatin in promoting accurate segregation
of non-recombinant homologues by completing the following three objectives: 1)
Test the hypothesis that the cohesin complex promotes heterochromatin-mediated
pairing of non-recombinant homologues; 2) Explore the role of the cohesin
regulator WAPL in promoting the association of non-recombinant homologues; 3)
Test the hypothesis that the heterochromatin protein HP1 promotes the accurate
segregation of non-recombinant homologues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; Accurate chromosome segregation during meiosis is essential
for sexual reproduction. This research will expand the understanding of this
fundamental biological process by elucidating the mechanisms that ensure proper
segregation of non-recombinant chromosomes during female meiosis in Drosophila
melanogaster. Given that centromere pairing plays a role in the faithful
segregation of non-recombinant chromosomes in both fission and budding yeast and
that sister-chromatid cohesion is evolutionarily conserved, these results may
also yield valuable information about homologue association and the segregation
of non-recombinant chromosomes in other organisms. In addition, this project
will integrate research and education at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Students will be involved in all aspects of the research involved
including experimental design, execution and data analysis. The methodology used
for each of the objectives lends itself easily to the full participation of
undergraduates at both the technical and intellectual level. Both undergraduates
and graduate students will attend weekly lab meetings/journal clubs. Learning to
effectively communicate their research and ideas will be an essential part of
their training. In the past 11 years, the principal investigator has mentored 22
undergraduates and 5 Ph.D. students. The small size of the research group
facilitates interaction of the principal investigator with each member of the
lab as well as extensive interaction among members. In addition, mentoring
undergraduates represents an important component of graduate student training.