* 0919138
* Collaborative Research: Landsliding, land-use change, and carbon dynamics in a Central American mountainscape
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2013
* Anne Carey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 11/30/2013
* USD 320,374.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landsliding is a complex process that
influences carbon budgets in mountainscapes worldwide. This interdisciplinary
project seeks to understand the relative contribution of landsliding and
deforestation to land-cover change and ultimately, their role in transferring
and storing organic carbon in the Sierra de Las Minas, Guatemala. Using a set of
contrasting watersheds - dry and wet - this project will address three primary
goals: 1) quantify the contribution of deforestation and landsliding to land-
cover change, 2) examine the coupling between landslides and streams, and 3)
estimate carbon fluxes associated with landsliding and deforestation. Land-cover
data obtained from remotely sensed images taken at many points in time, and
carbon-content data obtained from field sampling of vegetation, soil, and water,
will be combined in a geographic information system (GIS) to model carbon
storages and fluxes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the
education of a new generation of scientists in an emergent field that recognizes
important links between Ecology and Earth Sciences. This goal will be
accomplished by engaging students traditionally under-represented in science
across educational levels in a variety of activities, including field work,
satellite image analysis and modeling, and laboratory analyses. Students will
also benefit from the cross-cultural aspects of interdisciplinary scientific
research in international settings. Results of this project will improve the
knowledge base needed for carbon mitigation projects in tropical regions, and
will enhance our understanding of carbon cycling and sequestration in the
context of climate change, hazard assessment, and forest conservation.