* 0919697
* The Molecular Genetics of Male Behavior of Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Brigitte Dauwalder, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 724,572.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the brain works is an important and
complicated question. One of the many functions of the brain is to regulate
complex behaviors, such as behaviors that govern the interaction among
individuals. It is known that behavior is guided by both genes and the
environment, and that these two influences interact closely. In addition, brain
function is also regulated by hormones in ways that are not well understood.
This project studies such hormone-like factors and their influence on the mating
behavior of fruit flies, a model organism that has very powerful genetic and
molecular tools available to experimentally test mechanisms underlying function.
This allows easier examination and manipulation of these factors. Mutant flies
will be made that lack them, and they will be observed to study how that changes
the mating behavior of the fly. It is possible to draw general conclusions from
these studies, because hormonal factors work similarly in many organisms. In
addition, the project examines another important question: How these factors can
get through the blood brain barrier, a cell layer that protects the brain in
most higher organisms, including humans. These studies will give insight into
the ways hormones affect the brain, and how this influences behavior.
Ultimately, they will help to better understand how the brain works. These
studies will be performed at one of the most diverse Universities in the United
States that educates many students from underrepresented groups. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the research and be
trained in how to perform scientific studies.