* 0919363
* MAX - Multi-ton Argon and Xenon TPCs
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Peter Meyers, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2013
* USD 3,509,566.00

This proposal will fund the search led by Princeton University for evidence to
the existence of dark matter that is made of Weakly Interacting Massive
Particles (WIMPs). WIMPs may be detectable by their collisions with nuclei on
Earth, but the low expected rate of such collisions and low energy of the recoil
nuclei requires massive detectors with extremely low background rates, located
in a deep underground laboratory. The development of a Deep Underground Science
and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL) will enable the deployment within the U.S. of
WIMP detectors several orders of magnitude more sensitive than those operating
today. This proposal plans to use Liquid argon and xenon as the active media in
Time Projection Chamber (TPC)where the scintillation and ionization can be
independently detected and spatially resolved through large volumes of liquid.
The discrimination of nuclear recoils from background is possible using the
relative size and time dependence of these signals. By exploiting these methods
and the self-shielding capability of the dense liquids, the leading xenon and
argon TPC experiments have already achieved competitive sensitivity to WIMPs.
This proposal plans to develop two important new technologies that will greatly
enhance the power of the present collaboration to design the best xenon and
argon detector system for the discovery and identification of WIMPs: (1) the
development within the Xenon collaboration of a new low radioactivity, high-
quantum-efficiency hybrid photomultiplier tube, the Quartz Photon Intensifying
Detector or Qupid, designed at UCLA in partnership with Hamamatsu and (2) the
discovery of underground sources of argon gas low in the isotope 39Ar by the
Princeton and Notre Dame groups, supported by the NSF. This proposal will also
prepare the way for a following generation of still-larger detectors (10 ton
xenon TPC, 50 ton depleted argon TPC). These will be required to detect WIMP
dark matter if the cross section is below the 10 to the minus 47 cm**2, or to
perform high statistics, detailed studies of WIMP properties if WIMP dark matter
is discovered using DUSEL-ISE experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT:
The proposed activity will advance the development of DUSEL and its scientific
and educational mission in a variety of ways: (1) it will help the visibility of
DUSEL as an international facility, through cooperation and partnership of US
universities and national laboratories with European and Japanese groups; (2) it
will offer an excellent opportunity for the training of students, who will have
a chance to contribute to the success of a cutting edge project in fundamental
science and advanced engineering; (3) it will benefit society through commercial
applications of noble liquid detectors and associated technologies in areas
ranging from national security to medical imaging; (4) it will support continued
development of successful EPO programs such as the Princeton-Abruzzo-South
Dakota summer school for high school students.