* 0919800
* The Pursuit of Excellence: Transforming Undergraduate Science Education through Evidence-Based Practice
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,06/30/2015
* Jennifer Jackson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 472,457.00

The West Virginia Summer Institute on Undergraduate Science Education (WVUSI) is
a 4-day professional development workshop on scientific teaching for science and
math faculty, post-doctoral fellows, and graduate students in 4-year
institutions in the state of West Virginia. Just like the successful National
Academies Summer Institute on Undergraduate Biology Education (NASI), this
institute holds morning workshops that model active learning, assessment and
diversity, with afternoon group work sessions where participants create teaching
materials using the strategies that they practiced in the morning workshop. As a
summative assessment at the end of the week, the groups present their teaching
materials to the entire institute. The groups receive valuable peer evaluation
on their teaching materials which they incorporate before implementing the
materials into one of their classes when they return to their institutions.
However unlike NASI, which only selects biology faculty teams, this project
targets science and math teams and also post-doctoral fellows and graduate
student. Piloting this institute in May 2008 at West Virginia University has
already increased the number of faculty and graduate students across the
sciences and in math that are changing the way they teach, and also volunteering
to help with this institute.