* 0919347
* Professional Practice Simulations for Engaging, Educating and Assessing Undergraduate Engineers
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Naomi Chesler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 08/31/2012
* USD 499,993.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;This project is tailored to the newest
generation of engineering students who are more computer literate,
electronically connected, and simulation game-oriented than any prior
generation. Through this project, a computer game is being developed that models
authentic engineering practice. The game is being tested with first-year
engineering students to help them develop an epistemology of engineering
practice. In this game, students are employees in the Nephrotex Company that
designs kidney dialysis machines for people with end-stage kidney disease. As
entry-level engineers, student players are being charged with troubleshooting
client questions and developing guidelines for proper use of the company's
product in clinical settings, and for generating and testing ideas about the
design, operation, and performance of dialysis equipment. Student players also
interact with non-player characters who represent other members of the firm,
clients, and potential customers. To complete their tasks, students need to
research kidney function, machine design, transport phenomena, and fundamentals
of optimization. Game play is taking place face-to-face during class time as
well as outside of the classroom. Results from the project are being rigorously
assessed to evaluate the impact of the game on student learning and motivation
as well as the development of an engineering epistemic frame for the students.