* 0919261
* LZD Development: the LUX-ZEPLIN Multi Tonne Dark Matter Experiment Technical Development Plan for DUSEL
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Thomas Shutt, Case Western Reserve University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2014
* USD 3,200,000.00

The discovery of dark matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology,
astrophysics, and elementary particle physics. A broad range of observations
indicate that 80 to 90% of the matter in the universe is in some new form of
matter. The resulting Standard Cosmology holds that a quarter of the energy
density of the universe is a new fundamental form of matter not yet encountered
in the laboratory, and most of the remainder is dark energy. The solution to
this mystery may lie in the existence of some new generic class of Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, whose existence is also motivated by
physics beyond the standard model of particle interactions. WIMP detection
experiments require operation deep underground to prevent cosmic ray
interactions from causing false positive signals. The LUX and ZEPLIN
collaborations, building on their pioneering efforts in liquid xenon (LXe) dark
matter detectors and their broad expertise in low background techniques and rare
event searches, propose here a plan for the design of a 20-ton LXe detector
(LZ20). The LZ20 detector will use established two-phase LXe technology with
readout of primary and secondary scintillation signals for particle
identification together with 3d position reconstruction to exploit the self-
shielding of the LXe, removal of surface artifacts and calibration of position
dependent response functions. This detector, installed at the 4850 level, with a
fiducial mass of 13.5 tons and an initial operating period of 1000 days, will
suppress internal and external backgrounds from electromagnetic and neutron
interactions to below a single event and achieve a sensitivity to WIMP-
interactions down to cross section of 10 to the power negative 48 cm2. At this
exposure, the sensitivity will begin to encounter irreducible backgrounds from
solar and atmospheric neutrino interactions this experiment therefore represents
the definitive WIMP search that can be performed with liquid Xe.

Regarding Broader Impacts Dark Matter science is broadly appealing to the
public, building on the natural curiosity of the public as well as the
connection and familiarity with gravity. The collaboration proposes to develop a
range of activities, from tours and displays to partnerships with local schools
and individuals, to foster an interest in science and science careers. Dark
matter experiments demand the development of new technologies that are ultra-
sensitive to radiation, and new methods for achieving ultra-low radioactive
backgrounds. There is an overlap of these technologies and methods with those
used in a wide range of nuclear security contexts. Through direct technology
development or through the training of personnel that transfer to industry or
defense labs later in their careers, the collaboration expects significant
impact from LZ20 particularly because of the involvement of LLNL. This proposal
includes a description of postdoctoral mentoring plans.