* 0919987
* Benzoic Acid  Biosynthesis in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Natalia Doudareva, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 1,042,558.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-15).

Intellectual Merit: Numerous plant compounds, including natural plant growth
regulators, defensive compounds, pathogen-induced phytoalexins, pollinator
attractants and flavor compounds, contain benzoyl moieties derived from benzoic
acid and play crucial roles in plant survival and reproductive success in
natural ecosystems. Despite the simple structure of benzoic acid, widespread
distribution and importance for the plant life cycle, the biochemical pathways
leading to its formation remain largely unknown. The goal of the proposed
research is to discover unknown biochemical pathways leading to benzoic acid
biosynthesis, biochemically characterize the enzymes involved and determine
their localization in the cell. A unique integrative approach including
genetics, metabolomics, functional genomics and metabolic flux analysis will be
employed to dissect the pathways to benzoic acid biosynthesis in plants. Petunia
flowers, emitting large amounts of benzenoid compounds, represent an ideal model
system for the elucidation of the metabolic pathways leading to benzoic acid
formation and will be used in this research. The natural emission of
methylbenzoate as well as a variety of other volatile benzoic acid derivatives
from petunia flowers enables a rapid, quantitative analysis of flux through the
benzenoid network. Candidate genes involved in benzoic acid biosynthesis will be
silenced using RNAi methodology. The use of a petal-specific promoter will
ensure that benzoic acid synthesis will be affected in petals only, thus
minimizing unwanted effects on plant viability, growth, and reproduction.
Transgenics with altered benzoic acid metabolism will be subjected to metabolic
profiling, isotopic labeling experiments and computer-assisted pathway modeling
to assess the carbon flow within benzoic acid network and detect flux
redistribution during metabolic perturbation. Enzymes encoded by genes whose
silencing leads to changes in benzoic acid metabolism will be biochemically
characterized. Subcellular localization of these enzymes will be determined
experimentally to evaluate the potential role of compartmentalization in
regulating flux to benzoic acid. This research will result in the fundamental
discovery of genes and enzymes involved in benzoic acid biosynthesis and fill
important gaps in our knowledge of benzoic acid metabolism. Obtained results
will provide a comprehensive understanding of structural and regulatory
properties of the benzoic acid network and lay a foundation for future rational
metabolic engineering of plants to improve flavor and aroma quality, boost plant
defenses against environmental adversities, increase pollinator attraction and
heighten amounts of biologically active compounds.

Broader Impacts: This project has a strong multidisciplinary training component
for the next generation of plant biochemists. The undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as post-doctoral scientists (including women and minorities)
will gain experience in plant enzymology, molecular biology, in vivo isotopic
labeling, genetics, and integrative modeling. In addition to training students
in the laboratory, the PI will organize a Graduate Research Seminar on
biochemistry and metabolic engineering of plant secondary metabolism that will
bring graduate students and postdocs from the US together with others from
around the world and will precede the Gordon Research Conference on Plant
Metabolic Engineering in 2011. This seminar will provide young scientists with a
deeper understanding of plant metabolism and more actively involve them in
science and education, as well as help them build professional relationships
with future colleagues from abroad, particularly helpful since plant
biochemistry is quite strong in certain foreign countries (e.g., Germany,
Japan). Results and approaches used in this research will also be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate education at Purdue University by developing
course modules focused on plant specialized metabolism. The PI will provide
mentorship to trainees for success in their future scientific endeavors.