* 0919583
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the phylogeny of North American milkweeds through the application of massively parallel sequencing technology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Aaron Liston, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 463,968.00

Milkweeds (the genus Asclepias) are beautiful plants that are well known and
commonly planted for their ability to attract butterflies. There are 135 species
of milkweed in North America that have all originated fairly rapidly. This
project will use genomic sequencing technology to investigate how the species
are related to each other. DNA sequences will be obtained from complete
chloroplast genomes and 10 nuclear genes from two or more samples of each
species. The goal is to achieve a species level phylogeny of a large, rapidly
radiating genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of systematic relationships
among milkweed species will help to improve the classification of the genus.
Furthermore, these results will provide a robust foundation for studies of
milkweed floral diversity, pollination biology and biogeography. Milkweeds have
long served as a model system for the evolution of plant defenses against
herbivory, and results from this research will contribute to a better
understanding of how plants co-evolve with their pests. The methods developed
here achieve a savings in cost, time, and effort beyond any previously attained
in comparative genomics, and will be directly applicable to phylogenetic,
population genomic and ecological genomic studies of animals, fungi and plants.
A post-doctoral associate and three undergraduate students will be trained, and
two workshops designed to introduce plant systematists to genomic sequencing
approaches will be conducted at the annual Botany meetings in 2010 and 2011.