* 0919086
* Uncovering Theoretically Significant Empirical Patterns in the African Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kenneth Safir, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2013
* USD 404,895.00

Anaphora refers to a phenomenon in which one linguistic form depends on another
for its reference, such as the way in which the English reflexive "himself"
refers back to "John" in "John likes himself". Theoretical work on anaphora in
natural language has been a major engine for innovation in linguistics for over
30 years because of deep cross-linguistic similarities. Such similarities
provide important evidence for the existence of a shared human language faculty
and provide important details about the workings of that faculty. At the same
time, languages appear to differ a great deal in their particular patterns of
anaphora and such differences are also important in linguistic theorizing. The
goal of this project is to expand our knowledge of empirical patterns of
anaphora in the non-colonial languages of Africa through collection and in-depth
analysis of data from these languages. In earlier work supported by the NSF, the
project performed a number of detailed case studies of anaphora in selected
African languages. That work has already uncovered new patterns of anaphora
informing the nature of transitivity, the nature of clause boundaries, the
competition of anaphoric forms, and some unexpected interpretive subtleties. The
research methodology, to be continued in this project, consists in enlisting
native speaker linguists as language consultants to fill out a detailed
questionnaire made available over the internet. Both the questionnaire responses
and language-related materials are made available at the project's web site and
in a specially designed database also developed with NSF funding that permits
fine-grained comparative work
(http://www.africananaphora.rutgers.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from
this project will be of interest to theoretical linguists working in a variety
of frameworks. The comprehensiveness of the database's case files will
contribute to the goal of advancing linguistic research on anaphora. African
languages are particularly valuable in this goal: of the estimated 6000
languages of the world, approximately 2000 are spoken in Africa, and Africa is
unique in having so many speakers of national and minority languages with
sufficient academic training to participate in the project. Collaboration
between the project staff and native speaker linguists of Africa permits
knowledge to flow in both directions, building the community of scholars that
focus on fundamental questions about humans' linguistic abilities. The research
also develops a methodology that can be a model for comparative research into
other empirical patterns in the world's languages. An ultimate goal of this
project is to involve theorists and native speaker consultants in new
investigations of empirical patterns beyond anaphora, using the project's
existing infrastructure, including website, database, consultant network, and
project staff.