* 0919930
* Bacterial Chemotaxis to Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Related Pollutants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Rebecca Parales, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 612,482.00

Chemotaxis is the ability of motile bacteria to detect and respond to specific
chemicals in the environment, moving up gradients of attractant compounds and
away from repellents. Although diverse bacteria appear to have conserved
chemotaxis signal transduction systems, soil bacteria seem to have more complex
chemosensory systems than the well-studied enteric bacteria. For example,
enteric bacteria such as Escherichia coli have a relatively small number of
methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs), which is likely to reflect the
range of available carbon sources present in the ecological niche in which they
reside. In contrast, the available sequenced genomes of members of the genus
Pseudomonas have between 26 and 49 annotated MCP-like proteins. Soil bacteria
such as the pseudomonads are known for their catabolic diversity and with such a
large number of MCPs, they appear to have equally broad chemosensory systems.
However, few studies have attempted to characterize the range of chemotactic
responses or identify specific chemoreceptors in soil bacteria. This research
focuses on the relationship between the biodegradation of environmental
pollutants and the ability of degradative bacteria to sense these toxic
chemicals by using specific chemotaxis systems. The overall goal of this project
is to characterize the chemotactic responses of a biodegradative bacterium to
aromatic hydrocarbons and related pollutants. The catabolically versatile
aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading bacterium Pseudomonas putida F1 will be used as
the model organism for these studies. P. putida F1 has the ability to sense and
respond chemotactically to several aromatic hydrocarbons including toluene,
benzene, ethylbenzene, and p-cymene, all of which serve as carbon and energy
sources for the strain. In addition, this strain is also attracted to the
chlorinated hydrocarbon pollutants trichloroethylene, cis-dichloroethylene, and
perchloroethylene. The responses to these compounds are inducible--current data
from the Principal Investigator's laboratory indicate that P. putida F1 contains
at least two chemoreceptors to mediate these responses. At this time, however,
nothing further is known about the specific receptors involved in chemotaxis to
toluene and related pollutants in P. putida F1. The project will investigate the
relationship between aromatic hydrocarbon metabolism, chemotaxis, and gene
expression in P. putida F1, focusing primarily on the toluene and p-cymene
chemotactic responses. This work will be facilitated by the availability of the
complete genome sequence of P. putida F1. The results obtained in this study
will increase our understanding of the breadth of bacterial chemosensory systems
and how bacteria detect and respond to toxic aromatic hydrocarbons and man-made
chlorinated alkenes.

Broader impacts: This research project will contribute to the education and
training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, providing them
with valuable research experience. At the University of California-Davis, the
project will provide research experience for two graduate students, one of whom
will focus primarily on toluene chemotaxis, and the other on p-cymene
chemotaxis. Part-time undergraduate researchers will work on the project at UC
Davis during the academic year, and high school students in the Young Scholars
Program and undergraduates in the Summer Undergraduate Research Program at UC
Davis will also participate in the research. At the University of St. Thomas
(UST) research will be integrated into the Biology curriculum in a new
Bioinformatics course in which students will actively annotate the P. putida F1
genome while they carry out wet laboratory research projects with this organism.
Summer UST students will carry out full time research on chemotaxis in P. putida
F1, and one student per summer will travel to UC Davis to work for one month
with graduate students working on the project.