* 0919629
* MSB - Investigating the Relationship Between Structural Diversity and Functional Resilience to Stress in Ammonia-Oxidizers
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Lutgarde Maria Raskin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2011
* USD 312,560.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This project will evaluate the basic factors that allow
ammonia oxidizing bacteria to respond to stress. An ecological framework based
in differential gene expression at the community level will be integrated with
deterministic mathematical models to accurately characterize the function of
chemically stressed ammonia oxidizing bacteria and, if found to be relevant,
ammonia oxidizing archaea. The operating hypothesis is that the resilience of
ammonia oxidizers to stress is a function of microbial phylogenetic diversity in
the stressed system and this resilience arises due to differences among strains
in their investment of energy towards stress resistance at the expense of
growth. The project uses whole cell physiological indicators and microbial
ecology methods to follow the changes in the community diversity, species
dominance, population-level activity, and differential gene expression of
ammonia oxidizers perturbed with the heavy metals cadmium and copper.
Laboratory-scale reactors containing bacterial communities will be maintained
and exposed to copper and cadmium, and the behavior of the microorganisms in the
bioreactors will be analyzed. This project will have broader impacts for systems
where nitrification is often chemically stressed, including drinking water pipes
that are disinfected with chloramines and aquaculture treatment systems where
ammonia removal is key to optimum fish production. An increasing number of
biotreatment systems are implementing nitrogen removal, as the water quality in
many estuaries is deteriorating worldwide. Key to the nitrogen removal process
is ammonia oxidation. Results from the experimental work will allow current
computer models that are used to design wastewater treatment systems to be
expanded and improved, thereby motivating the design of more robust nitrogen
removal treatment systems. Finally, the participants in this program will
integrate various project activities into an existing outreach program that
develops environmental microbiology and engineering learning modules for grade
school children to help them understand how microorganisms both harm and help
humans.