* 0919230
* Collaborative research: Consequences of habitat heterogeneity and seed dormancy for adaptation at the margins of a native plant population
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Kara Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2013
* USD 459,527.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The principal objective of this project is to understand how
environmental and genetic factors affect local expansion of plant species'
ranges. Although in recent years many models have been developed to address this
issue, little has been done empirically to test developed theories. This study
combines field experiments and modeling to understand how range expansion in
plants may be influenced by adaptation at population margins, by changes in
environmental variability across population boundaries, and by dispersal of
dormant seeds beyond those boundaries. Seeds of known genetic backgrounds will
be transplanted in two successive years into multiple sites spanning the local
population boundary of an annual plant native to California. This boundary
occurs along a transition between serpentine grassland harboring high native
plant diversity and a non-serpentine grassland dominated by invasive, non-native
species. Concurrently, these researchers will develop new mathematical models to
elucidate how dispersal, habitat variability and adaptation influence local
range expansion. The models will be parameterized using data from the field
experiments to estimate average survival and reproduction, as well as variation
in those vital rates among sites, years and genotypes. Our integrative approach
will advance conceptual and empirical understanding of how dispersal, dormancy
and adaptation shape plant distributions over time.

Broader impacts of this project include conservation, training advanced
students, and public education. Studying mechanisms of range expansion is
important for understanding how invasive plants adapt as they expand into new
habitats and for predicting conditions under which plant species shift their
geographic distributions in response to rapid environmental change. Both
contexts are especially relevant for plant communities found on unusual
substrates, like serpentine soils. Such habitats are a special conservation
concern since many of their native plant species are rare and unique, and
because their plant communities are threatened by invasive species. The project
will support and train university students and post-doctoral fellows from under-
represented groups in environmental biology, and will include science-based
outreach to, and curriculum development for, local California public school
students in grades 1-7.