* 0919853
* Single Molecule Studies of Tau Conformations and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Anna Rhoades, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 761,404.00

As a growing number of proteins are identified as intrinsically disordered--
consisting entirely of or containing long stretches of regions that do not
populate well-defined secondary or tertiary structures--there is a corresponding
growth in interest in these proteins. They challenge the central dogma in modern
structural biology that function follows from structure. Gaining an
understanding of how biological function is achieved is challenging in
disordered proteins, in part due to the fact that they are inherently
heterogeneous with multiple conformations and species populated simultaneously
and with different lifetimes. In contrast to traditional ensemble methods, the
single molecule biophysical approaches used in this research are uniquely suited
to characterize heterogeneous molecular species in a wide range of solution
conditions and associated with relevant binding partners. This project focuses
on the protein tau, a microtubule binding protein that is entirely disordered in
solution and only partly structured when functionally bound to microtubules. In
a systematic study using single molecule experimental and computational
approaches, functional fragments of tau--such as the microtubule-binding domain
--will be characterized both independently of and in the context of the entire
protein chain. This will allow for a precise determination how the conformations
and dynamics of specific regions are coordinated, as engineered perturbations to
one region of the protein will be assayed for their effects on the functionality
of distant regions. Furthermore, the studies described here may serve as a model
for designing studies of other intrinsically disordered proteins, and help
elucidate how transient structure formation and long range interactions generate
function in this intriguing group of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a
number of educational and outreach activities that are integral to the PI's
research goals. The PI actively works to involve undergraduate students in
research. The research projects are ideal for undergraduate research; several
undergraduate students are already actively involved, including one from a
summer program for underrepresented minorities, and another who will spend the
summer and complete her senior thesis in the PI's lab in the upcoming year.
Another component is the PI's effort in the recruitment of underrepresented
students to graduate study in the sciences at Yale. In addition to serving on
the departmental diversity committee, the PI has attended and spoken at
conferences aimed at these minority students, including the Annual Biomedical
Research Conference for Minority Students (ABRCMS) and the Conference for
Undergraduate Women in Physics at Yale. Lastly is a multifaceted plan to improve
interdisciplinary training opportunities for students interested in biophysical
science. This includes the development and expansion of a course designed to
teach mathematical methods to biology undergraduate and graduate students. The
course covers analytical and numerical methods needed for analyzing biological
data, with a strong&lt;br/&gt;emphasis on learning to use MATLAB software for
solving and modeling complex biological problems. Synergistic with this course
development, the PI is involved with a new training program in Biological
Physics that recruits talented graduate students with an interest in
interdisciplinary research, but lacking the academic training in biology or
physics.