* 0919508
* Systematics of the Peyssonneliaceae (Peyssonneliales), a family of crustose marine red algae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Suzanne Fredericq, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2013
* USD 401,411.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red algae are among the dominant
photosynthetic organisms in the sea. Many are leafy seaweeds, but a large number
grow as crust-like pavements on the ocean floor. This project will examine
molecular gene sequences and morphological structures in a re-evaluation of the
classification and evolution of these crust-like red algae. Using new as well as
existing collections of algae, a specimen-based systematic treatment will be
produced. The study will provide correct names, species and genus descriptions,
and decipher phylogenetic relationships of these red algae worldwide. This
family is of great ecological significance in the deep-water marine environments
worldwide, with some species involved in the establishment of red algal nodules
common in the deep sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
resources essential to future research and educational training in the
biodiversity of seaweeds that share a crust-like habit. The results of this
study should prove useful as a basis for interpreting morphological evolution
and systematic relationships within a phylogenetic framework in other groups of
red algae. Training and outreach will be conducted at many levels, including the
production of databases and websites, and the posting of video clips on YouTube
in order to reach a wide audience that may not be familiar with the concepts of
basic scientific research, biodiversity, marine algae, or evolutionary
approaches in general. These video clips will be easily accessible in K-12
classrooms in Louisiana and beyond.