* 0919984
* Novel aspects of quorum-sensing signal transduction in Pantoea stewartii
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ann Stevens, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2014
* USD 466,532.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt; Quorum sensing is a process that enables a group
of single-celled bacteria to count their numbers and, based on cell density,
behave in a coordinated manner through cell-cell communication. One bacterium
that communicates through a quorum-sensing response is the plant pathogen
Pantoea stewartii subsp. stewartii. This organism causes Stewart's wilt disease
in sweet corn and maize, and thus has a negative impact on production of these
important US agricultural commodities. The wilt is a consequence of the
extracellular capsule or slime layer produced by the bacteria that blocks the
water transport vessels of the plant. Production of this capsular material is
controlled by quorum sensing. The quorum-sensing response involves extracellular
signaling molecules made by the bacteria that are called acyl homoserine
lactones (AHL) and a cellular receptor protein for the AHL called EsaR. EsaR
represses production of the extracellular capsule at low cell density, but is
inactivated by AHL at high cell density resulting in derepression of capsule
synthesis. This mechanism of AHL control is atypical amongst bacterial quorum
sensing regulatory proteins and is poorly understood. Most of the over fifty
known bacterial quorum-sensing systems function only at high cell density, when
the AHL signaling molecule is also present at high concentration. Recently the
PI demonstrated that AHL-free EsaR can also activate gene expression at low cell
density which is also a unique aspect of quorum sensing in P. stewartii in
comparison to other systems. The project here is to test the hypothesis that
EsaR acts both as an activator and as a repressor in P. stewartii. The specific
aims of the project are to (1) elucidate the mechanism whereby EsaR responds to
its ligand AHL in a manner opposite to that of the majority of quorum-sensing
regulators and (2) determine the targets and the manner whereby EsaR controls
not one, but two signal transduction pathways, one at low cell density and
another at high cell density. Results from these studies will transform some
accepted paradigms of quorum sensing regulators and the manner in which they
coordinate changes in bacterial gene expression. Studies of EsaR and the genes
it controls will also lead to a better understanding of the stages of pathogenic
infections in plants, and are also likely to reveal possible avenues for disease
control in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt; Research
training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students are top priorities
of this project. Students will be trained in the methods of science as well as
in scientific ethics. Students will be nurtured in other aspects of their
professional development, such as giving presentations at scientific conferences
and learning to work in a synergistic manner with each other and with
collaborators. Ultimately, these junior scientists will graduate and move on to
become productive members of the scientific community. To bring more diversity
to this community, efforts will be made to recruit, mentor and retain women and
underrepresented minorities to the research group and to maintain a supportive
working environment for them. As an individual, the PI is actively engaged in
improving the microbiology/immunology curriculum at Virginia Tech and serving as
an academic advisor to individual students as well as to the undergraduate
microbiology club. The club performs educational outreach at regional daycares,
elementary schools and alumni events, teaching parents and children about the
importance of microorganisms in their daily lives.