* 0919781
* Collaborative Research: Genetic mechanisms of conditional-expression and trait exaggeration in weapons of sexual selection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2015
* Douglas Emlen, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hammond
* 07/31/2015
* USD 660,452.00

Animals produce a bewildering diversity of ornaments and weapons that function
in male contests over reproductive access to females. Two characteristics are
common in the most elaborate of these structures: disproportionate growth
yielding exaggerated trait sizes, and growth that is more sensitive to nutrition
than is the growth of other, non-sexually-selected, structures (e.g. antlers in
moose or elk reach extreme sizes in the largest bulls, and antler growth is
especially sensitive to the nutritional state of the animal). Despite intense
interest in the evolution of these sexually selected traits, almost nothing is
known of the genes or the developmental mechanisms responsible for
disproportionate/ exaggerated growth, or of the mechanisms linking nutrition
with the amount of trait growth. This proposal addresses a fundamental gap in
understanding the evolutionary potential of ornaments and weapons of sexual
selection: What are the genes and developmental/ physiological processes that
underlie nutrition-dependent expression and exaggerated growth? The premise for
this project is that to understand the evolution of these structures requires
exploration of the details of how they develop. The long-term goal is to
understand how physiology and development interact with the environment to
generate diversity in morphological and behavioral phenotypes. The objectives
are to identify genes and associated physiological pathways responsible for
generating exaggerated weapon growth, and nutrition-dependent phenotypic
plasticity. The investigators will (1) test whether the mechanisms generating
nutrition-dependent expression are the same as those generating exaggerated
growth, and (2) compare these mechanisms for two weapons (horns &amp; mandibles)
in three lineages of beetle representing three independent origins of enlarged
male weapons (dung beetles, rhinoceros beetles, &amp; stag beetles). The
integrative approach utilized will shed light on physiological and developmental
pathways involved with nutrition-dependent phenotypic plasticity in animals
generally, and will provide one of the most comprehensive studies to date
linking variation in male condition with the expression of sexually selected
traits - a central tenet of current theories of sexual selection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core objective is the cross-training of young scientists
in genetics, development, physiology and evolution. The postdoc and students
involved with this project will spend extensive periods in all three labs
actively learning techniques and interacting and collaborating with all three
PIs. The PIs are committed to training undergraduates in all aspects of the
research process, and will incorporate innovative teaching methods in science
that embrace diversity; the very nature of this system lends itself to learner-
centered investigations. The focal species are a fantastic resource for outreach
activities and the PIs will use these animals in educational programs designed
to enhance STEM learning in K-12 students as well as in informal science
education environments, including visiting local school classrooms in both WA
and MT, supporting the WSU insect museum, and aiding with a new Montana insect
zoo.