* 0919586
* Modeling and Theory of Biomolecular Association
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Chia-en Chang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 353,887.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The association of ligand and protein
is of fundamental importance in biology, playing roles in functions as diverse
as immunity, metabolism, signaling, and cognition. Recent advances on Brownian
dynamics and continuum simulation methods provide powerful tools to study
diffusion in biomolecular systems, but they are mostly restricted to systems
that are near the limit of diffusion-control one-step association processes. For
more complicated processes, such as two-step association processes that involve
short-range interactions and conformational changes of ligands and proteins,
existing methods may not be reliable enough to study the association pathways
and predict the rate constants. This project will develop new computer
simulation tools and theoretical models to study the two-step binding processes.
This work will be carried out in three integrated steps: First, new multi-scale
methods, combining Brownian dynamics simulation methods and continuum simulation
methods to study ligand-protein encounters and association rate constants will
be developed. Second, the new codes will be modified for field programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs). Notably, FPGAs are new hardware code accelerators that can
largely speedup the calculations. Third, free energy profile of binding
pathways, energy barriers and kinetic and thermodynamic properties of ligand-
receptor association and dissociation will be computed by several widely used
molecular simulation packages and methods to be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will integrate the research activities with
education at different levels. The training of young scientists, including
graduate students, undergraduates, as well as postdoctoral fellows, will be a
central focus of the PI's group. The PI strongly encourages undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in science to participate in the research. Local high
school students will also have the opportunity to gain research experience in
the PI's lab through a variety of programs at the PI's institution. The PI will
distribute all codes developed in this project.