* 0919729
* Understanding xylem refilling:   Molecular and biophysical perspectives
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,10/31/2012
* Maciej Zwieniecki, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 10/31/2012
* USD 431,366.00

Plants and especially trees move a significant volume of water every day from
the soil to the atmosphere without employing any moving parts. In the case of
the mature oak tree, this could be as much as 200 gallons of water a day. This
transport happens under tension and thus it is vulnerable to cavitation
resulting in embolism (filling of xylem vessels with air) that is responsible
for the loss of hydraulic continuity. Such loss of water transport capacity in
tree stems could lead to significant loss of photosynthetic capacity or even
plant death. How plants deal with this apparent intrinsic weakness and keep the
water column intact remains the major question in the understanding of the
transport process. One of the current hypotheses is that plants cannot avoid
occurrence of embolism but instead evolved the ability to refill empty vessels
and restore the transport capacity during active transpiration. The goal of this
proposal is to analyze plant biological activity during embolism refilling under
tension by integrating genetic, biochemical, morphological and physiological
processes. The data generated from multiple experiments will be used to inform a
systems level approach including quantitative and qualitative analysis as well
as theoretical modeling to understand the dynamics and control of embolism
formation and refilling under environmental stress. Resolving this
embolism/refilling process would fill a major gap in knowledge and open new
avenues for future research in plant water relations, plant biotechnology, and
bio-mimicking of self healing devices to deal with challenges of climate change.
Linking anatomy with physiology will also provide a foundation for better
understanding the evolutionary trajectories of early plant evolution that
allowed these formerly aquatic organisms to succeed in their quest to invade
terrestrial habitats. Outreach activities, including public lectures and web
dissemination of new methods and protocols, will be used to reach a broader
audience. The proposed research project will also support the career development
of a postdoctoral fellow and stimulate interest in plant biology among
undergraduate students via summer employment opportunities.