* 0919276
* Effects of long-term elevated CO2 on earthworm populations, bioturbation and carbon sequestration in soils
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Linda Deegan
* 07/31/2013
* USD 432,209.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most pronounced global
effects of human activity is the sharp increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide
(CO2) concentration. Elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration has a direct impact
on vegetation through increasing plant growth and an indirect impact through
cascading effects on soil organisms that consume plant residues. Earthworms are
considered one of the most important groups of soil organisms due to their
substantial processing of plant material, incorporation and stabilization of
plant-derived carbon in soils, and soil-mixing activities. Earthworm activities
can affect carbon sequestration in soils by controlling the amount of carbon
that is processed and by mixing the plant material deep in the soil, thereby
influencing the amount of time that this plant-derived carbon remains in the
soil. This project seeks to understand: (1) how plant responses to elevated CO2
have affected earthworm populations, (2) whether earthworm-mediated soil mixing
has increased or decreased in forests exposed to elevated CO2, and (3) how these
combined effects influence soil carbon sequestration. The investigators propose
to combine geochemical techniques with ecological methodologies to make
inferences about the role of earthworms on soil mixing and carbon sequestration.
The study will be conducted in a temperate deciduous forest exposed to elevated
CO2 since 1998 at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. To study the effects of
elevated CO2 on earthworms, the densities and biomass of earthworm species in
replicated forest plots exposed to elevated CO2 will be compared with those at
ambient CO2 conditions . The investigators will use stable and radioactive
isotopes as chemical markers and will measure biomarkers for specific plant
components (i.e., leaves and roots) to identify separate mixing layers within
the soil and to provide a more accurate knowledge of the fate of plant-derived
carbon in these forest soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project
will contribute new knowledge about feedbacks and interactions among biological
and soil processes that determine the degree of carbon sequestration in an
ecosystem. Specifically this project will: (1) provide new information on
cascading effects of elevated CO2 and global change on temperate forests, (2)
quantify the role of earthworms on soil mixing and carbon sequestration, (3)
apply a novel method using radioisotopes to study the effects of global change
on soil processes, and (4) generate important functional data that will provide
an unprecedented context for earthworm ecology in carbon cycling and global
change research. An important outcome of this proposal will be the incorporation
of earthworm research in on-going science education activities in high schools
of Chicago public schools from districts that serve mostly underrepresented
groups. In addition, funding for this project will broaden participation in
science, and represent an employment opportunity for the PI, who is a beginning
investigator, as well as for undergraduate students from the University of
Illinois at Chicago who will participate in this research, providing them unique
experiences in science with real-world implications.