* 0919159
* Dissociating the contributions of discrete hippocampal subregions to contextual and trace conditioning
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Timothy Otto, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2014
* USD 588,000.00

There is now widespread agreement that different "types" of memory are processed
by different areas of the brain. One of the primary brain areas involved in the
processing and temporary storage of some forms of memory is the hippocampus;
however, relatively little known about the specific types of memory dependent on
the hippocampus and the biological mechanisms underlying this process and
storage. Like most brain areas, the hippocampus can be divided into separate
functional and anatomical subregions, which have recently been shown to
contribute differentially to two forms of memory commonly referred to as
contextual memory (i.e. memory for the spatial contexts in which certain events
occur) and trace memory (i.e. short-term memory for specific information). This
project will systematically examine the contributions of these hippocampal
subregions to contextual and trace learning by using techniques designed to
temporarily inactivate, or "turn off" these areas either before learning or
before recall at a later time. Moreover, recently data suggest that the activity
of a specific gene, ARC, is regulated within these brain areas by learning. In
order to more fully understand the biochemical processes underlying memory
formation, this project will further examine the activity of this learning-
related gene within the hippocampus during and after learning. These
inactivation and genetic studies will provide a significantly more precise
characterization of the types of memory processed by each of these hippocampal
subregions as well as the basic biological mechanisms by which this processing
and storage occurs. These studies will also provide important training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students who are pursuing
careers in science. Graduate students will receive intensive training in
research techniques and scholarship, help mentor undergraduate students, and all
will present their research projects at national and international meetings.