* 0919742
* Segmental Recombination in the Mouse t Complex:  Tools for Mapping and Evolutionary Analysis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Mark Erhart, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 537,383.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mouse t complex is a naturally
occurring chromosomal variant consisting of four segments that are inverted
relative to the normal homolog. Genetic recombination between the two chromosome
types is rare, making it difficult to analyze the biological roles of individual
mutant genes within the t complex. This project aims to develop and characterize
segmental recombinants as a gene mapping resource for the mouse t complex, and
to investigate a naturally occurring segmental recombinant as a possible
evolutionary precursor to the t complex. This research focuses on the fourth
inversion of the t complex. This inversion harbors the greatest number of genes
affecting t complex phenotypes (sperm function and embryonic development), and
has persisted in mouse populations for an estimated 1.5 million years. Aim 1 is
designed to generate recombinant chromosomes using a genetic cross that has
proven to yield segmental recombinants. As a result of this aim, a panel of
recombinant chromosomes will be created for gene mapping purposes. Aim 2 is
designed to assess the properties conferred by the recombinant chromosomes.
Genetic crosses will be used to determine the presence or absence of these
properties for each recombinant chromosome. This will allow particular candidate
genes to be excluded or included as factors contributing to these biological
properties. Aim 3 will characterize a unique variant of the fourth inversion
using DNA sequencing, genetic recombination assessment, and gene expression
studies. This unique variant may represent a "molecular fossil" present at the
time when the inversion arose in the ancestral mouse population. There are two
important outcomes from this work. First, these experiments will generate a
mapping resource that will be used to identify the genes responsible for
fundamentally important mammalian biological processes. Second, this work is
designed to elucidate the origin and evolution of the largest inversion in the
mouse t complex, contributing substantially to the long-standing debate about
the reasons why the t complex exists in nature at a frequency lower than
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chicago State University (CSU) serves a largely
underrepresented clientele, with a student enrollment of &gt;83% African
Americans and a location in one of the largest African American communities in
the US. The primary mission of CSU is teaching. In the science disciplines at
CSU, research and research training are recognized as being essential to the
teaching and intellectual advancement of the clientele. The activities described
in this project will take place in a laboratory environment in which training of
both undergraduate and MS-level graduate students has been a priority for 18
years. The project principal investigator currently coordinates two research
training programs designed to increase the number of underrepresented minorities
entering Ph.D. programs in the science disciplines: A summer research training
program for CSU undergraduate science majors, and a MS to Ph.D. Bridge program
for CSU Biology graduate students. Students in both of these programs will
participate in hypothesis-driven research described in this project. In
addition, because CSU is the lead institution of the NSF-funded Illinois LS-AMP
consortium, LS-AMP scholars will have an opportunity to contribute to this
research. The principal investigator also will incorporate experiments from this
work into a CSU lab course (Recombinant DNA Laboratory) as a means to teach
modules on DNA isolation, gene expression, and bioinformatics. Taken together,
these approaches will (1) recruit more underrepresented minorities to research
activities, (2) afford MS students in the lab an opportunity to mentor
undergraduates through organized research training activities, and (3) increase
the number of underrepresented minorities going to Ph.D. programs.