* 0919709
* Nucleolar Protein Function in Cell Growth and Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2015
* Patrick DiMario, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2015
* USD 440,167.00

Intellectual merit. The overall goal of this project is to test the hypotheses
that 1) a block in nucleolar function in Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)
induces cell stress leading to programmed cell death (apoptosis) via p53
activation, and that 2) certain nucleolar proteins participate in ribosome
assembly under normal growth conditions, but then regulate cell stress response
upon their release to the nucleoplasm when cells are stressed. The nucleolus is
the sub-compartment within the cell nucleus that is responsible for the
biosynthesis of ribosomes, elaborate protein and RNA complexes that catalyze
protein synthesis once they are exported to the cytoplasm. Nopp140 is a
nucleolar protein considered to be a chaperone for ribosome assembly. Loss of
Nopp140 could result in the under-production of ribosomes, or in the production
of ribosomes that are defective in structure and function. One specific aim will
test the hypothesis that the loss of Nopp140 and thus nucleolar function induces
p53-mediated apoptosis. This basic research in Drosophila has direct
implications to the human Treacher Collins Syndrome (TCS) which is characterized
by craniofacial birth defects. A second specific aim examines Drosophila
nucleostemin (NS1), a nucleolar GTP-binding protein. This aim will test if NS1
plays an active role in the maturation and nuclear export of the large ribosomal
subunit in non-stressed cells. This aim will also test the hypothesis that
nucleoli act as cell stress sensors; specifically, the studies will determine if
Drosophila NS1 regulates either p53, the nuclear transcription factor known to
induce apoptosis in both human and Drosophila cells, or negative regulators of
the TOR signaling pathway that normally suppresses a second form of programmed
cell death called autophagy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This award
will maintain the strong support provided to women and minorities in past years
of funding. For example, an African-American female research associate has been
supported through this project. Several undergraduate minority students have
also been supported in this laboratory by the Louisiana Alliance for Minority
Participation (LAMP) which is a Louisiana Board of Regents/NSF Program grant
awarded to the LSU College of Basic Sciences. Other minority students in the
laboratory have been supported by the Louisiana State University Ronald E.
McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program that targets first-generation
college students of low-income groups that are under-represented at the post-
graduate level. The current award will also support a minority graduate student,
who provided important preliminary data for part of this project. The current
award will also maintain strong undergraduate research in the laboratory. In the
last two years, nine undergraduates and two high school students (as part of an
out-reach program) participated in aspects of this project. As one example of
the impact of this effort, one minority undergraduate researcher completed an
LSU Honors thesis, recently graduated with a perfect 4.00 GPA with a major in
Biological Sciences, and starts medical school at LSU-New Orleans in August,
2009.