* 0919123
* Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure Development for the Western Consortium of Idaho, Nevada, and New Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Gayle Dana, Nevada System of Higher Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sian Mooney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 2,000,000.00

EPS-0919123: Nevada System of Higher Education, Gayle L. Dana, Linked to
EPS-0918635 (University of New Mexico) and EPS-0919514 (University of Idaho)

Collaborative Research: Cyberinfrastructure Development for the Western
Consortium of Idaho, Nevada, and New Mexico



Idaho, Nevada, and New Mexico have NSF EPSCoR Track-1 Research Infrastructure
Improvement (RII) awards that share a common theme of global challenge.
Collectively, the project teams are studying climate change and its effects on
water resources, ecosystems, and the environment. Subsequently, the three states
formed a consortium to pursue cyberinfrastructure (CI) improvements that would
leverage their resources so that the cumulative impact of NSF RII investments in
the three states could exceed the sum of the parts. The impetus for this Track-2
award was the recognition of the complexity and scale of the scientific
challenge and subsequent ramifications for science, education, and economic
development.

The NV-ID-NM consortium proposed three high priority objectives: 1) to increase
connectivity and bandwidth; 2) to enhance data and model interoperability; and
3) to utilize CI to integrate research with education.

Intellectual Merit Climate change impacts are especially pronounced in the
Western United States due to the tight coupling between climate and regional
hydrology, and the associated ramifications for the water supply, disturbance
regimes (e.g., fire, drought), regional economy, and the quality of life. The
proposed CI developments will enable researchers to more effectively share
standardized and interoperable data and models, and to more easily develop
regionally coupled atmosphere-land surface-hydrology-socioeconomic models.
Consortium institutions and states will be linked to more than 200 other
Internet2 universities, government research laboratories, companies, and other
research facilities throughout the world to facilitate data-intensive research,
collaboration, distributed experiments, grid-based data analysis,
experimentation using high performance networking, and social networking. In
addition, the proposed investments aim to support effective participation in
national and international virtual organizations focused on global climate
change, such as the National Ecological Observatory Network, and the Consortium
of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc.

Broader Impacts The proposed CI investments in the consortium seek to achieve
broad impact and add value by leveraging existing resources and infrastructure
within the institutions, jurisdictions, and regions. The institutions that will
benefit from the proposed increased connectivity include rural institutions and
those serving Hispanic and Native American students and faculty members. Open
access to the data and models developed within the consortium will be made
available through the data archive, and the model interoperability framework
will ensure that scientific products can be broadly disseminated and readily
used by scientists, engineers, and students throughout the world. The project
also seeks to make usable high-quality environmental data, information, and
models available for STEM education and outreach. The consortium?s education
programs are designed to have far-reaching impact by: (1) developing new CI
skills and climate modeling expertise for graduate students, postdoctoral
associates, and faculty; (2) integrating cyberlearning and climate change
science into middle and high school science education, especially targeting
rural schools and schools that reach Hispanic and Native American students; and
(3) developing an Industry CI Days Program that promotes CI awareness in
business and industry.

The consortium is committed to improving access to cyberinfrastructure for
minority populations and geographically disadvantaged populations, and to
increasing diversity in the future workforce of the partnering states.