* 0919033
* NER: Catalytic formation of nanostructured ceramics by a bio-mimetic and environmentally friendly approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2010
* Douglas Adamson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2010
* USD 87,824.00

National Science Foundation - Active Nanostructure and Nanosystems (ANN) (NSF
06-595)&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale Exploratory Research
(NER)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET-0708054&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Adamson, Douglas&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NER: Catalytic formation of nanostructured
ceramics by a bio-mimetic and environmentally friendly
approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NER:Catalytic formation of nanostructured ceramics
by a bio-mimetic and&lt;br/&gt;environmentally friendly
approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For millions of years nature has been able to make
ceramic structures with precise detail and control at the nanoscale. The
strength of the abalone shell and the intricate designs found in diatoms are two
examples of organisms producing highly ordered ceramic materials under
conditions of near-neutral pH at ambient temperatures. In the case of man-made
materials, not only is the precise nano-structure lacking, the conditions
required to form ceramics involve extremes of pH and/or high temperatures. These
conditions are detrimental in terms of cost and environmental impact, and may
preclude the use of many organic structure-directing agents as well as the
incorporation of catalysts that could be included in a porous ceramic matrix. A
synthetic system that can mimic the ability of nature to produce well ordered
ceramics at the nano-scale under mild conditions would find applications ranging
in structural materials, catalysis, and filtration technologies. &lt;br/&gt;The
natural system on which we have focused our efforts is the protein Silicatein,
found in the marine sponge Tethya aurantia. This sponge creates silica spicules
that are composed of a silica outer casing comprising 75% of the spicule weight
and a core containing a mixture of proteins. Of the protein found in the core,
70% is Silicatein. We focused on this protein for two reasons: first, the
structure of the protein had been determined and second, the mechanism of its
catalysis had been elucidated. These studies revealed that Silicatein has the
ability to catalyze the hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS). The subsequent
condensation of the hydrolyzed silane is rapid and results in the formation of
silca. Exploiting this mechanism, the relatively stable TEOS can be quickly
converted to silca at room temperature and under near neutral pH. &lt;br/&gt;We
have recently developed a synthetic, non-peptide based polymer that mimics the
catalytic function of the protein Silicatein. By incorporating analogs of the
functional groups shown to be critical in the catalytic activity of the protein
into a purely synthetic polymer, we have demonstrated catalytic function in a
non-peptide block copolymer. This work has been described in a manuscript
currently under consideration by the Journal of the American Chemical Society.
We have demonstrated by numerous analytical and chemical methods the catalytic
nature of our polymer with respect to TEOS condensation. Building on our
successful demonstration of catalysis, we will exploit the amphiphilic nature of
our block copolymer catalyst to form nano-structured ceramics under near-neutral
pH and ambient temperatures. The high-risk element of this work is the use of
this polymer to template ceramics with nanoscale features and the incorporation
of ceramics other than silica, neither of which has been previously
demonstrated. We thus will create a synthetic system that mimics the natural
system in which a nanoscale templating agent is also a catalyst. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this grant include the creation of new materials that
increase the efficiency of catalysis, produce new nanostructured ceramics, and
create new structural materials, under environmentally benign conditions. It
will also allow for the incorporation of temperature or pH sensitive materials
into a porous ceramic matrix. Additionally, this grant will support the PI's
involvement in outreach programs that include a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program, Princeton University Materials Academy (PUMA)
targeted at underrepresented minority high school students, and the Scientist in
Residence program at the Liberty Science Center. This grant also includes
research activities for an undergraduate student. Every effort will be made to
attract a female or minority student and introduce them to cutting edge
research. The intellectual impact of this work is two-fold. Being able to mimic
a biological process is one of the best ways to truly understand it. Thus our
efforts to reproduce what nature does in a completely synthetic system will lead
to a deeper understanding of the natural process. Secondly, in synthesizing a
ceramic ordered at the nano-scale, we will increase our understanding of self-
assembled amphiphilic systems and how the structures formed can be immobilized
and exploited. &lt;br/&gt;