* 0919270
* A Tonne-Scale Ge Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Wilkerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,600,000.00

This proposal will fund the search for neutrino-less double beta decay. The
neutrinos are fundamental particles that play key roles in the early universe,
in cosmology and astrophysics, and in nuclear and particle physics. Results from
neutrino oscillation experiments have provided compelling evidence that
neutrinos have mass and give the first indication that the Standard Model of
nuclear and particle physics is incomplete. A 1-tonne detector searching for
neutrino-less double beta-decay will be about 100 times more sensitive than
current measurements and will confirm or exclude the inverted mass hierarchy for
Majorana neutrinos. To achieve the ultimately realizing 1-tonne scale detectors
using Ge detectors, the Majorana and GERDA collaborations have established a
formal cooperative agreement. The collaborations have agreed to share resources
and knowledge in their development of detector designs to reach for a Majorana
mass sensitivity below 50 meV. This proposal requests support for the design of
a 1-tonne-scale Ge experiment. Work will be performed on the engineering,
design, simulation, and risk analysis of an apparatus based on two different
concepts, one developed by the Majorana collaboration, and the other by the
GERDA collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology of larger, lower-
background Ge arrays developed from a tonne-scale neutrino-less double beta
decay experiment can be expected to enable a new generation of highly efficient,
ultra-low-background gamma spectroscopy measurements. Among the fields that
stand to benefit from this new generation of technology are: measurements of
anthropogenic radiation in the environment; atmospheric, ocean, and groundwater
environmental transport measured via natural isotopic tracers; methods of
radioactive dating; reactor monitoring; bioassay for determining very low
occupational exposures to radiation; and biological studies involving
radiotracers at very low activities. Students and postdocs will be trained in
deep underground physics and related disciplines, such as low-background
techniques, detector technology, nuclear physics and neutrino physics. An
education and outreach program with the Morehead Planetarium on the campus of
University of North Carolina will bring this science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;