* 0919357
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ECOHYDROLOGY OF DEEP CRYSTALLINE ROCKS AT DUSEL HOMESTAKE
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2013
* David Boutt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2013
* USD 111,416.00

The proposed Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL)
provides a unique opportunity to study deep subsurface ecosystems, an endeavor
that could fundamentally change the way we view the origin and early evolution
of life on Earth, the search for novel materials, or the generation of energy to
sustain future generations. We are guided by the over-arching question: What
controls the distribution and evolution of subsurface life? Our hypothesis is
that these controls are dominated by processes related to geology, geochemistry,
geomechanics, and hydrology. Themes of scaling and the development of facies, or
zones of similar characteristics, cut across all the processes. This project
responds to the DUSEL S4 solicitation and has the ultimate goal to prepare a
Preliminary Design Report describing experiments that will be developed as part
of the DUSEL facility. Project planning activities include 1) refinement of the
ecohydrological facies model using extensive Homestake data, 2) a workshop to
refine goals, experimental designs, infrastructure, and education and outreach
activities, and 3) writing the Preliminary Design Report and Work Breakdown
Structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What we know about subsurface life has come
from only a few studies of a few boreholes and deep mines. We are planning the
first detailed study of a deep ecosystem in the context of the hydrology,
geochemistry, and rock system state that sustain it at the former Homestake gold
mine in the Black Hills of South Dakota where DUSEL has been proposed. The
development of a long-term deep geosciences observatory at the Homestake DUSEL
will revolutionize the field of deep subsurface ecohydrology. The opportunities
for young scientists and international participation in such a facility will be
tremendous. Results from the work will have wide ranging implications as 20% of
the current earth's surface consists of a similar geologic setting. DUSEL also
will facilitate experiential learning for K-12 through graduate school students
working alongside world-class geoscientists. Current activities will focus in
particular on South Dakota-based target audiences and programs.