* 0919899
* Collaborative Research:   Influences of environmental manipulation on parental programming and stress physiology in a cooperatively breeding bird
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Stephan Schoech, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2013
* USD 447,358.00

A wealth of research in the biological and social sciences has demonstrated that
rearing environment is an important contributor to offspring development. Are
these developmental effects adaptive in terms of molding an individual to match
current environmental conditions? The co-PIs will first test whether variation
in provisioning behavior by breeding Florida Scrub-Jays gives rise to
differences, both physiological and behavioral, in the resulting offspring. The
research will then follow the survival and reproduction of these offspring to
assess whether the developmental pathways determined by their parent's
provisioning behaviors do indeed match the offspring phenotype to the current
environment. Florida Scrub-Jays breed as family units, with older siblings
helping to rear the most recent brood of nestlings. Hence, findings with respect
to the rearing environment and its potential to affect physical and mental
aspects of the emerging adults will have implications for other species with
complex social systems (like humans). Furthermore, through a multifaceted
approach to monitoring physical, physiological, and behavioral aspects of focal
birds, the co-PIs will be able to provide insight into the mechanisms that drive
environmental influences on offspring development (preliminary data suggest an
important role for secretion of the 'stress hormone' corticosterone, early in
life). A key component of the research will be the development of a new
automated feeding technology to manipulated food availability and provisioning
rates in particular family groups. This approach, which will use radio frequency
identification to selectively administer food to targeted individuals, will
introduce an inexpensive yet powerful tool for studies that require manipulation
of the feeding environment. Previous work by the co-PIs has demonstrated that
food supplementation can increase the number of young produced in this
Threatened species, and the improved delivery system the co-PIs will use in this
research will be a powerful conservation tool that can be used by managers of
other threatened and endangered species. The field work will take place at
Archbold Biological Station in Central Florida, and will contribute to this
institution's infrastructure and legacy of high-quality research. Finally, the
research will provide training opportunities for a number of undergraduates (or
recent graduates), two Ph.D. students, and two post-doctoral researchers; and it
will help enrich Archbold's K-12 education programs.