* 0919631
* Mechanism of ATP-Dependent Proteolysis by Lon Protease
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Irene Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 591,856.00

The overall goal of this project is the elucidation of the mechanism of ATP
(adenosine triphosphate-dependent proteolysis by Lon protease. Lon protease is
an ATP-dependent serine protease complex functioning to maintain cellular
homeostasis and relieve cell stress. This protease possesses an intrinsic ATPase
activity that is elevated during protein degradation. The specific goal of this
project is to determine how the chemical energy source ATP is used by Lon to
catalyze protein degradation, and from here, obtain insights into why nature
design proteases that utilize ATP as activators. In this project, the PI will
perform kinetic experiments to identify enzyme intermediates, whose formations
are dependent on ATP hydrolysis in the degradation pathway of an unstructured
protein called lambda N, and determine their functions accordingly. The kinetic
mechanisms of ATP binding and subsequent hydrolysis during lambda N degradation
are evaluated by rapid chemical quench techniques. The kinetic mechanisms of
ATP- versus AMPPNP-dependent cleavage of specific sites within lambda N are
evaluated by fluorescence stopped flow technique. The kinetic mechanisms of ATP-
versus AMPPNP-dependent translocation of a defined scissile site in lambda N to
the proteolytic site of a bacterial Lon are evaluated through monitoring the
fluorescence resonance energy transfer signal by stopped flow techniques.
Results generated from this study will provide insight into the mechanism by
which Lon couples its ATPase and peptidase activities to degrade an endogenous
protein substrate lacking defined structure. This work will represent the first
quantitative study designed to determine the contribution of the ATPase activity
of Lon to protein degradation.

Broader Impacts This project employs a multi-disciplinary approach to determine
the mechanism of ATP-dependent proteolysis. As such, students participating in
this project acquire a multidisciplinary training in enzyme kinetics, protein
chemistry, liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, chemical synthesis, solid
phase peptide synthesis, fluorescence spectroscopy, protein purification and
molecular cloning. These research activities provide excellent training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students in biochemistry.
Additionally, all personnel working in the PI's laboratory serve as volunteers
to the National Youth Sports Program (NYSP). NYSP is summer program offered to
children of low-income families in the Greater Cleveland area between the ages
of 10 and 16. Participating students teach these children chemistry of daily
life through experimentation with household chemicals and dry ice. This annual
outreach activity has become a tradition in the PI's laboratory, where
undergraduate and graduate students learn to become more involved in the
community and education for the underprivileged.