* 0919993
* Creating and Disseminating Tools to Teach with Demographic Data Maps and Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Andrew Beveridge, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2013
* USD 332,896.00

This project combines the versatility of the web application tool known as
"Social Explorer," which is used to create visual maps illustrating
quantitatively various social patterns and demographic change, with research-
based instructional supports for using this tool in teaching undergraduate
social science classes. "Social Explorer" provides demographic information in an
easily understood format consisting of: interactive thematic data maps; reports
that present data for an area in a larger context; and simple tools to visualize
complex data patterns across geographies (from the entire nation to individual
census tracts) and across time. Extensive data are available for US counties
from 1790 to the present, and for census tracts for each decade from 1910 to the
present.

Through the creation of a dynamic online archive of curriculum modules that
embody proven instructional approaches for teaching with GIS, this project is
enhancing the impact of "Social Explorer" by facilitating the teaching and
learning of key social science concepts and data analysis skills essential for
understanding population distributions and demographic change. This project is
also developing support materials for instructors. It is using Web 2.0
approaches to: (1) develop and support a community of instructor users; (2)
provide adaptable modules as examples of effective teaching with "Social
Explorer" in Urban Studies, Sociology, Political Science, and other
undergraduate courses; and (3) use classroom studies to inform strategies for
supporting instructors' adaptations of these examples to their own teaching, as
well as "out of the box" use of materials. "Social Explorer" produced nearly 3
million maps in 2008, and is currently used at a growing number of colleges and
universities.