* 0919815
* Conference:  2009 Epigenetics Gordon Research Conference being held August 9-14, 2009
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Jeannie Lee, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2010
* USD 5,000.00

Intellectual merit. This project will provide support for the Epigenetics Gordon
Research Conference to be held in Aug, 2009. Epigenetics is defined as the study
of interactions between genome and environment that leads to changes in gene
expression without changing the DNA sequence. The study of epigenetics therefore
leads to an understanding of genome function and consequences of aberrant
environmental stimuli. In recent years, epigenetics has revealed some of the
most extraordinary forms of gene regulation and quickly become one of the most
exciting research areas in genetics, genomics, and medicine. The advances have
come with the realization that the environment is a significant modulator of
health and disease, though the exact mechanisms have remained elusive. It is
clear that functional alteration caused by the environment does not necessarily
involve mutational change, but can instead involve stable epigenetic change.
Even as genome projects are providing the complete nucleotide sequence of a
myriad of organisms, researchers are turning to the field of epigenetics to
understand how that sequence is interpreted both correctly and aberrantly in the
context of the cell and the whole organism. Epigenetic processes encompass an
impressive diversity of mechanisms including noncoding RNA (ncRNA), DNA
methylation, prions, histone modifications, chromatin remodelling, higher order
chromosome structures, and nuclear compartments, all of which will be discussed
at this meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This conference will
explore the interaction between the environment and the epigenome at all levels.
At the whole-organism level, there will be a focus on the health consequences of
normal and aberrant environmental stimuli. At the most molecular level, the
conference will aim to understand how specific environmental stimuli change the
epigenome without changing DNA sequence. In addition to featuring the classic
epigenetic phenomena such as imprinting, X-inactivation, RNAi, paramutation, and
transvection, several sessions will be devoted to toxins, diet, parental care,
and endocrine disruptors in promoting normal development, behavior, cancer,
diabetes, and aging. Examples will be drawn from model organisms in the
prokaryotic, fungal, plant, and animal kingdoms. Since its inception in 1995,
this conference has played a key role in moving forward the field of
epigenetics, earning an international reputation for generating new research
avenues and providing a unique setting for bringing together a diverse group of
scientists. The 8th meeting of the Gordon Research Conference on Epigenetics
will: (1) Advance understanding of epigenetic mechanisms by facilitating the
exchange of information and ideas from experts working in a wide array of
epigenetic systems; (2) Introduce new issues and new questions that push the
boundaries of epigenetics, and at the same time, provide a venue in which
alternative viewpoints can be heard and discussed openly; and (3) Promote the
careers of young investigators, including students, postdoctoral fellows, and
new principal investigators including underrepresented minorities.