* 0919100
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Spatial-Specific Phytochrome Responses in Arabidopsis Thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Beronda Montgomery, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2013
* USD 765,249.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Distinct organs, tissues and cells of plants can display different responses to
environmental cues (e.g., during de-etiolation cotyledon growth is stimulated by
light, whereas hypocotyl growth is inhibited by light). The hypothesis that
organ- and tissue-specific pools of light-absorbing phytochromes initiate
distinct signaling cascades that effect discrete, physiological responses is
being tested in these investigations. In this project, a novel targeted
molecular approach is being used to inactivate metabolically the phytochrome
chromophore and thereby specifically deplete phytochromes in distinct cells and
tissues of plants. Such an approach is a prerequisite for understanding
phytochrome functions at the cellular and tissue (i.e., spatial specific) level
and allows control over the severity and localization of phytochrome deficiency
in plants that is not achievable using classical mutant isolation or RNAi
technology followed by phenotypic analyses. To identify novel spatial-specific
aspects of phytochrome signaling and the molecular bases of distinct aspects of
photomorphogenesis, the following objectives will be pursued: (1) the
characterization of novel spatial-specific phytochrome responses associated with
distinct aspects of de-etiolation in Arabidopsis thaliana; (2) the
identification of molecular mechanisms responsible for spatial-specific
phytochrome responses in targeted phytochrome-chromophore deficient lines; and
(3) the characterization of spatial-specific photoregulation of flowering in
targeted phytochrome-chromophore deficient lines. Molecular genetic and genomic
approaches are being utilized to accomplish these objectives. The results from
these studies are expected to contribute significantly to our understanding of
the complex phytochrome-dependent signaling pathways that operate in higher
plants through the identification of specific cellular mechanisms and candidate
genes involved in the regulation of distinctive aspects of light-mediated growth
and development in plants.

Broader Impacts: This research focuses on improving fundamental understanding of
molecular mechanisms of biliprotein-regulated photomorphogenesis. Results from
these studies are expected to yield novel insight into the molecular bases of
cell- and tissue-specific pools of phytochromes that work intercellularly to
coordinately control distinctive aspects of plant growth and development in
response to light and may lead to improved agricultural practices for maximizing
light-dependent growth of agronomically important plants. In addition to the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, broader impacts of
these investigations include research experiences designed to develop the
capacity to think critically and analytically of undergraduate science majors
and students from underrepresented groups, including students in the Charles
Drew Science Enrichment Program at Michigan State University and participants in
the MSU Plant Genomics Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates Program. A
mentoring and professional development plan for postdoctoral associates also has
been developed to promote the comprehensive training of participating
postdoctoral scientists.