* 0919409
* Environmental change and the ecological dynamics of Great Basin small mammals over the past century: Insights from historical museum records and modern resurveys
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eric Rickart, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 372,743.00

This project uses historical museum records and modern field surveys to assess
changes in the small mammal communities of the Great Basin over the past
century. Comparative "then and now" data from resurveyed historical localities,
information from repeat photography, and historical and modern climate data will
be used to distinguish the relative impact of human land use and climate change
on Great Basin mammals. Preliminary data from the Ruby Mountains reveal major
faunal changes over the past 80 years. At local sites, these include the
apparent loss or gain of species or changes in species relative abundance. Some
local changes are associated with altered plant communities and reflect land-use
history, whereas others are likely direct responses to climate change. Local
community similarity has decreased over time, and faunal changes have been most
profound at lower elevations. Across elevation, distributions of some moisture-
loving species have shifted upslope consistent with predicted response to
climate change. In contrast, ranges of arid-adapted species have not
expanded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land use, invasive species, and climate change
have altered biotic communities throughout the Great Basin, now considered one
of the most threatened bioregions in North America. Understanding how species
and communities respond to environmental change requires a longterm perspective.
This research will develop the use of museum data to investigate faunal response
to environmental change. It will generate additional data for investigating
future biotic change, and to support future studies on the ecology, population
genetics, and biogeography of regional mammals. Results will have direct
relevance for regional land management. The project will support a post-doctoral
scientist and will engage university students and volunteers in field research,
museum science, and scholarship. Results will support museum programs and
K-12&lt;br/&gt;science curricula on environmental change and the relevance of
natural history collections to this important topic.