* 0919666
* RNA Structure and Dynamics In Vivo
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2012
* Kevin Weeks, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Roy Welch
* 06/30/2012
* USD 365,385.00

Intellectual Merit. The overarching vision of this research is to create a
technology for analyzing RNA structure at single nucleotide resolution for RNAs
of arbitrary complexity inside living cells. The goal is timely because of the
growing prominence of RNA in all fields of biology. This prominence reflects, in
part, the appreciation that the ribosome and many other ribonucleoproteins are
highly dynamic and nimble biomolecular machines. It also reflects the many new
roles being discovered for the numerous untranslated and regulatory RNAs with
critical functions. The goal of this research program is therefore to extend the
high-throughput SHAPE (selective 2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer
extension) RNA structure analysis technology, invented in the project
laboratory, into a robust tool for in vivo analysis of RNA structure. This
technology will then be used to understand surprising discoveries that
preliminary studies have revealed about RNA structure in E. coli ribosomes as
they exist inside healthy, growing, bacterial cells. SHAPE technology is also
sufficiently mature to serve as the basis for a completely undergraduate-driven
research endeavor, which will be developed into the Undergraduate Transcriptome
Project (UTP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts are envisioned to be multi-
fold. An accurate and efficient technology for analyzing RNA structure in vivo
has the potential to transform many fields in the biological sciences. When
fully developed under this research program, in vivo SHAPE will interconnect
molecular information about RNA structure as obtained from high-resolution
structural and biochemical approaches in highly purified systems with cellular
function and fitness in the complex in vivo environment. The technology created
in this work will be disseminated widely via both formal and informal channels.
The Undergraduate Transcriptome Project (UTP) is a new kind of undergraduate-
driven research experience. Students will be mentored to assume a large part of
the responsibility for the project and will initiate, lead, and maintain its
intellectual momentum. The UTP will focus on structural analysis of the RNA
genome of an icosahedral plant virus. Such viruses are among the most widely
distributed plant, animal and agricultural pathogens in biology. The project has
several distinctive features with the goal of inspiringundergraduates to become
deeply invested in and passionate about scientific research.