* 0919455
* A multilocus phylogenetic study of the Teloschistales (Ascomycota) and the evolution of symbiotic systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Francois Lutzoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2013
* USD 395,432.00

Lichens are highly successful obligate mutualistic symbioses between fungi and
photosynthetic green algae and cyanobacteria that live within their tissues.
Bright orange-colored species of the fungi in the group named Teloschistales are
among the most noticeable lichens worldwide. This recently redefined group of
fungi includes nearly 2,000 described species that live in wide variety of
habitats, including surfaces of man-made substrates. This will be the first
global phylogenetic study of these brightly colored organisms. The results of
this study will lead to a better understanding of the diversity of these fungi,
and will likely result in the description of new families and the re-definition
of most genera. This study will also be an experimental test of a novel method
of finding genetic markers that can be used to study patterns of evolution in
fungi and other organisms. This study will also demonstrate the importance of
studying the evolution of genes involved in reproduction in organisms living in
symbiotic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the training of one
female postdoctoral researcher and one female Ph.D. student, a workshop will be
organized during year three of this proposed project to develop a worldwide
consensus among all leading experts on a new system of classification for these
fungi. This new classification, which will be co-authored by all workshop
participants, will be a long-lasting contribution of this project to fungal
biology.