* 0919383
* Wildebeest forage acquisition in fragmented landscapes under variable climates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Robert Lilieholm, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 673,524.00

Migratory grazers must move between ranges each year, and make daily movements
to locate food, but landscape fragmentation and other obstacles to movement are
increasing. At the same time, climate change is making droughts more frequent
and extreme, requiring animals to move farther to locate sufficient food. How
wildlife populations are affected by this combination of effects is of interest.
Researchers from the U.S. and Kenya will address this topic in three
conservation areas in Kenya. To track movements of wildebeest across the
landscape, the researchers will place 45 collars, which contain global
positioning devices, on the animals. Future landscape fragmentation in the areas
will be modeled. A model will also be constructed to allow researchers to
simulate movements of individual wildebeest within each population. Landscape
fragmentation and frequency of droughts will be varied in simulations to
quantify potential effects of land-use intensification and climate change on
migratory wildebeest populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildebeest migration
fascinates the public, but remarkably little is known about individual
movements, and how fragmentation and climate change interact to alter movements.
The results will shed light on effects on other mobile grazers as well,
including livestock, and address the sustainability of current practices in
landscapes shared by wildlife and humans. This research will facilitate the
development of novel modeling approaches. Other broader impacts include training
of three graduate students, which will include international experience, and
incorporation of research results into university courses. In addition,
information will be shared with land managers and citizens from Kenya and the
U.S.