* 0919638
* Modulation of host defense responses by Agrobacterium tumefaciens Type VI secretion system
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Lois Banta, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 415,330.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria frequently cause disease in
plants or animals by using secretion systems to deliver protein or DNA factors
that manipulate normal host cell functions and/or subvert host defenses. The
soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens transports both protein and DNA into a
variety of plants, resulting in tumors or "plant cancer" on infected plants. The
investigators recently discovered that Agrobacteria lacking one such secretion
system, the Type VI Secretion System (T6SS), are compromised in their ability to
cause tumors compared to normal bacteria. The goal of this project is to
determine how the factors delivered through the Agrobacterium T6SS alter or
dampen the host plants? defenses. The investigators will measure the amount of
specific defense compounds produced by the plant, and will monitor the extent to
which the plants turn on defense-related genes in response to the normal or the
T6SS-deficient bacteria. The results will reveal new information about how
plants protect themselves from diseases such as plant cancer. Because similar
T6SS have recently been found in a wide variety of other bacteria, including
several that cause serious diseases in humans, the findings may well have
relevance to these other infectious agents as well. In addition to its role in
causing plant disease, Agrobacterium is widely used to introduce new genes into
plants, but its utility is limited by the fact that some plants, including many
economically important grain crops, are poor hosts. This project will yield new
insights into the factors that make some plant species better able to resist
Agrobacteria. The project fully integrates research and education, in that the
experiments will be performed primarily by undergraduate students, thereby
providing them with the opportunity to take a leadership role in cutting-edge
research.