* 0919769
* Drosophila ventral furrow morphogenesis: rapid inactivation of cytoskeletal regulators by CALI
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Jonathan Minden, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 09/30/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Most animals, including humans, start life as a small ball of cells. To form
tissues, limbs and organs, these cells divide, move and change their shape to
form a healthy individual. An organism's genetic program instructs its cells to
adopt certain characteristics and the cells respond appropriately. The central
goal of Dr. Minden's laboratory is to understand the connection between the
genetic program and cell behavior. Cell movement is controlled by a large number
of proteins collectively referred to as the cytoskeleton, the molecular
equivalent to bones and muscles. Cytoskeletal proteins are used by all cells to
regulate their shape, and developmental biologists study how cell shape changes
lead to the formation of particular tissues in the embryo. Dr. Minden's
laboratory is particularly interested in how cells first decide to form muscles
and immune cells of fruit flies. To study how these cells change their shape
without affecting other cells, he has devised a laser-dependent scheme to
inactivate specific cytoskeletal proteins at the precise time at which cell
shape changes take place. These studies will identify proteins required for cell
shape changes, and this method will be broadly applicable to the analysis of
cell behavior in a wide variety of experimental
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work resides in its
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students. This research
involves chemistry, biochemistry, cell and molecular biology, genetics, state-
of-the-art microscopy, image analysis and proteomics to address longstanding
questions in cell and developmental biology. To date, his laboratory has used
its previous government funding to train over 50 undergraduates, 14 graduate
students and 8 postdoctoral fellows from the departments of biology, chemistry,
mathematics, statistics, computer science, robotics, and biomedical engineering.
This funding will allow Dr. Minden to continue to provide outstanding
interdisciplinary training to young scientists.