* 0919136
* Mechanisms underlying the growth-survival trade-off among tree species in relation to edaphic specialization
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,10/31/2012
* Sabrina Russo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 10/31/2012
* USD 167,994.00

All organisms face tradeoffs in they way they allocate resources. Trees, for
example, can allocate resources in ways that promote rapid growth (e.g., more
leaves with higher nitrogen content) or in ways that protect them from
herbivores (e.g., thorns, defensive chemicals). This project addresses those
tradeoffs and asks if they contribute to specialization of tree species on
different soil types in an extremely diverse Bornean rain forest. Environmental
gradients in the availability of resources may contribute disproportionately to
tree diversity because tree species often specialize on particular habitats. A
reciprocal transplant experiment, combined with a defoliation treatment and
observations of resource allocation in the field, will be used to test for
differences in allocation to growth, storage, and defense among trees on
different soil types. Plant available mineral nutrients and water will be
quantified to document the variation in belowground resources. In addition to
advancing knowledge of the determinants of fundamental life history trade-offs,
this research will improve understanding of tree species' responses to
belowground resources and of mechanisms whereby soil-specific tree species
distributions arise in forests. This project is an international collaboration
with several worthy broader impacts. Several local Malaysians and Iban (an
indigenous people) will be trained in data collection and management. This
research will provide valuable information on forest regeneration and the
environmental requirements of tree species, which can be applied directly in
forest conservation and reforestation efforts in Borneo. Public lectures and
development of secondary school education materials will communicate the broader
implications of this work and emphasizing the vital functions of tropical
forests and the ecological services they provide to human society.