* 0919914
* Molecular mechanisms underlying temperature modulation of defense responses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Jian Hua, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2013
* USD 650,000.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

Moderate temperature variations have large effects on various plant processes
including defense responses. Often, an elevated growth temperature above the
norm renders an otherwise resistant plant susceptible to pathogens. This project
aims at revealing the molecular mechanisms underlying the inhibition of defense
responses by elevated temperature. Recent studies from these investigators have
identified disease resistance (R) proteins as a temperature-sensitive component
in defense responses. That a higher temperature reduces the accumulation of the
NB-LRR type of R proteins in the nucleus might be one common basis for
temperature sensitivity in defense responses. This project will use molecular
genetic approaches to generate and test models and hypotheses on temperature
sensitivity on R proteins. It will also isolate and characterize genes
regulating temperature sensitivity of defense responses. Results coming from
this project will shed light on the molecular basis of adaptive responses to
moderate temperature variations in plants as well as activation of R proteins,
an essential step in disease resistance regulation. Knowledge gained from this
project will potentially have applications in coping with temperature
fluctuations and global climate changes through crop improvement by enhancing
the capacities of plant defense responses in a wide range of temperatures. This
project will provide a broad training for postdoctoral fellows, graduate
students, and undergraduate students in research and teaching.