* 0919594
* Broad to fine scale phylogenetic pattern and character evolution in Ruellieae (Acanthaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lucinda McDade, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2013
* USD 540,505.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a comprehensive study
of a group of some 1,000 plant species that are poorly known among botanists.
Members of this group, the Ruellieae (plant family: Acanthaceae), occur in
nearly every tropical and subtropical environment across the planet. They are
extraordinarily variable in flower shape and structure and thus contribute
significantly to a range of plant-pollinator interactions in their respective
environments. Despite this morphological diversity, Ruellieae have received
little study by biologists. The major objectives of the project are to 1) survey
existing specimen material in natural history museums worldwide; 2) use genetic
data to build a family tree for Ruellieae; 3) use this tree to reconstruct the
history of evolutionary events that led to such a great number of species, and
investigate potential factors contributing to diversity (e.g., plant-pollinator
relationships); and 4) distribute knowledge gained from this project through a
variety of means including student training, professional and lay presentations,
the development of international collaborations, publications, and contributions
to online resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As biologists, we have a major
responsibility to accurately estimate standing biodiversity, but an accurate
estimate is only the initial step. Understanding the historic patterns and tempo
of diversification, and processes that sustain this diversity has predictive
qualities that are vital to ensuring the continued existence of the organisms
that form the basis of our ecosystem. We are only beginning to envision the
impacts of one of the great mass extinctions in Earth history that has been
termed a biodiversity crisis. One example is the serious decline in worldwide
pollinators that concomitantly impacts their plant hosts. This study will help
clarify the ecological and evolutionary relationship between plants and
pollinators, and thus will contribute to the sustenance of worldwide ecological
heath. Upon completion of the Ruellieae project, we will have built (and, in
many cases employed) a global consortium of colleagues, students,
conservationists, and laypersons who are dedicated to learning about and
protecting diversity and ecological interactions.