* 0919027
* Structure/Function Correlations Over Binuclear non-heme Iron and Related Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2014
* USD 1,106,969.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Binuclear iron enzymes are widely distributed in
nature and catalyze an extensive range of medically, industrially, and
environmentally important reactions. These reactions all involve the activation
of oxygen by very similar binuclear iron active sites. Intermediates can be
trapped in these reactions and small binuclear iron designed peptides are
available as models for these enzyme active sites. This research project
involves using a wide variety of spectroscopic techniques combined with quantum
mechanical calculations to understand the reaction mechanisms of this large
class of enzymes and how apparently similar binuclear iron active sites perform
very different functions. The achievement of these goals, in part, requires the
development of new spectroscopic methods and definition of their information
content from quantum theory. These studies define geometric and electronic
structural contributions to O-O bond cleavage. Research also focuses on defining
structural contributions to the complementary reaction of O-O bond formation by
manganese cluster sites in photosynthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The enzymes being studied are important in industrial
synthesis, bioremediation, greenhouse gas elimination, iron metabolism, and as
drug targets. The insights derived from these studies are being applied toward
the development of new heterogeneous and bio-inspired catalysts. New
spectroscopic methods, developed as part of this research program, have
applications to a wide range of problems in chemistry, biology, materials and
environmental sciences. The spectroscopic/electronic structure expertise of this
research program is made available to the scientific community through a wide
range of collaborations, which also leverage the impact of this research. This
research provides students with a unique opportunity to use a variety of
spectroscopic methods, develop new spectroscopic methodologies, and learn
computational approaches to chemistry. The availability of such a wide range of
techniques and theoretical insight allows students to learn to integrate these
approaches to solve important problems in science. The students trained in the
PI's lab (an equal gender mix) have become significant contributors in academics
(&gt; 40) and industry (&gt; 50). This research group extensively participates
in undergraduate teaching, mentoring women in science and outreach into the
community to expose elementary school students in low-income areas and middle
school females to science and careers in science. Through general seminars on
spectroscopic methods, editing numerous books and thematic volumes, course
readers, and significant participation on a range of editorial boards, this
research program promotes the information content and utility of spectroscopic
methods to problems in chemistry and biochemistry