* 0919331
* Collaborative Research:   Impacts of Climate Seasonality on Carbon Accumulation and Methane Emissions of Alaskan Ecosystems during the Holocene Thermal Maximum
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Qianlai Zhuang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 202,918.00

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Impacts of Climate Seasonality on Carbon
Accumulation and Methane Emissions of Alaskan Ecosystems during the Holocene
Thermal Maximum Institution: Lehigh University Abstract Date: 06/12/09

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The Arctic has been experiencing great warming and ecological changes in recent
decades. The last pronounced warm period occurred about 11,000-9,000 years ago
in Alaska. The warm and possibly dry climate resulted in unusual ecosystem types
and processes, including novel poplar-willow deciduous forests in uplands, and
rapid peatland expansion and growth in lowlands. The proposed research will test
the hypothesis that the enhanced climate seasonality at that time played a major
role in causing such contrasting responses of ecosystems on uplands and
wetlands. To look into the past, the researchers will analyze microfossils
preserved in peat. They will integrate their findings and test the hypothesis
using simulation modeling. The project's objectives are to document ecosystem
changes that occurred 10,000 years ago across Alaska and to assess effects of a
warmer climate and different seasonality on nutrient and water cycling using the
Terrestrial Ecosystem Model.

This research addresses an important topic in global change, how a warming
climate will interact with changing precipitation to influence ecosystem
structure and functioning in the Arctic. An improved ability to model ecosystem
processes will allow for better prediction of changes in carbon cycling under a
changing climate in Alaska, and potentially for Pan-Arctic ecosystems in the
future. In response to the public's keen interest in Arctic warming and its
biological impacts, the investigators will disseminate results through the
popular press. Undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral researcher
will be trained on this project.

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract Proposal:0919385 PI Name:Yu,
Zicheng Printed