* 0919925
* RUI: The cell biology of pectin dynamics in the Charophycean Green Algae: Homogalacturonan secretion in the model organism, Penium margaritaceum
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2012
* David Domozych, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2012
* USD 247,058.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt; Cell wall polymers are important biochemicals in
the growth, development and survival of green plants and constitute the most
abundant biochemicals on the planet. Pectins represent one of the major classes
of cell wall polymers and function in regulating cell wall expansion and cell
growth as well as cell wall porosity and uptake of key ions. The synthesis,
secretion and post-secretory remodeling of pectins represent key subcellular
events in the life of a plant cell and specific studies to elucidate these
processes have only just begun. Pectins are found in all land plant groups and
have been recently characterized in the Charophycean Green Algae (CGA). The CGA
represent the extant group of green algae that is ancestral to modern-day land
plants. In this project, a model organism from the CGA, Penium margaritaceum, is
employed to study quantitative aspects of pectin secretion, the specific role of
subcellular components in pectin and cell wall processing, and the role of a key
pectin-modifying enzyme. This project applies various experimental, microscopy-
based and immunolabeling technologies to studies of the endomembrane system,
cytoskeletal/cytomotile networks, and cell surface phenomena that are
intricately involved in the secretion of pectins to the cell wall. The results
of this project will be synthesized and used in the construction of models of
pectin dynamics in plants and will provide insight into cell wall polymer
processing by green plant cells, the coordinated interaction of multiple
subcellular systems in defined secretory activities, and the evolution of
primitive green plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; This
RUI project will provide summer research opportunities for 4 undergraduates and
semester-based research opportunities for 6-10 undergraduates at Skidmore
College. The project also will promote the integration of research in education
as components of the project will be used to enhance instruction and support
laboratory experiences in courses as Plant Biology, Plant Physiology, and
Biological Electron Microscopy. The project also includes outreach experiences
for pre-college students. Specifically the outreach plan includes a series of
active presentations by the PI and Skidmore biology majors to elementary
students and their teachers on the microscopic world. In addition the PI and his
students will lead Saturday field trips to wetlands for high school and middle
school students and their teachers. The field trips will include activities in
collecting microscopic specimen followed by identification exercises with the
microscope. The results of the study will be broadly disseminated through
student/PI presentations and publications, outreach programs, and the recently
established CGA website at Skidmore College.