* 0919938
* Collaborative Research:   Biosynthesis of Alkamides - Experimental Modeling of a Modular Secondary Metabolic Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Robert Minto, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 655,912.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Alkamides (amides linked to fatty acids) are
novel plant secondary compounds that are poorly characterized, but that
accumulate to significant levels in Echinacea, making this plant of choice to
study these compounds and their biosynthesis. Our understanding of alkamide
function in plants is in its infancy, but recent data suggest these compounds
may have novel signaling functions in addition to insecticidal properties. This
work will lay the foundation for further studies of the importance of these
compounds in plant biology as well as open up research on this plant genus which
has been used medicinally for hundreds of years. Because the pathways in
alkamide biosynthesis involve amino acid metabolism and novel chemical linkages,
there are also multiple future biotechnological applications for the enzymes
involved. The proposed research will strategically apply high-throughput global
profiling technologies to elucidate this natural product biosynthetic pathway.
Alkamides appear to be biologically assembled via a modular metabolic pathway
that may be an adaptation of amino acid and fatty acid metabolism. Experiments
that combine metabolite profiling, metabolic flux studies and transcriptomics
will be used to identify genes and enzymes that assemble a diverse collage of
alkamides. Defining the alkamide pathway offers the potential of discovering new
metabolic processes that generate novel combinations of chemical
functionalities, which have wide-ranging applications (e.g., lubrication and
detergent industries). In addition, this research project outlines a general
methodology that should be broadly applicable to discovering how primary and
specialized plant metabolism are juxtaposed and evolve to generate the
physiochemical phenotypic differences among plant taxonomic groups. The
multilayered bio-prospecting to be used offers the opportunity to browse the
metabolic repertoire of an organism, and the system-wide knowledge of the
involved biochemical processes should translate to the creation of novel bio-
derived compounds relevant to the chemical industries, as well as strategies for
pest resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This project
will facilitate a multidisciplinary partnership between IUPUI, ISU researchers
and scientists at the USDA North Central Regional Plant Introduction Station.
The collaboration established to conduct this research will mentor young
scientists at the increasingly uncommon intersection of organic chemistry,
mechanistic biochemistry and functional genomics through the coeducation of
undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. Students at IUPUI,
a large, urban university, will be drawn from a trainee pool rich in
underrepresented minority and first generation students in the McNair and
Diversity Scholars STEM research programs. These interactions will allow the
project to operate synergistically with IUPUI campus initiatives to mentor
undergraduate students toward graduate education. As an outreach activity
specific to IUPUI, high school teachers will experience hands-on research. In
conjunction with the graduate students, they will engage in experiments leading
to biochemical lessons suitable for use at their home schools. This effort
dovetails with ongoing NSF GK-12 participation in IUPUI's research programs. At
ISU, undergraduates will translate the proposed research into a module in a new
course in biotechnological biochemistry.