* 0919860
* Fundamental Processes in the Folding of Helical Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Raleigh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 672,224.00

Protein folding, the processes by which an initially unfolded protein rapidly
self assembles into its folded functional form, has often been called the second
half of the genetic code. All of the information required for a protein to fold
is encoded in the primary sequence but a detailed understanding of the folding
process is still lacking. Interest in protein folding continues to grow, driven
in part by the realization of the fundamental and practical importance of
folding and in part by experimental and theoretical advances. The potential for
synergy between computational simulation and experiments has generated
considerable interest in small proteins that fold very rapidly. These are
excellent test cases for addressing fundamental issues in protein folding and
for developing new methodology. This project aims to deduce general mechanistic
features of the folding of alpha-helical proteins, to test specific hypotheses
about their folding, to develop new methods to study their folding, and to
provide rigorous bench marks for computational studies. A key goal is to link
experimental results with computational studies of folding. To that end, the
research is primarily focused on the villin headpiece helical subdomain (HP-36).
HP-36 is the smallest naturally occurring sequence which folds cooperatively and
it is one of the fastest folding proteins known. Its rapid folding, small size
and simple structure have made it an extraordinarily popular model system for
computational and theoretical studies of protein folding. Key questions to be
addressed by this research include: (1) What is the nature of the unfolded state
ensemble and what is its role in rapid folding? (2) Just how accurate are
molecular dynamic simulations of protein folding, do they provide a reliable
picture of the folding pathway or just a model of the native state? (3) What is
the nature of the rate limiting step for folding? The unfolded state ensemble
will be studied using peptide models, destabilized mutants, pH dependent
stability measurements and simulations. Newly developed isotope edited IR
detected T-jump methods will be used to study the folding of wild type HP-36 and
mutants which alter the unfolded state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved
understanding of protein folding has important implications for basic biology as
well as important practical implications for biotechnology and for biomaterials
design. The solution of the protein folding problem lies at the interface of
chemistry, biology and physics and the research will involve close collaboration
between experimental and theoretical groups. These factors create a stimulating
multidisciplinary research environment for participating graduate and
undergraduate students. Stony Brook is one of the most ethnically diverse major
research universities in the nation and the research will enhance opportunities
for traditionally underrepresented groups. Undergraduate participation is a key
component of the research. Partnerships with undergraduate institutions have
been established to expand undergraduate participation beyond Stony Brook. An
"adopt a lab" program is being developed as part of the first year undergraduate
honors lab class in order to provide a wide range of students with initial
exposure to modern research. Traditional undergraduate laboratory exercises are
being revised to better tie them into modern science. For example, certain food
dyes are inhibitors of protein aggregation. Aggregation can be monitored using
turbidity measurements conducted with inexpensive undergraduate spectrometers.
The experiment illustrates light scattering, protein structure, the concept of
inhibition and provides an introduction to protein folding while nicely tying
into current research. Lab exercises will also be developed as part of Stony
Brook's university-wide program designed to provide support and encouragement to
undergraduate women who are interested in science and engineering.