* 0919649
* Post-transcriptional control of Lunatic fringe in the segmentation clock
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Susan Cole, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 09/30/2013
* USD 685,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

During embryogenesis, the single cell produced upon fusion of the sperm and egg
cells develops into a complex, multicellular organism. For this process to occur
properly, the developing embryo must turn genes on and off in distinct cells at
the right times and in the correct sequential order. The research proposed here
investigates the function and mechanism underlying a genetic "clock" (called the
segmentation clock) that is utilized during embryogenesis to time processes
involved in the development of the spine and ribs. The genes involved in this
clock interact somewhat like gears in a mechanical clock, with the oscillations
of each individual gene affecting the function of others. Previous work has
shown that genetic mutations that perturb clock-linked gene function affect
embryonic development, resulting in abnormal development of the spine and ribs.
The work proposed here examines the mechanisms that control clock-gene activity
during development, essentially determining how the sizes of the genetic "gears"
or "gear ratios" in the clock are regulated. This will be accomplished by
examining the genetic and biochemical mechanisms that control clock-linked gene
activity at the level of RNA and protein function. These experiments are
expected to enhance our understanding of the segmentation clock, elucidating
mechanisms that control the function of a critical cell to cell communication
pathway in the clock, and informing our understanding of how embryos control
time-regulated events during development of key anatomical structures. This
research will also support the education of graduate and undergraduate students,
allowing developing scientists to integrate principles of research into their
education.