* 0919608
* Collaborative Research: PACMAN - Cyberinfrastructure for Discovering Climate Change Impacts on Water Resources across Alaska and the Hawaiian Islands
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 08/31/2012
* USD 3,000,000.00

EPS-0919608, University of Alaska, Fairbanks Campus, Virgil L. Sharpton, linked
to EPS-0919607 (University of Hawaii)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: PACMAN ? Cyberinfrastructure for Discovering Climate Change Impacts in
Water Resources Across Alaska and the Hawaiian
Islands&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop and demonstrate the
capability of a Pacific Area Climate Monitoring and Analysis Network (PACMAN).
PACMAN is expected to yield a more reliable understanding of the impacts of
climate warming on fresh water resources and communities in Alaska and Hawaii.
In addition, PACMAN will include modeling and planning activities that can
advance the understanding of immediate and long-term precipitation patterns
across the North Pacific. PACMAN?s capabilities will include: (1) real-time
access to synoptic satellite data and in-situ sensor systems, deployed
throughout Alaska and the Hawaiian Islands; (2) integration of these datasets
with archival data from existing research databases and drawn from sophisticated
web-harvesting capabilities; (3) redundant archival of all data and information
products; (4) real-time distributed simulation from supercomputing centers in
Alaska and Hawaii; (5) a collaborative framework for visualization and multi-
dimensional mapping; (6) development of and reliance upon open-source web tools;
(7) development of an agent-based framework for assessing societal impacts, and;
(8) open distribution to researchers and policy makers in Alaska, Hawaii, and
around the world through the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The core cyberinfrastructure to be developed will enable
research focused on measuring and understanding the macro- and micro-scale
processes that influence fresh water and its ties to the social, cultural, and
environmental wellbeing of communities in Alaska and Hawaii. The researchers
seek to understand the dynamics of the integrated climate-water-social system
from the local to global scales, and use this understanding as a basis for
evaluating the effects of climate change on water resources. The integration
framework goes beyond discipline-based inquiry and will be fundamental to
understanding the impacts of climate variability and change on ecosystems?
functions and biodiversity. The project uses the state-of-the art environmental
monitoring and information management system initiated in the prior Hawaii
EPSCoR RII awards as the core platform. This management system platform will be
further developed in the Track-2 project so that it can handle the complex data
processing, simulation, sharing, and integration needs of diverse teams of
researchers in various targeted thematic
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The PACMAN
consortium?s projects will enhance the abilities of Alaskan and Hawaiian
communities to understand, plan for, and respond to changing climate conditions.
It will inform effective policies that build resilience in fresh water resource
management at multiple scales of control. The project will build upon the
successes of previous Alaska and Hawaii EPSCoR RII educational and public
outreach plans, as well as the Pacific and Alaska Regional Integrated Science
and Assessment programs funded through National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PACMAN will incorporate capabilities that
are relevant to addressing other ?real-world? issues that most directly affect
the coupled human-environment systems of the North Pacific, and will provide
data and information products that are appropriate for, and capable of advancing
a broad suite of cultural, economic, educational, and environmental missions
across Alaska and Hawaii. This will be accomplished in two ways: 1) through the
development of a highly accessible agent-based model capable of assessing the
consequences of different hydrological scenarios, and 2) through the reliance of
an External Advisory Group consisting of members drawn from potential end-user
groups such as land holders, native Alaskan and Hawaiian groups, NGOs, K-12
schools, and government agencies to ensure that the consortium effectively
engages Native Alaskans and Native Hawaiians in the project. &lt;br/&gt;