* 0919808
* RUI:   Methods for characterizing small genes in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Tjaden, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2013
* USD 327,007.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to elucidate the
roles of small genes in bacteria. In particular, the project focuses on two
classes of elusive genes, namely small noncoding RNA genes and small protein
coding genes in bacteria. While the bioinformatics methods developed in this
project will be assessed in Escherichia coli or Shewanella oneidensis, they will
be applicable to bacteria more broadly. Specific aims include the following: (1)
Bioinformatics methods for systematic identification of small, noncoding RNA
genes and their regulatory targets will be developed and evolved. (2) Using a
combination of computational and experimental approaches, small noncoding RNA
genes will be investigated in Shewanella oneidensis. In particular, the role of
noncoding RNAs in metal reduction will be studied. (3) A bioinformatics tool
will be developed for characterizing short open reading frames in bacterial
genomes. The bioinformatics tool will be based on a framework that incorporates
primary sequence data with comparative genomics information and genome-tiling
microarray measurements for the purpose of predicting short genes encoding new
small proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The belief that excellent teaching is
integrally coupled with active scholarship is a cornerstone of this project.
Aspects of the research project will be incorporated into existing undergraduate
courses as well as new courses under development. Undergraduate students will be
integrally involved in all aspects of the research program. Wellesley College's
productive record in the education of women scientists, coupled with the
increased participation of talented young women in the bioinformatics research
community, bodes well for the sustained and broad impact of this project on
research training and learning in bioinformatics. Also, a broader community will
be reached by making the bioinformatics tools developed from this work available
through user-friendly web interfaces, and results will be disseminated via peer-
reviewed publications and by active participation of students and faculty at
professional meetings.