* 0919525
* Romantic Breakups in Young Adulthood: Biopsychosocial Mechanisms of Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Sbarra, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 09/30/2013
* USD 243,350.00

Romantic separation experiences in adolescence and young adulthood are common
but significant events that can have a lasting negative impact on psychological
well-being and precipitate biological stress responses. Being rejected by a love
interest is humiliating and distressing and, relative to many other social
transitions, breakup experiences are among the strongest predictors of a first
onset Major Depressive Disorder episode. Despite these risks for poor outcomes
associated with a breakup, most young adults fare well over time. Relatively
little is known, however, about the dynamics of recovery or why some people
become ensnared in periods of long-term emotional distress and others do not.
This research seeks to develop an integrative account of the mechanisms that
promote or hinder positive adjustment in the wake of a breakup experience. The
first study focuses on the social aspects of coping and investigates how
perceptions of social support are associated with trajectories of recovery over
time. Participants will not only include target individuals who have experienced
a recent romantic separation, but also close friends and family members of these
individuals who can report on that person's adjustment and recovery. By
assessing perceptions of both support receivers and givers, this work is
uniquely situated to improve the understanding of precisely how social support
operates to improve well-being. The second study is designed to investigate
potential dynamic associations between participants' psychological evaluations
of their separation and indicators of a biological stress response. Participants
will be asked to think about their relationship history and separation
experiences while a variety of autonomic nervous system response patterns are
measured across four laboratory sessions over a four month period. The
fundamental goal of this study is to determine the dynamics between
psychological adjustment to separation and biological stress responses over
time. The proposed studies promise to advance not only the understanding of
stress and recovery following romantic breakups, but also to provide new methods
and approaches for studying how people cope with difficult life events in
general. From this perspective, the proposed research has clear public health
benefits and potential for a lasting impact on the field.