* 0919147
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Assessing temperature-related changes in introgression of hybridizing species across time and space
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2013
* Jessica Hellmann, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 01/31/2013
* USD 216,238.00

Global climate change is altering patterns of biodiversity by changing when and
where species live. Species that hybridize with a related species at their
geographic range boundary could be affected in new ways by climate change.
Several outcomes are possible: the geographic range of both species could shift
congruently with little change in hybridization, individual traits that are
shared across the hybrid zone could shift while other traits remain stable,
hybridization could fall apart as the species move independently, or there could
be little change in hybridization patterns and species boundaries. The
investigators will explore the effect of changing climatic conditions on
hybridization patterns using two species of swallowtail butterfly. The zone of
contact between these two species was studied in the past and the investigators
will compare the historical data to modern samples. They will use a variety of
genetic traits to make this comparison. In addition, experiments with hybrid
crosses will test how individuals perform under winter warming, summer heat
stress, and extreme winter cold, factors that have changed in the recent past.

This project is likely to become an example of how climate modifies patterns of
genetic diversity. In conjunction with this project, the investigators will
develop management recommendations for the conservation of species affected by
climate change. Furthermore, students working on this project will participate
in MSU's "Bug House", a program that uses insects to introduce K-8 grade
students to scientific concepts. Finally, all of the graduate students and
postdocs working on this project will collaborate on a wiki that facilitates
cross-institutional research.