* 0919099
* Post-transcriptional Control of Immunoglobulin Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Martha Peterson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 08/31/2014
* USD 538,750.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to
understand the regulation of gene expression, focusing specifically on the
connections between gene transcription and RNA processing. While a substantial
base of knowledge has been accumulated about these processes individually, how
they are coupled and how this coupling affects regulation has yet to be
determined. This project will explore the mechanistic interconnections between
RNA processing events (splicing and cleavage-polyadenylation) and transcription
elongation and termination in the immunoglobulin M (IgM or µ) gene. The µ gene
is an excellent model system in which to address these questions since its
expression is regulated during B lymphocyte maturation at multiple steps,
including RNA splicing, cleavage-polyadenylation and transcription termination.
An extensive collection of well-characterized modified µ genes, multiple
reagents to analyze µ gene expression and microarray data from B cells before
and after being stimulated to differentiate, are available in the PI's lab for
this work. The project will identify trans-regulators of µ alternative RNA
processing based on microarray data and gene expression experiments, determine
how RNA processing signals affect RNA polymerase II elongation, using a
combination of nuclear run-on and high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays and characterize changes in factors associated with elongating pol
II over wild-type and modified µ genes in B cells and plasma cells by high-
resolution ChIP experiments. These studies will lead to a better understanding
of the connections between transcription and RNA processing in the µ gene and
will shed new light on these connections, which also regulate the expression of
many other genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research include the involvement of graduate, undergraduate, and
possibly high school students in the research, as well as their participation in
local and national scientific meetings. The majority of students associated with
the PI's lab over the past eighteen years have been female. An on-going
collaboration with a former graduate student from this lab, who is currently an
Associate Professor at Middle TN State University, will continue; the microarray
data has been the basis for projects in undergraduate lab courses and individual
student independent research projects. The PI of this grant continues to support
science in the broader community by participating as a science fair judge and
visiting high school classrooms. In addition, as a part-time Associate Vice
President for Research at the University of Kentucky and member of the KY
Academy of Sciences, the PI supports research in institutions across the state
of KY. The data and resources generated from this project will be shared widely
with the scientific community through national and international meeting
presentations and publications.