* 0919215
* Genomics of repeatedly evolving color diversity in the polymorphic Hawaiian happy face spider
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2016
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2016
* USD 705,281.00

A major challenge in evolutionary biology is to understand the molecular basis
of diversification. This project applies recent advances in comparative
genomics, including genome-wide sequence scanning, linkage mapping, and
candidate genes, to address the evolution of diverse color patterns in the
exuberantly patterned Hawaiian happy face spider. The happy face spider has a
balanced genetic color polymorphism for which the mode of inheritance differs
between islands in the Hawaiian chain. Accordingly, despite similar sets and
frequencies of color forms across islands, the color diversity has arisen
independently on different islands. This research will identify the genomic
basis for the differences between islands, and hence the mechanism through which
color diversity has been recreated. The research will provide insights into the
molecular origins of diversity during evolutionary history and also will produce
the first genome sequence and expressed gene data for any spider. The visible
and genetically controlled color polymorphism of spiders provides a compelling
context for teaching complex concepts in genetics and molecular evolution.
Parallel systems to that of the Hawaiian happy face spider occur elsewhere
(including California) and will be used to support the development of teaching
tools using local spiders in collaboration with an on-going science education
project.

