* 0919651
* RIG:   MK-STYX and PTEN Role(s) in Stress Granule Assembly and/or Disassembly
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Shanta Hinton, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2011
* USD 60,460.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;When cells are exposed to environmental stresses,
such as heat shock, UV irradiation, or hypoxia, they initiate protective
responses to ensure survival. A reversible block of mRNA translation, triggered
by phosphorylation of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor elF2a under
the action of several stress-activated kinases is one of the most rapid
responses. These translationally-stalled mRNAs are sequestered in cytoplasmic
structures called stress granules. Triage within stress granules recycles mRNA
molecules for translation or directs them for degradation in processing bodies,
which contain the mRNA decay machinery. Stress granules themselves contain a
collection of molecules that regulate or initiate mRNA translation as well as
proteins implicated in RNA remodeling or degradation. Ras-GTPase activating
protein (G3BP) is a stress granule endoribonuclease implicated in RNA remodeling
or degradation that is also implicated in the regulation of stress granule
formation. Recently the PI showed that the dual specificity phosphatase MK-STYX
interacts with G3BP and possibly affects stress granule formation. In addition,
a second dual specificity phosphatase, PTEN, has been linked to G3BP expression.
This linkage between G3BP and phosphatases suggests the intriguing possibility
that phosphatases play an important role in the dynamic assembly and/or
disassembly of stress granules in response to environmental signals. The concept
is novel as stress sensing kinases are known to correlate stress granule
formation but there is no known similar function for specific phosphatases. The
overall goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that dual specific
phosphatases supplement the role of stress sensing kinases in regulating stress
granule dynamics by controlling the phosphorylation state of G3BP. The study
will clarify the role(s) of dual specific phosphatases as regulators of the
cellular stress response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
project broadens the curriculum at Hampton University, a HBCU, by integrating
science education and basic research in molecular and cellular biosciences.
Hampton has a long history as an excellent teaching institution but is now
expanding its program to include undergraduate research. However, currently
there are limited resources for students to participate in research in the
Department of Biological Sciences. Students who obtain research experiences
traditionally do so at other schools. However, the goal of this project is to
allow Hampton students to continue the traditional off-campus plan for research
experiences but to also provide the opportunity for some students to have their
first research experience at their home institution. This project will also
extend into the Cell Biology teaching laboratory and replace some of the
repetitive teaching laboratory experiences with original research associated
with the project described here. As an outreach activity students in the Cell
Biology course will apply their learning by assisting science teachers at
Hampton City Schools in providing laboratory experiences for their students and
in assisting students and teachers with the annual science fair. The idea is to
introduce middle school and high school students to research early in their
training with an ultimate goal of informing students of the research that
supports the text and the figures in the textbooks that they use.