* 0919496
* Evolutionary Origin and History of Antifreeze Glycoprotein Gene in the Northern Cod Fishes (Gadidae): Creating Sense from Non-Sense DNA?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Chi-Hing Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 09/30/2013
* USD 649,113.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The evolutionary adaptation to polar climates can provide a model for
adaptations to climate changes in general. Today's frigid polar waters are
inhospitable for most bony fishes, but some can live in freezing waters because
they have evolved antifreeze proteins. The antifreeze glycoproteins (AFGP) of
northern/Arctic cod fishes bind to invading ice crystals, preventing the fish
from freezing. Novel proteins are commonly thought to evolve from a pre-existing
protein gene rather than from other kinds of DNA. The evolution of the cod AFGP
gene may defy this long-held paradigm. The codfish genes analyzed thus far
suggest that the repetitive DNA encoding the AFGP arose from repeatedly copying
a snippet of ancestral, non-protein coding DNA. Furthermore the AFGP trait
appears in two cold-water codfish groups that are distant cousins, suggesting
the AFGP gene evolved twice, in separate branches of this family tree. To test
these two intertwined evolutionary hypotheses, the distribution of the AFGP
trait will be mapped onto the codfish family tree. Then the AFGP genomic regions
will be compared for two distant species bearing complete AFGP function, and
with the corresponding region in a related species without AFGP function.

If the antifreeze gene did not evolve from coding DNA, the result would indicate
that evolutionary novelty has more sources than previously thought. The
principal investigator will train graduate and undergraduate students in cutting
edge genomics technology and science. The sequence data from the project will
also be utilized in a "Find a Gene" workshop for a group of high school students
for basic training in bioinformatics and genome data management.