* 0919251
* MSB:  Insights Into Mutualistic Interactions Between Free-Living, Pleomorphic Spirochetes (FLiPS) and Obligate Dechlorinators (Dehalococcoides)
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2009,07/31/2010
* Kirsti Ritalahti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clayton Cook
* 07/31/2010
* USD 446,388.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Soil, sediment and subsurface environments harbor a tremendous diversity of
microbes, and a major research goal is to better understand how such complex
systems evolve, function, and respond to environmental changes. The reductionist
approaches that focused on individual bacterial populations provided a wealth of
valuable information, usually under simplified conditions, but to truly
understand how complex microbial communities function, the interactions and
interdependencies between different populations inhabiting the same environment
must be explored. The premise of this proposal is that many bacteria engage in
unknown interactions with neighboring organisms, and that these interspecies
links can be characterized using microbiological and genome-enabled approaches.
Dehalococcoides and free-living, pleomorphic spirochetes (FLiPS) are members of
natural river sediment and aquifer microbial communities. Dehalococcoides are
highly specialized bacteria that gain energy for growth by removing halogen
substituents from many hydrocarbons, including priority pollutants. This process
is called organohalide respiration, and as the bacteria breathe halogenated
hydrocarbons (just like we breathe air), the contaminants are detoxified.
Dehalococcoides bacteria grow very poorly in isolation but perform robustly in
mixed cultures when FLiPS are present. Conversely, FLiPS benefit from
Dehalococcoides, and a major goal of the project is to explore the biomolecular
basis of these microbe-microbe interactions. This project will characterize
unexplored microbe-microbe interactions (symbiosis) at the fundamental,
molecular level and shed light on the evolutionary mechanisms that lead to
beneficial interactions between distinctly different microbial populations. This
research project will generate new understanding on how microbe-microbe
interactions develop, operate, and persist, while affecting specific functions
of the community (e.g., detoxification of halogenated hydrocarbons). This
project will not only advance knowledge of Dehalococcoides and spirochete
biology, but will further improve our predictive ability how microbial
communities function and respond to perturbations. Two doctoral students and
three summer undergraduate students from the University of Puerto Rico will
engage in this research effort.