* 0919724
* CCLI Phase II: Collaborative Research - Teaching the Global, Economic, Environmental, and Societal Foundations of Engineering Design through Product Archaeology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 08/31/2012
* USD 166,659.00

The project, a collaborative effort involving SUNY at Buffalo, Pennsylvania
State University, and Northwestern University, is combining concepts from
archaeology with advances in cyber-enhanced product dissection to implement new
educational innovations that will directly address the challenging global,
economic, environmental, and societal aspects in an engineering curriculum. The
approach builds upon the team's previous demonstration and assessment efforts in
cyber-enabled product dissection-based pedagogy by developing and disseminating
scalable learning materials, strategies, and educational innovations that
develop students' understanding of the broader context of engineering.
Specifically, they are (1) creating integrative in-class activities and learning
materials based on a cyber-enabled product for engineering design-related
courses that span freshmen through senior levels; (2) developing rubrics and
assessment tools in core areas to ensure sustainable deployment with national
impact; and (3) conducting hands-on workshops to foster dissemination of new
teaching strategies based on product archaeology through faculty development and
outreach. Evaluation efforts are examining the impact on student learning
through assessments embedded in the actual learning material and exercises, the
extent to which their materials are adopted by others, and the factors that
facilitate or impede adoption by others. Broader impacts include aggressive
dissemination through faculty workshops and focused K-12 outreach efforts
targeting female high school students and technology and science teachers.