* 0919986
* Did the First Angiosperms Lack an Embryo-Nourishing Endosperm?   (An Accomplishment-Based Renewal)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* David Stock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

Principal investigator: William Edward Friedman Proposal number: IOS-0919986
Proposal title: "Did the First Angiosperms Lack an Embryo-Nourishing Endosperm?"

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The origin of flowering plants represents one of the most significant
evolutionary radiations of plants during the last 475 million years. With over
250,000 extant species, angiosperms are the largest and most diverse group of
plants to have evolved. It has long been assumed that the first flowering plants
formed a nutrient-storing and embryo-nourishing tissue called endosperm that is
derived from a second fertilization event during the process of double
fertilization. Indeed, many evolutionary biologists have suggested that
endosperm represents a key innovation associated with the ecological and
evolutionary ?success? and radiation of flowering plants. Although poorly
studied, there is fragmentary evidence that many of the most ancient lineages of
angiosperms do not rely upon an endosperm as the primary embryo-nourishing
tissue within the seed. It is the explicit goal of the project to study the
embryological processes within seeds of ancient extant lineages of flowering
plants in order to reconstruct the pattern of embryo-nourishing behavior of the
first angiosperms. The comparative developmental data to be derived from this
project have the potential to lead to the discovery of a "missing link"
associated with the transition from the ancestors of flowering plants to the
earliest angiosperms.

Among the broader impacts of this project, it should be noted that two out of
every three calories consumed by humans worldwide are derived from the endosperm
of flowering plants (e.g., rice, maize, barley, wheat, coconut). Thus,
examination of seed development in ancient lineages of angiosperms will provide
basic biological information that may ultimately be relevant in an applied and
agricultural context. In addition, the questions to be addressed in this project
are sufficiently basic to warrant the expectation that the findings will
contribute to undergraduate and graduate curriculum development at the national
and international levels, as has been the case in the past. Discoveries from
this project can be expected to be widely disseminated to the general public.
During the last grant cycle, research findings were publicized in a number of
media outlets including CBS News, USA Today, Natural History Magazine (invited
article), New Scientist, Science News, the Telegraph (U.K.), as well as a
variety of websites from around the world.

Finally, this project can be expected to contribute to the development of human
resources in the sciences and the advancement of members of underrepresented
groups in the sciences. The Friedman lab has consistently included a high
proportion of women and members of underrepresented groups, all of who aspire to
careers in the life sciences as educators (two recent members of the lab have
gone on to teach secondary science in public schools) and/or practicing
scientists (the most recent Ph.D. student to graduate is Hispanic). In essence,
while the vast majority of funds associated with this project will go to support
the solution of basic and longstanding scientific questions, these funds will
also be central to the development of a few of the next generation of biologists
and teachers.