* 0919519
* MSB:  Experimental Coevolutionary Genetics of the Attine Ant-Microbe Symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Ulrich Mueller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2014
* USD 513,611.00

Certain ants cultivate fungi as their major food source. The ants collect and
transport vegetable substrate to a "garden," usually a sheltered chamber
excavated in the ground, then plant fungus on this new substrate. Gardens of
fungus-growing ants are foci of interactions within a community of ants, the
cultivated fungus, and a great diversity of additional microbes. Specifically,
pathogens attacking the ants or the fungal gardens can cause the death of the
nest community, but a variety of auxiliary microbes contribute disease-
suppressing properties that control such pathogens. Disease resistance to
pathogens is shaped by the genetic identity of both the ant and the fungus and
the interaction of these two dominant community members with the auxiliary
microbes. This research will elucidate how these nest community members interact
and co-evolve in response to pathogen presence. To understand disease dynamics,
the research will (a) characterize the inheritance of assemblages of auxiliary
microbes from maternal to offspring ant nest; (b) determine the importance of
co-inheritance of ant-fungus-microbe combinations to disease resistance of the
community; and (c) evaluate the relative contribution to disease-resistance by
ant, fungus, and auxiliary microbes. The research integrates a variety of
experimental approaches within an ecological-genetics and quantitative-genetics
framework, contributing towards a unification of ecology and evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inheritance of auxiliary microbes between
generations occurs in diverse hosts, including humans, but the importance of
communities of auxiliary microbes in their contribution to the health of a host
is incompletely understood. This research develops novel experimental approaches
to elucidate the role of auxiliary microbe communities in disease suppression.
Because microbial communities also confer disease resistance for humans (e.g.,
the microbiome of human skin or gut) and for crops (e.g., the microbiome of
roots), this research on fungus-growing ants will contribute to the
understanding of general microbial principles with applications to human and
agricultural disease management. Fungus-growing ants and their microbes will
also be used to promote education of students and the public on the importance
of ecological, evolutionary, and all biological processes. A postdoctoral
researcher and multiple undergraduates will be trained and mentored in this
research project.