* 0919029
* Revisiting the Sociolinguistic Analysis of Variable Coda /s/ Weakening in Spanish: An Instrumental Phonetic Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* ricardo otheguy, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2013
* USD 224,410.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Studying the variable pronunciation of syllable-final /s/ in Spanish (mismo
'same,' sabes 'you know,' buenas 'good') has been central to the field of
sociolinguistic variation. On the basis of naked ear perceptions, previous
studies describe Spanish /s/ as either a fully articulated [-s], an under-
articulated [h], or as a case of total /s/ deletion. But this segmental
description obscures systematic patterns of acoustic variation; variable speech
phenomena are more accurately described by computer-based, instrumental measures
of subsegmental speech sounds. On the basis of interviews with both monolingual
Spanish and Spanish-English bilinguals that includes both Latin American-born
and U.S.-born speakers, this study will provide instrumental phonetic
descriptions of 20,000 tokens of syllable-final Spanish /s/, calculating, for
each token, a subsegmental description in terms of duration in milliseconds and
frequency in hertz. The study will include detailed specifications of language-
internal and socio-demographic predictor variables of these tokens. The societal
impact of the study of variability stems from the evidence it provides for the
systematicity of linguistic behavior in all speakers, irrespective of income,
education, citizenship, or bilinguality. Participants in the present study range
over all these social categories. Consequently, a more exact understanding of
their speech sheds light broadly on the most widely spoken minority language in
American society and the most frequently taught foreign language in American
schools. The study thus contributes to building a truer, more accurate
conception of the sociolinguistic landscape in American immigrant and minority
communities, in American schools, and in U.S. society as a whole.