* 0919443
* Collaborative Research:  EPSCoR RII Track 2 Oklahoma and Kansas: A cyberCommons for Ecological Forecasting
* O/D,EPS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Donald McMullen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kelvin Chu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 3,000,000.00

EPS-0919466, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus, Paul Risser, linked to
EPS-0919443 (University of Kansas Center for Research
Inc)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: EPSCoR RII Track 2 Oklahoma
and Kansas:&lt;br/&gt;A cyberCommons for Ecological
Forecasting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four universities (Kansas University (KU),
Oklahoma University (OU), Kansas State University (KSU), and Oklahoma State
University (OSU)) in two EPSCoR states, Kansas and Oklahoma, are united to
create a cyberCommons, a powerful, integrated cyber environment for knowledge
discovery and education across complex environmental phenomena. The cyberCommons
will integrate two frameworks?the science framework of data, models, analytics
and narratives, and the cyberinfrastructure framework of hardware, software,
collaboration environment and integration environment. Two scientific questions
underlie the understanding and forecasting of ecological systems in the Central
Plains, which are in the main focus of this project: (1) What are the impacts of
changes in land-use/land-cover and climate, both natural and anthropogenic, on
biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem function? In turn, what are the feedbacks
among these drivers and consequences? and (2) What are the impacts of changes in
land-use/land-cover and climate, both natural and anthropogenic, on
biodiversity?its composition, patterns and dynamics? In turn, how do these
changes in biodiversity affect the spread of plant and animal diseases and
invasive species, and how do these phenomena influence ecosystem structure,
function and services?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Scientists at
the four universities have independently developed research expertise, web-based
data portals, web applications, and models dealing with the ecological drivers
and consequences. CI tools are, for the most part, advancing this research along
single, independent pipelines of ecological and biotic data, models, analytics
and narrative scenarios. The cyberCommons is thought to enable unified,
collaborative research across these pipelines, transforming the modeling and
synthesis of ecological complexity. It will build on and unite the consortium?s
existing expertise and capabilities in ecological observation, data assimilation
and distribution, mathematical modeling, and CI architectures. Effectively, the
cyberCommons will create a new research and educational community that
transcends geographic, disciplinary and institutional boundaries in promoting
peer-to-peer collaboration and new pedagogy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The cyberCommons is proposed to build upon strengths in the two states
in the ecological, biodiversity and CI sciences. The researchers plan to enhance
these strengths and research competitiveness through a new CI/science framework
by enabling cross-domain investigation of complex environmental phenomena. The
knowledge discovery advanced by the cyberCommons is expected to have immediate
and long-term applicability to the management and sustainability of grassland
ecosystems on the Central Plains. Using web portals, resources and tools
developed for the cyberCommons, teachers and students at a wide range of
institutions in OK and KS will have new opportunities for hands-on exploration
of the science of ecological forecasting. Such outreach efforts will reach the
growing population of minorities, help advance the curriculum at a diverse range
of institutions, and improve workforce education and training in areas of vital
importance to the economy of the region. New curricular content at the
participating universities will help prepare the next generation of researchers
to work in CI environments and virtual collaborations. By leveraging existing
successful programs that serve young women, blacks, and Native Americans in both
states, the cyberCommons will foster engagement in science and careers among
groups traditionally underrepresented in science, engineering and eco-
forecasting disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;