* 0919088
* Atmospheric Transport Barriers and the Biological Invasion of Toxigenic Fungi in the Genus Fusarium
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Shane Ross, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2012
* USD 413,476.00

This project examines the role of atmospheric transport barriers (ATBs) in the
biological invasion of Fusarium--one of the most important groups of fungi in
the world and a devastating disease agent of many crops. Fusarium species use
the atmosphere to travel from one habitat to another. Their atmospheric
transport is poorly understood, yet necessary to assess their ecological roles
in agricultural ecosystems and to evaluate risks posed by invasive Fusarium. The
goal of this work is to develop an increased understanding of the atmospheric
transport of microorganisms. The specific objectives are to: (1) develop a
framework for understanding the role of ATBs in shaping the populations of
Fusarium at both local and regional scales, (2) evaluate the population
structure of Fusarium collected in the lower atmosphere associated with
predicted ATBs, and (3) deliver an innovative outreach program to attract and
retain students at the interface of aerobiology and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transdisciplinary project will create a new framework
for understanding how atmospheric transport influences the ecological biology of
airborne microorganisms. Research and resulting new technology will be showcased
through Field Days at Virginia Tech's Kentland Farm, aerobiology workshops for
high school students, and an ambitious program at a Virginia high school
allowing students to explore microorganisms in the atmosphere through cutting-
edge microscopy.