* 0919494
* Testing Simultaneous Divergence of Isolated Avian Populations in the Caucasus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Zink, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2013
* USD 592,499.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
ecological and behavioral factors that promote genetic divergence in, and
ultimately the evolution of, new species. It focuses on bird species in the
isolated forest islands of the Caucasus. DNA sequences from mitochondrial and
nuclear genes will be compared for samples of 35 bird species, some of which are
non-migratory habitat specialists and others migratory generalists. A new
statistical method will be used to test the hypothesis that all populations
diverged simultaneously. Because the age of the forests is known, this project
will be able to elucidate the time frame involved in the divergence of
populations and, for the first time, allow independent calibration of divergence
rates of nuclear and mitochondrial genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental
islands such as the Caucasian forests are important arenas in which to study
evolutionary change because the distance from other populations, time of
isolation, and population sizes are standardized. This study will be one of the
first tests of the contemporaneous origin of an island fauna. It will reveal
whether loss of migration and habitat specialization enhance the effects of
isolation and speed the diversification process. Additionally, it will reveal
the conservation status of the isolated populations. The results of this study
will be of importance to biologists studying speciation and rates of
evolutionary change in all types of organisms.