* 0920799
* Workforce Training for Stem Cell Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Christopher Scott, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Workforce Training for STEM Cell Research endeavor is a Stanford University
effort to develop a suite of instructive and lab-based materials focusing on
stem cell biology and research for use in undergraduate courses in community
colleges and four-year schools. This work is responsive to the identified need
for: 1) an undergraduate curriculum that integrates science, laboratory
training, and the humanities; 2) innovations in pedagogy not commonly seen in
traditional approaches to teaching biology; 3) independent and flexible modules
to accommodate "just-in-time" changes to a frontier area of biology; and 4) a
scalable approach to address the nation's dearth of a technically-trained post-
baccalaureate workforce for stem cell research. This project draws from prior
successes in creating multidisciplinary, team-taught courses in the most active
stem cell research centers in the world. In addition, community college faculty
serve as collaborators in this work, drawing upon their biotechnology expertise
and ensuring the materials meet the needs of their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A well-trained workforce in stem cell research
has the potential to fuel discovery and the eventual translation of technologies
for human use. This stem cell curriculum--purpose-built for the workforce--is
being designed to accomplish this end. This integrated series of instructional
modules spans scientific, technical, and social dimensions of stem cell
research. Importantly, the materials to be developed include laboratory-based
training. The curriculum will provide educators with clearly written, rapidly
revised core material and instructional modules. For each module, what students
need to know for careers involving stem cell research is first determined, then
development of a curriculum and pedagogy that can deliver appropriate knowledge
and technical competency occurs. The products of this project include a suite of
classroom and laboratory-based teaching and learning resources and evaluative
materials that can stand-alone or be joined to create new courses. The
curriculum has the potential for broad and immediate impact on teachers and
students working to launch technical careers in stem cell research. These
materials are also of benefit to undergraduate biology curricula and certificate
programs with technical foci, as the modular approach allows four-year schools
to pick topics and materials that best suit their teaching needs. Materials will
be distributed through the web and well-known national and international media
channels. In addition, the modular approach can be adapted for distance learning
and subject-based seminars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for life science
STEM professionals, some of whom will supervise dozens of technicians, is
increasing. In sum, this project is designed to address a major educational gap
in the biotechnology, commercialization and development chain.