* 0920625
* RIG:   Identification of the Drosophila Tbx20 transcription factor regulatory network mediating neuronal specification
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Sandra Leal, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,994.00

The central nervous system (CNS) is an elaborate network of many diverse neurons
capable of relaying electrochemical signals with remarkable fidelity. The
acquisition of neuronal cell fates within the developing CNS is a highly
regulated, yet evolutionarily conserved process. Research supports the
hypothesis that a distinct combination of nuclear transcription factor binding
proteins activates and/or inhibits the expression of neuronal fate determination
genes. For example, a known combination of transcription factors specifies the
identity of motor neurons projecting axons ventrally, while a different
combination specifies the identity of motor neurons projecting axons dorsally.
Each subclass of motor neurons extends axons to innervate different muscle
targets. To decode the transcription factor networks specifying neuronal fates,
the proposed research will functionally characterize a newly identified
regulator of neuronal specification, the Drosophila transcription factor gene
neuromancer2 (nmr2). Thus far, expression studies between Nmr2 proteins and
transcription factors known to specify motor neuron and interneuron fates reveal
little co-expression between these factors. Consequently, the first goal of this
project is to employ a genetic screen to identify genes that interact with nmr2.
Identifying nmr2-interacting genes will resolve nmr2 function and determine
whether nmr2 is a novel transcription factor combinatorial code member governing
the specification of neurons. The second goal is to define the downstream gene
targets through which Nmr2 mediates its effects on neuronal specification. The
integration of genetics and embryological methods with genome-wide searches for
Nmr2 transcription factor gene targets will elucidate how Nmr2 directs distinct
sets of neurons to differentiate from each other. Further comparative analyses
will provide insight to understand the function of Tbx20, the conserved
mammalian counterpart of nmr2. In addition, this project will provide scientific
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to pursue a
research thesis, to co-author manuscripts, and to present their research at
scientific meetings. This project will be conducted at the University of
Mississippi. As such the project has the potential to broaden participation of
minority students in STEM disciplines.