* 0920312
* Structural Studies of Crenarcheal Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Valerie Copie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 12/31/2012
* USD 597,215.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crenarchaeal viruses such as SSV1 and
STIV inhabit extreme thermal and acidic environments (T&gt; 80oC; 4.0 &gt; pH
&gt; 1.0) such as those found in Yellowstone National Park. SSV1 and STIV are
among the best characterized of these viruses, and thus serve as important model
systems for study. Sequence analyses of the SSV1 and STIV genomes, and those of
other viruses from extreme thermal environments, are unable to suggest functions
for most of the encoded proteins. The proposed research focuses on the use of
structural biology to investigate the functional roles of the SSV and STIV
proteomes, and on interactions in host organism Sulfolobus solfataricus.
Structures of viral and host proteins of unknown function will be determined
using crystallographic and NMR techniques. In many cases, these studies are
expected to reveal structural similarity to proteins of known function, or to
otherwise suggest functions that in collaboration with Dr. Mark Young, Montana
State University, can be tested using biochemical and genetic experiments.
Together, these studies will contribute to an increased understanding of the SSV
and STIV life cycles, and the molecular interplay between these viruses and
their crenarchaeal hosts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Much of the
ongoing work within the MSU Thermal Biology Institute (TBI) including the
characterization of hyperthermophilic viruses is being communicated to the
general public through outreach programs. Target groups include K-12, tribal
colleges, and other undergraduate institutions. In addition, TBI partners with
the National Park Service /Yellowstone National Park in outreach to the general
public within the Park. There is strong integration of the proposed research
with the educational goals of the PI, Co-PI, the Department, the University, and
the NSF. Students at the high school, undergraduate, doctoral and post-doctoral
levels will receive significant training in biochemistry, structural biology and
thermal biology. The involvement of under represented groups, particularly women
and Native Americans, is actively encouraged.