* 0920276
* RIG: Analysis of the Role of Myosin XI in Plant Cell Polarized Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,03/31/2010
* Luis Vidali, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 03/31/2010
* USD 199,998.00

Luis Vidali Proposal # 0920276 Title: RIG: Analysis of the Role of Myosin XI in
Plant Cell Polarized Growth

Plant growth and development are achieved by the combined effect of two
fundamental cellular processes, cell division and cell growth. This project aims
at understanding an extreme form of polarized cell growth called tip growth,
which occurs in root hairs, pollen tubes, and the filamentous cells of ferns and
mosses. It is well established that tip growth is dependent on the actin
cytoskeleton. This cytoskeleton is a cellular structure composed of nanometer
size fibers. In cells, molecular motors called myosins interact with these
fibers for contraction and intracellular transport. Despite the long known role
of the actin cytoskeleton in tip growth, it is not known how this cytoskeleton
is linked to growth. This project aims to evaluate if a plant specific myosin
(myosin XI) is the link between the actin cytoskeleton and tip growth. To help
understand myosin XI function, the investigators will determine its location
within the cell. In addition, by preventing myosin XI expression, they will
determine if myosin XI regulates the actin cytoskeleton or intracellular
transport. These studies are being carried out in the emerging plant model, the
moss Physcomitrella patens. This organism was chosen because of its unique
genetic properties and simple development. Furthermore, a recently completed
genome sequence facilitates the generation of molecular tools. As the primary
producers of food and biofuel, plants are an essential component for the
establishment of a sustainable future. Hence, understanding plant growth is an
important endeavor of basic science, potentially becoming the basis of vital new
technologies. The investigators are committed to increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in the life sciences. Throughout this project, students
and postdoctoral researchers who are members of these groups will be actively
recruited, trained and mentored. By coordinating with other organizations,
support will be provided for undergraduate students to complete summer projects
and full year internships.