* 0920082
* The Chemistry of Gene Silencing
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2009,11/30/2014
* Cynthia Wolberger, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2014
* USD 627,470.00

The Sir2 proteins, also known as sirtuins, comprise an ancient family of
NAD+-dependent enzymes found in all organisms, where they play a central role in
diverse biological processes including transcriptional silencing, suppression of
rDNA recombination, regulation of the p53 tumor suppressor, fat mobilization,
neuronal regeneration, and aging. Most sirtuins deacetylate lysine residues in
an NAD+-dependent reaction that releases the deacetylated peptide, nicotinamide,
and O-acetyl ADP ribose. The unusual chemistry catalyzed by sirtuins allows some
of these enzymes to catalyze a second reaction, ADP ribosylation, in which NAD+
is cleaved and the ADP ribose product is attached to target side chains. In the
past funding period, significant progress was made towards elucidating the
structure-based mechanism of NAD+-dependent deacetylation. In addition, the
first direct evidence for ADP ribosylation by a sirtuin was obtained and the
modified side chains identified. The present proposal builds upon this work,
applying approaches using x-ray crystallography, biochemistry, and computational
biology to understand the underlying mechanism of the ADP ribosyltransferase
activity of sirtuins. Structures of complexes with substrates and trapped
reaction intermediates will be determined using x-ray crystallography in order
to uncover the mechanism by which sirtuins ADP ribosylate acetylated and
unacetylated substrates. Solution studies and quantum mechanical calculations on
the new structures will complement these structural studies and will shed
further light on the enzymatic mechanism. In a second area of inquiry,
structural and biochemical studies will be carried out on the complex formed by
the yeast Sir2 protein with Net1, which is responsible for rDNA silencing and
suppression of rDNA recombination. These studies will shed light on how Net1
recruits Sir2 to the nucleolus and establishes a chromatin-bound complex that
silences transcription and suppresses recombination. In addition to elucidating
how Sir2 interacts with partner proteins, these studies will also contribute to
an understanding of why the enzymatic activity of Sir2 is altered when it
becomes part of a complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT OF THE PROPOSED
ACTIVITY: The proposed experiments will be carried out exclusively by graduate
students and will provide excellent training in using an integrated approach
that applies the tools of x-ray crystallography and solution biochemistry to
important biological problems. The principal investigator's ongoing work in
structural biology of sirtuins has provided an opportunity to reach out to and
encourage women and underrepresented groups to pursue a career in science. The
principal investigator participates in the "Women Serious About Science" club at
a city high school with a largely minority student body. She has also devised
and taught a curriculum for "Crystal Day" as part of a new summer program for
inner-city 5th graders that is taught annually.