* 0920920
* Mathematical Challenges in Phylogenetic Landscapes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Katherine St. John, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 221,150.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this project is to develop innovative mathematics to compare,
optimize and visualize phylogenetic, or evolutionary, trees. We will analyze,
via a combination of theoretical advances and computational experimentation, the
metric space of trees. Our efforts will focus on better understanding of and
improving algorithms for calculating biologically relevant tree metrics. We will
focus on the interaction between these metrics and the canonical, but NP-hard,
optimization criteria favored by biologists. Computationally expensive searches
are currently used to estimate the optimum and can survey only a tiny fraction
of treespace. Deeper understanding of treespace will improve searches and
sampling methods by suggesting better starting points, identifying clustering of
local optima and suggesting locations of global optima.

Phylogenies, or evolutionary histories, play a central role in modern biology,
illustrating the interrelationships between species, and also aiding the
prediction of structural, physiological, and biochemical properties that can
lead to the discovery of new drugs and vaccines. The reconstruction of the
underlying evolutionary history from a set of morphological characters or
biomolecular sequences is difficult since the optimality criteria favored by
biologists are hard to compute, and the space of possible answers is huge. Due
to this, clever searching techniques and heuristics are used to estimate the
optimal tree. To improve these important, and computationally intensive,
methods, we propose to step back and rigorously examine the underlying space of
trees, along with different optimality criteria (often called the ?landscape? of
trees), and provide a detailed understanding of the space of trees to improve
phylogenetic tree reconstruction.