* 0920668
* Imprinting learning in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jing Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During critical developmental stages,
important environmental cues such as the face of one's mother or the smell of
home are stored or "imprinted" into the memories of young animals. In this
capacity, imprinting serves as an important survival mechanism and can have
enduring effects on animal behaviors. Dr. Wang's laboratory has obtained
evidence to demonstrate that the fruit fly Drosophila exhibits a robust form of
olfactory imprinting. Exposure to a given odorant in early adulthood
dramatically increases a fly's preference for that odorant at a later stage.
Despite significant progress into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of
olfactory imprinting in diverse species, causality between neural plasticity in
specific neurons and olfactory imprinting behavior has been difficult to
establish. The anatomical simplicity of Drosophila, coupled with sophisticated
genetic tools for this model organism, confers unique advantages for studies
linking neural activity to behavioral output. Dr. Wang and colleagues will use
molecular genetics, behavioral studies, and optical imaging, to study olfactory
imprinting in Drosophila. The proposed experiments aims to reveal the neural
circuit underlying the imprinting behavior, which will yield insights into
mechanisms of social attachment and development of individual
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support for this project will have broader
impact at several levels. First, making inroads into understanding how early
experience shapes behavioral preferences can elucidate basic principles that may
seed and inform future efforts in the study of imprinting in other organisms.
Second, experience gained by the participants of this proposal will be vital in
incorporating modern imaging techniques and quantitative analysis into the
undergraduate biological curriculum. Third, the support of this project will
also provide opportunities to train a new generation of scientists in a
multidisciplinary approach.