* 0920103
* RUI:  A proteomic analysis of stress responses in the ribbed salt marsh mussel, Geukensia demissa
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Peter Fields, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2013
* USD 209,151.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The salt marsh mussel, Geukensia
demissa, is an important member of the salt marsh community that stretches from
northern Florida to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. In this habitat, Geukensia helps
stabilize sediment, filters particulates from the water, and provides habitat
for many species of invertebrates. Because it lives in the intertidal zone,
Geukensia must cope with environmental extremes including high and low
temperatures, anoxia (absence of oxygen), desiccation and fluctuations in
salinity. Students in the Fields lab will determine the biochemical strategies
Geukensia employs to survive in this challenging habitat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will employ proteomics (an analysis of
changes in types and abundances of proteins in tissue, including identification
of proteins whose abundances change significantly) to examine how Geukensia
responds to environmental stresses. The research will address the following
questions: How much change in an environmental variable is necessary to modify
protein expression (a stress response)? Are the same groups of proteins
expressed in response to different stresses? Can proteins whose expression
changes significantly be identified? Answers to these questions will provide
insight into how Geukensia is able to survive in such a variable environment.
More generally, the research will reveal similarities in biochemical responses
to a variety of stresses, and the extent to which tolerance to one type of
stress provides resistance to others. Answers to these questions have important
ramifications regarding the ability of organisms to survive in the face of
human-induced stresses, including climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to addressing the above questions, this research will engage
undergraduates in research, exposing them to biochemistry techniques including
2-D gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Undergraduates will also have the
opportunity to co-author peer-reviewed articles and present their results at
national meetings.&lt;br/&gt;