* 0920904
* DDIG: Reconfiguration of Social Support Networks and Collective Action amidst Shifting Land Ownership Regimes in Northern Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Allan Burns, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,890.00

University of Flordia doctoral student, David R. Garcia, under the supervision
of Dr. Allan F. Burns, will investigate how the transformation of diverse land
ownership systems into individual private property affect the social
organization and well-being of rural communities. The overaching research
question asks how such processes reconfigure social ordering, collective action,
and environmental beliefs and practices.

The research will be carried out in Q'eqchi'-Maya communities of the lowland
agricultural frontier of Chisec, Guatemala, where contemporary land policies
entail reforms of collective tenure traditions in frontier lands where land
tenure is uncertain. Garcia will employ a mixed methods approach including
archival research in land registers and open-ended interviews to unravel how
pre-existing social practices figure into the transformation of property regimes
among diverse social actors including state officials, local grassroots leaders,
and community organizers and members. He also will gather social network data in
three Q'eqchi' villages with varying levels of private land titling. The
analysis of the network data will probe the effects of distinct levels of land
privatization on social structure, social support, and collective action.

The research is important because the transformation of collective lands into
privately held lands is happening throughout the world. The results of this
research will contribute to ongoing theoretical and policy debates regarding the
social effects of property rights and ownership systems. The research may inform
policy makers who need to evaluate land policy alternatives as they seek to
reduce social conflict, poverty, and social exclusion. The research also will
contribute to the education of a graduate student from an underrepresented
group.