* 0920341
* WeBWorK: Improving Student Success in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2018
* Michael Gage, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,452,322.00

WeBWorK: Improving Student Success in
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discipline: Mathematical Sciences
(21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CCLI Phase 3 project, "WeBWorK: Improving Student
Success in Mathematics," is updating, expanding, and enhancing one of the most
used, freely-distributed, open source, online, mathematics homework systems. By
providing students with immediate feedback about the validity of their answers
and giving them the opportunity to correct mistakes while they are still
thinking about the problem, WeBWorK is helping students stay on task and is
increasing the effectiveness of student homework in the learning process. Using
WeBWorK, students each receive individualized versions of problems, enabling
instructors to encourage students to work together. Additionally, instructors
can select different levels and types of questions for the students ranging from
routine questions to more advanced interactive
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) is
partnering with the developers of WeBWorK to create a permanent supportive home
for WeBWorK, thus providing the mathematical sciences community with dependable,
long-term access to WeBWorK while at the same time strengthening the on-going
maintenance and development. The MAA is providing a hosting service for WeBWorK
courses so professors can gain experience with WeBWorK without first having to
have it installed at their home institutions. Additionally, WeBWorK is being
integrated into more course management systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project assessment team is investigating the impact of WeBWorK on student
learning and evaluating the efficacy of the project's dissemination efforts.
Furthermore, the MAA is expanding research into effective practices for the use
of WeBWorK. Training workshops are providing faculty with the tools they need to
make effective use of WeBWorK. Presentations and publications are exposing
faculty to results from using WeBWorK for improving student learning in college
mathematics.