* 0920327
* Identification of the Mechanisms of Protein Transport during Arabidopsis Root Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2012
* Kimberly Gallagher, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2012
* USD 659,596.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. In order for
multicellular organisms to function properly, individual cells within the
organism must be able to share information. One way this can happen in plants is
through the directed transport of transcription factors between cells. Estimates
are that as many as 17% of all transcription factors move between cells in the
model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. However, the mechanisms regulating
transcription factor movement are largely unknown. The goal of this research is
to identify and characterize the molecular machinery controlling the cell-to-
cell transport of transcription factors using the SHORT-ROOT (SHR) protein as a
model for movement in the Arabidopsis root. This research has two specific aims.
The first is to characterize and identify proteins required for SHR signaling.
Five proteins known to interact with SHR will be the focus of these studies. The
second aim is to characterize the dynamics of transcription factor movement in
Arabidopsis roots, using proteins tagged with photoconvertible fluorophores.
This research has the potential to shed light not only on an essential but
poorly understood aspect of plant development (i.e., how proteins are
transported between cells), but also on animal development, as there is emerging
evidence that some of the trafficking machineries are conserved between these
two kingdoms. In addition, since viral proteins are thought to traffic between
plant cells by utilizing the endogenous components of the plant transport
pathways, this research will likely lead to a better understanding of how viral
pathogens are able to propagate an infection throughout the
plant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This research will rely heavily on
the assistance of undergraduate researchers. Students will use modern confocal
microscopy in the phenotypic analysis of the SHR binding protein lines and in
analyzing the effects of chemical inhibitors on SHR movement and localization.
In addition, undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from a course in
cell-to-cell signaling that incorporates this research into the curriculum. The
commitment of the principal investigator to education also includes introducing
local high school students to the workings of a high-level research laboratory
by inviting students to work in the laboratory for a day. There will also be
strong participation in departmental seminars to help postdoctoral and graduate
researchers learn how to present their data and to enter into productive
mentoring relationships with their future students. &lt;br/&gt;