* 0920342
* RUI: Mechanisms Underlying Limulus behavior: from Molecules to Movements
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Winsor Watson, Plymouth State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 09/30/2014
* USD 420,297.00

Internal biological clocks play important regulatory roles in virtually every
living organism. The circadian clock in animals regulates daily activity rhythms
and is composed of a molecular control system involving the protein PER. Recent
preliminary evidence suggests that PER may also be an important part of the
clock(s) controlling circatidal (~12.4 hour cycle) rhythms in the horseshoe
crab, Limulus polyphemus. The first goal of the project is to use molecular
techniques to investigate the molecular mechanisms that underlie both circadian
and circatidal rhythms in Limulus and to localize the clocks that drive these
rhythms to specific brain regions. A second goal will be to determine if
circatidal rhythms are controlled by two 24 hr "circadian clocks" that each
drive one of the high tide bouts of activity; an outstanding issue that has
remained unanswered for decades. Third, for the first time in an aquatic
invertebrate, the pattern of biological rhythms that are actually expressed by
freely moving horseshoe crabs in their natural habitat will be recorded using a
newly developed monitoring technique. The overall results will, for the first
time in any species, localize a clock controlling circatidal behavior and will
also identify the long sought after circadian clock in Limulus. Ultimately, the
data obtained will allow for a full understanding of the mechanisms underlying
the expression of rhythmic patterns of locomotion in this commercially and
ecologically important species, from the molecular to the ecological
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly enhance the training
of undergraduates in the sciences at an institution that educates many of the
K-12 educators in the state. Over half of the student researchers are likely to
be women and some will be from under-represented minorities. In addition, many
of the students will be first generation university students from lower economic
sectors.