* 0920549
* "Proto Clovis" or "PreClovis"? Investigating the Cultural Antecedents of Clovis at the Gault Site, Texas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Michael Collins, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2013
* USD 216,400.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Who first populated the Americas and when? Where did they come from and how did
they get here? What was their lifeway like? These are not trivial questions
since the Americas, comprising 24% of the Earth's land surface, were the last
major area to be inhabited by humans. For most of the past 60 years dogma has
held that about 13,500 years ago nomadic mammoth hunters from the steppes of
North Central Russia migrated through Siberia, walked across a land bridge to
Alaska created by lowered sea levels of the last Ice Age, found their way down
an ice-free corridor in western Canada, and then spread out across North America
as bearers of a culture called Clovis.

Over the last dozen years, most scholars have embraced evidence that there had
been people in the Americas before Clovis, but details of that earlier
archaeological time are sketchy and controversy abounds over much of the
evidence and over most interpretations of that evidence. A few reject all
evidence of cultural antecedents of Clovis in the Americas, many consider Asia
to be the sole homeland of earliest American people and cultures, and a few
raise the possibility that Europe also contributed people and culture to the New
World at a very early time. It is debated whether Clovis culture developed
entirely in the Americas or evolved from antecedents in Europe or Asia. There is
no consensus on the timing of the earliest arrival of people in the Western
Hemisphere. An early American culture, predating Clovis but unlike and clearly
unrelated historically to Clovis might properly be referred to as 'PreClovis,'
whereas one predating and historically related to Clovis might qualify as 'Proto
Clovis.'

In Area 15 of the Gault Site, Texas, a stratigraphic layer below, and
chronometrically predating, a layer of Clovis artifacts was exposed in two small
test excavations and yielded a sizeable sample of debris from the manufacture of
stone tools. This debris is distinct from that produced by Clovis tool makers.
It completely lacks any aspect that would be considered a technological
progenitor of Clovis technology it seems to be 'PreClovis.' This stands in
contrast to several sites on the eastern seaboard of the United States where
cultural evidence antedating Clovis does share enough technological detail to be
tentatively considered 'Proto Clovis.' Understanding the early cultural history
of the Americas is quite complex and one must begin with solid evidence

This project proposes to excavate a 12m2 block in Area 15 at Gault, ascertain
the stratigraphic integrity of the archaeological sequence, establish the age
and duration of the Clovis and earlier components, and obtain a sufficiently
large sample of the early materials to reveal their technological and
typological characteristics. Intense and detailed comparisons between Clovis and
earlier artifacts will aim to resolve the issue of the degree of their
relatedness at this site and this resolution will then be considered at the
hemispheric perspective. When completed and disseminated this research will add
an important, thoroughly vetted sample of evidence to the sparse record that we
have for understanding the peopling of the Americas.