* 0920886
* Multiscale Modeling of Subcellular Structure and its Effects on Gene Expression and Regulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Samuel Isaacson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 272,515.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop mathematical
models to study the influence of subcellular architecture on the dynamics of
gene expression and regulation in eukaryotes. Detailed three-dimensional
stochastic reaction-diffusion models that incorporate the exclusion of nuclear
volume by chromatin and the sliding of transcription factors along DNA will be
constructed. Systems of spatially-continuous Smoluchowski diffusion-limited
reaction equations (SDLR) and lattice-based reaction-diffusion master equations
(RDME) are the two primary stochastic reaction-diffusion models that have been
used to study systems in which both the stochasticity in the chemical reaction
process and the spatial diffusion of molecules is important. We will develop
extensions to the RDME and SDLR systems of equations to account for the
influence of chromatin on the motion of proteins and messenger
ribonucleoproteins (mRNPs) within the nucleus of cells. A multiscale approach
will be developed in which an initial model that explicitly represents chromatin
fibers over length scales significantly smaller than the size of the nucleus
will be constructed. This model will then be coarse grained, and combined with
existing experimental imaging data to estimate parameters in effective whole-
nucleus scale RDME and SDLR models. These new coarse grained models will be used
to study the influence of global nuclear substructure on the time needed for
gene regulatory proteins, upon entering the nucleus, to find specific DNA
binding sites. Methods will also be developed for improving the accuracy of the
RDME in approximating the SDLR model, and for exactly simulating the stochastic
processes described by the SDLR model in the complex geometries that are present
in cells. A rigorous analytical and numerical study of the predictions that the
two models make for general multi-particle systems and for specific biological
systems with realistic geometries will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
better comprehend how organisms function, respond to environmental stimuli, and
to aid in treating disease, it is necessary to understand, predict, and control
the behavior of individual cells. Each cell contains numerous complex dynamical
processes involving proteins undergoing biochemical reactions that play a major
role in cell to cell communication, cell growth and division, heart and nervous
system development and function, and the development and progression of cancer.
Understanding the ways that these processes activate and inactivate genes inside
individual cells is fundamental to determining how these processes influence
cell function. In this work we will develop explicit mathematical models of how
proteins within a cell find the specific genes that they activate or inactivate.
These models will allow the quantitative study of how the interior physical
structure of cells influences this process. New mathematical equations will be
developed to model the movement of proteins within cells containing realistic
cellular substructures. New computational methods will be developed to
efficiently solve these mathematical equations in order to better predict and
control the dynamical processes that influence cell behavior.