* 0920928
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Impacts of Two Irrigation Management Strategies on Water Distribution and Access in the Bolivian Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Christopher McCarty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2011
* USD 14,888.00

University of Florida doctoral candidate, Timothy Podkul, under the guidance of
Dr. Christopher McCarty, will carry out research with the overall objective of
understanding the relationship between social organization and access to
irrigation water in water-scarce communities. This research is grounded in
anthropological theories drawn from a broad base of international literature
concerning the interrelationship between community organization and governance,
and water access and distribution strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will focus on two agro-pastoral communities in the Bolivian Andes, a region
plagued by severe alternating drought and flooding. In both communities, the
production of alfalfa and grass for livestock is essential to economic security.
Two strategies are used to manage the distribution of scarce irrigation water:
(1) independently-organized systems and (2) state-supported Water User
Associations (WUAs). In one, distribution is organized and enforced locally by
the users, while in the other, the irrigation water is under control of a WUA.
Social network data from each community will be collected to examine how
structural properties of actors within the network affect water distribution.
Associations between other variables such as water management strategies,
geographical location within a community, and community consensus about water
management norms will also be measured as potential predictors of water access.
Particular attention will be paid to the changing cultural and political roles
of the Water Chief and community social structure as WUA-appointed leaders take
over water management duties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
issues of importance to water and agricultural management and policy in a region
where implementation of best practices for successful natural resource
management could decrease conflicts and out-migration. This study has both
theoretical importance and practical applications for those seeking to
understand the increasingly tenuous relationships between communities and
government authorities in areas of scarce vital resources. Funding this research
also supports the education of a graduate student.