* 0920697
* RUI: Detection and Analysis of Fused Genes in Eukaryotic Genomes.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Andre Cavalcanti, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 08/31/2012
* USD 211,397.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Fusion genes are important markers of evolution and can also aid in identifying
protein function and protein interactions. Despite their importance and
potential applications in research, few studies focused on identifying and
characterizing fusion genes in eukaryotic species. One objective of this project
is to perform a survey of sequenced eukaryotic genomes to identify and
characterize fusion genes. In order to achieve this goal, two software programs
will be developed. Gene Fuser/Defuser will allow users to detect evolutionarily
fused genes in eukaryotic genomes and EukGenomeBlast will allow researchers to
determine the phylogenetic distribution of fusion genes and metabolic pathways
among a phylogenetically diverse set of complete eukaryotic genomes. In
addition, Gene Fuser/Defuser can be used to detect faulty gene predictions in
genome projects. Several of the genes detected by the program are not truly
fused, but are instead the result of faulty gene predictions. Detection of these
faulty gene models makes Gene Fuser/Defuser a useful tool for the correction of
genome annotation.

BROADER IMPACTS: Both programs will be available online and will be easy to use
even for non-specialists. EukGenomeBlast, in particular, has applications that
will allow researchers with no programming experience to perform more detailed
and focused BLAST searches using their genes or group of genes of interest.
Another important factor in the design of these programs is their suitability
for use in an undergraduate classroom setting. Many colleges do not have the
resources to hire full-time bioinformaticians and many bioinformatics tools are
complex and difficult to use making it a challenge for a non-specialist to
incorporate them into undergraduate courses. This project will create simple
modules, with detailed protocols and tutorials, that can be used in
undergraduate courses as an introduction to genomic and bioinformatics research.
The programs are also ideally suited for undergraduate research as they generate
smaller research projects that can be undertaken by undergraduate students. Each
fusion gene identified can become its own project, allowing a student or a small
group of students to perform a complete analysis of a given fusion gene in a
semester.

