* 0920777
* Calico: Improving Software Design Education with Tool Support, Design Exercises, and Course Modules for Sketch-Based, Continuous Design Practice and Reflection
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Adriaan van der Hoek, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 499,873.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project focuses on
software design education, and provides tool support, design exercises, and
course modules for sketch-based, continuous design practice and reflection. From
an educational perspective, the process by which a student or group of students
arrives at some particular software design is as important as the design itself.
What alternatives were considered? Why were certain alternatives favored over
others? How deeply were the various alternatives explored? What primary concerns
drove the design process and the choices that were made? What constraints were
assumed and applied? In the answers to these and other similar questions lie
valuable opportunities for instructors and students to reflect upon and learn
from the design process undertaken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This expansion project
brings together and builds upon three related strands of work: (1) observing
actual software designers in action, (2) implementing a tool for supporting
creative, sketch-based software design activities, and (3) migrating to a
studio-based approach to software design education. Preliminary results from
this work highlight a strong potential for a new approach to software design
education, one in which practice and reflection through sketching take center
stage in a studio-oriented educational setting, and one in which the sketching
exercises, whether in class or out of class as part of an assignment, are
supported and continuously reflected upon through powerful instructional
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has six components: (1) further
developing Calico, an existing prototype software design sketching tool, into a
design environment more explicitly geared towards education, (2) creating an
extensive library of sketch-oriented design exercises, (3) providing course
modules, (4) performing comprehensive, multi-university evaluations to gather
conclusive evidence regarding the educational merits of the approach, its
success factors, its strengths and weaknesses, (5) promoting faculty development
through workshops/tutorials at conferences, a web-based portal, and sample
lectures published via iTunes university, and (6) creating an effective strategy
for widespread dissemination.