* 0920758
* Understanding the Link Between Sterol Pathway Regulation and Tissue Differentiation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Bernd Lange, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 489,992.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-15).

Intellectual Merit: Phytosterols have essential functions in plants and are used
in human nutrition to lower blood cholesterol levels. They are important
structural components of the cell membrane in plants and other higher organisms,
and the derived steroids have vital functions as lipid hormones. Considerable
progress has been made with regard to understanding the properties of individual
enzymes involved in plant sterol biosynthesis. However, due to the complexity of
the sterol pathway, current knowledge of its regulation is still fragmentary.
The proposed research will combine mathematical modeling with experimental work
to unravel the regulatory complexity of the sterol metabolic pathway. The
overall goal of the research is to gain a comprehensive understanding of the
regulation of plant sterol biosynthesis and to assess the relevance of these
findings to sterol function in plant development. The regulation of sterol
pathway regulation is integral to the understanding of many different aspects of
plant development and responses to the environment. Results will provide
experimental resources to enable future molecular breeding and metabolic
engineering efforts targeted at manipulating sterol biosynthesis. The
mathematical models developed will be made available to the scientific community
to advance research in the emerging field of metabolic engineering.

Broader Impacts: Cross-disciplinary training will be provided for postdoctoral
fellows, graduate and undergraduate students in mathematical modeling,
analytical chemistry, metabolomics and plant molecular biology, physiology and
genetics. As director of the MJ Murdock Metabolomics Laboratory the PI will
provide outreach to K-12 students, teachers and the general public on the
current uses of high end analytical chemistry in society.