* 0920502
* Loss and rescue of regeneration in naidine annelids
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Alexandra Bely, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Animals vary tremendously in their
ability to replace lost body parts. While some animals, such as humans, cannot
re-grow most body parts, others, such as some segmented worms, can re-grow an
entire body from a small fragment of the original animal. The ultimate goal of
this research is to understand the root causes of this variation and to identify
factors that can cause regeneration, the process of body part replacement, to
fail or proceed. Specifically, this work focuses on two closely related species
of segmented worms, one that can regenerate its head and the other that cannot
do so except when the cut occurs within developmentally very young tissue.
Investigations in these two species will identify genes and developmental
processes that may allow an animal to regenerate even when it usually cannot do
so. Determining the specific conditions under which regeneration can be elicited
in an otherwise non-regenerating species will further understanding of the
natural blocks to successful regeneration and suggest paths to circumventing
these blocks. This work will foster the training of a diverse group of
undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate researchers within an environment
highly supportive of strong mentoring. This laboratory has provided and will
continue to provide opportunities to diverse students including underrepresented
groups such as minorities. Lab personnel will actively participate in
disseminating research results, and research findings will be disseminated
broadly and in a timely manner. Genetic resources will be made available to the
research community through a freely available sequence repository shortly after
acquisition.