* 0920145
* Genetic analysis of root traits associated with domestication of Phaseolus vulgaris
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,05/31/2014
* Carlos Vallejos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ben Holt
* 05/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Present day crops are the product of the intense selection applied by the first
farming communities on the genetic variation of ancestral wild populations. This
activity led to the accumulation of genes that control a group of traits known
as the "domestication syndrome." These traits comprise visible changes in growth
habit, organ size, seed dispersal, and environmental responses. However, with
the exception of a few species that were domesticated for their edible roots,
root traits have been neglected in domestication studies. Yet, morphological
differences between roots of wild and cultivated forms exist and can be
considered the product of indirect selection. This observation raises questions
about both the number of genes responsible for these differences and their
identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is the
identification of the genes controlling the root morphological changes
associated with the domestication of Phaseolus vulgaris, the common bean, a New
World species domesticated 8-10,000 years ago. The target genes and their
chromosomal position will be identified through a statistical analysis of root
traits (growth rates, branching, etc.) in progeny obtained from a cross between
a wild and a domesticated bean. This analysis requires two pieces of
information: a measurement of the root trait, and the genetic makeup of each
individual in the progeny at previously mapped marker-genes covering all
chromosomes. Root traits will be measured via 2D scans using a root scanner, and
3D scans using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Tools to evaluate 3D MRI root
images quantitatively have been developed and will be expanded to create a
computer generative 3D root model. The genetic makeup of the progeny will be
obtained with the latest generation of high throughput sequencing and genotyping
technologies. The genes controlling the domestication-associated root traits
will be identified and located on a chromosome when statistical tests show that
progeny with the wild version of the marker-gene exhibit significant differences
in root traits from those with the domesticated version.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of genes controlling root traits associated
with domestication will have broader scientific and educational impacts.
Knowledge about these genes will improve our understanding of the carbon balance
of ecosystems in which the carbon storage in root mass is a major concern, and
will also facilitate the genetic manipulation of roots for crop improvement.
This project will produce a computer generative 3D root model, which will be a
powerful teaching tool, and the starting point in the development of a gene-
based root model. The training of undergraduate and graduate students from both
the University of Florida and Florida A&amp;M University, an institution with
minorities who are under-represented in the scientific research community, will
be one of the major components of this project.