* 0920635
* Understanding Planning and Execution Expertise Among Engineering Faculty: A Field Initiated Practice Based Framework and Model
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Arunkumar Pennathur, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Maura Borrego
* 07/31/2012
* USD 499,758.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;One of the challenges that engineering
faculty face in preparing to teach their courses is to balance content with
pedagogy. While fundamental concepts in engineering have not changed much with
time, the contexts in which concepts can be applied and understood is dynamic
and changes with each new generation of engineers. Additionally, for any one
engineering topic, the technical content typically has multiple forms of
representation such as a mathematical model, a textual statement, or numbers
that estimate magnitude. Hence, the struggle for engineering educators is to
identify the best pedagogical practice to deliver varied representations of
engineering content to maximize student learning. As they are planning for their
class sessions, faculty often think in terms of abstracting, decomposing, and
transforming information to present to their students. The instructional
planning that faculty perform impacts the way that they teach and ultimately
impacts student learning. In this project, investigators are examining the
reflective journals of several faculty as they plan and implement their classes.
The relationship between planning and implementation is being examined as well
as the relationship between planning and student learning. The results from this
study will inform engineering educators as they prepare to teach, to improve
student motivation and learning.