* 0920446
* CCLI Phase II: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Systematic Ideation Curriculum Effectiveness Investigation &amp; Deployment to Enhance Design Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gul Kremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 07/31/2013
* USD 346,944.00

Engineering - Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;Design is the essence of engineering and
creativity is a requisite skill for effective design. Design often begins with
idea generation, typically brainstorming; however, brainstorming often falls
short when used as the main vehicle for creativity with undergraduate students
because it relies on the designers' abilities to look inward for inspiration and
it requires designers to have experience in the field. In this project, three
methods are being examined to determine their impact on improving the ideation
performance of undergraduate engineering students. The first method is TRIZ,
which is a systematic approach for the generation of innovative designs to
seemingly intractable problems. TRIZ was first developed in Russia and is based
on the analysis of thousands of patents that illustrate numerous solution
patterns from diverse disciplines. The second method of ideation being explored
in this project is freehand sketching and the third method is technology-enabled
design journaling. These three methods are being provided, either alone or in
combination, to students in various design-oriented courses at the partnering
institutions and the resulting design solutions are being analyzed for
creativity. The methods developed through this research have the potential to
transform undergraduate engineering design education. Results from the project
are being broadly disseminated to the engineering education community to inform
the inclusion of creativity among undergraduate engineering curricula across the
country.