* 0920398
* RIG: Diversity and biogeography of microbial communities in submerged caves
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Rima Franklin, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,252.00

The growing environmental threat to karst systems has led to increased research
into subterranean ecosystems. However, this work has largely been restricted to
subaerial ('dry') caves. Little research has been conducted in submerged caves,
which, although difficult to access, represent unique windows into deeper
groundwater environments. The objective of this research is to examine the
diversity and distribution of microorganisms in these habitats using molecular
genetic approaches and DNA sequence analysis. Through collaboration with the
Cambrian Foundation, the PI will gain access to microbial samples from several
previously unstudied submerged caves in Florida, Bermuda, and Mexico.
Simultaneous assessment of each sites' hydrology and groundwater geochemistry
will provide the environmental context for interpreting these data. In addition
to discovery of novel microbial species, the research will consider the
biological and geological consequences of microbial activity in these
ecosystems, filling a fundamental gap in our understanding of the microbiology
and geochemistry of karst aquifers and their influence on groundwater chemistry.
This has consequences for humans, in terms of contamination of drinking water
supplies, and for the preservation of the unique and fragile ecosystems that
thrive underground.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of her partnership with the
Cambrian Foundation (Orlando, FL), the PI has developed an ambitious education
and outreach program designed to increase public appreciation of these habitats.
At the core of the outreach program is a unique experience called 'Human-
Remotely-Operated-Vehicle' (ROV), which allows students to directly communicate,
via video and two-way audio links, with an investigator in the underwater cave
systems - allowing the students to experience this extreme environment from the
safety of land. 'Top side' students also participate in a variety of activities
designed to help them learn more about the biology and chemistry of these
ecosystems. In addition, the proposal includes opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate student research, and requires supported students to participate
in the local outreach activities by visiting K-12 classrooms and giving age-
appropriate presentations about their research.