* 0920463
* Systems Analysis of the Sporulation Initiation Network in the Bacterium Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Masaya Fujita, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2013
* USD 529,048.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The majority of
biological processes such as differentiation, growth, development and
transformation are under tight control of cellular signaling systems. However,
detailed mechanisms of how cells decide when and where to execute these
processes remains one of the great mysteries of modern biology. Discovery of
general principles underlying signal transduction in a simple unicellular
organism is an essential step towards understanding the complexity of genetic
and biochemical networks. Sensory behaviors of bacteria therefore serve as
powerful models for exploring the molecular basis of cell signaling,
differentiation and development. Sporulation in the soil bacterium Bacillus
subtilis is one of the best studied model systems but the mechanisms of cell-
fate decisions are still far from understood. The long-term goal of this project
is to reveal how bacterial cells process signals to make cell decisions during
sporulation. As a step toward that goal, this project aims to elucidate systemic
properties of the phosphorelay sporulation initiating network with a synergistic
combination of wet-lab experimentation, computational data analysis and
mathematical modeling. The project also addresses fundamental biological
questions on the relationship between population heterogeneity, noise,
integrated system behavior, and decision making in response to environmental
stimuli. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Project results are expected to
unravel novel mechanisms by which environmental cues are measured and converted
into dynamic changes in gene expression and subsequent differentiation. The
uncovered mechanisms can be generally applicable to studies of complex
developmental processes in a number of organisms. The model organism in this
study is closely related to those causing food spoilage. Heterogeneity in
sensitivity and resistance of spores, a well known obstacle of food
preservation, may be ultimately related to variability in the execution of the
sporulation program. The training of undergraduate and graduate students is an
integral part of this project and the PIs are committed to working closely with
trainees. The PIs will continue their efforts to recruit students from
underrepresented minority groups into their labs through existing institutional
programs. The project will provide abundant opportunities for the students
involved in its experimental and/or mathematical modeling aspects to work
together synergistically and therefore train scientists capable of effectively
bridging the gaps between the biological sciences and quantitative disciplines.