* 0920980
* Fair Trade and Socio-Economic Conditions in the Global Commodity Chain
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Laura Raynolds, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 93,586.00

SES-0920980 Laura Raynolds Colorado State University

Fair Trade is a rapidly growing initiative that challenges historical global
inequalities and seeks to improve the socio-economic conditions of marginalized
producers and workers in the global South through the creation of fairer
commodity chains for certified products. Existing research explores the dynamics
of Fair Trade in coffee and its implications for peasant producers. Yet Fair
Trade's most rapid growth is now in commodities, such as flowers, which are
produced by large enterprises using hired workers. There has to date been little
research on the nature of these new commodity chains or their impacts on hired
laborers, a significant share of whom are women. This project addresses this
research gap, analyzing three key questions: (1) What types of commodity and
non-commodity ties exist in global Fair Trade flower chains and how have
Ecuadorian plantations been integrated into these networks? (2) How successful
has Fair Trade, which was designed to address the conditions of peasant
producers, been at promoting partnerships with worker organizations and
improving the conditions of workers employed by certified plantations? (3) How
does Fair Trade effect gender dynamics on certified plantations and what are the
implications of certification how female as well as male workers?

This project pursues a multi-level multi-method approach and entails 5 months of
field research in Ecuador. It analyzes world Fair Trade flower markets, the
Ecuadorian plantations supplying those markets, and the conditions of workers on
those plantations. Research methods combine document reviews, ethnographic
observations, 60-75 semi-structured interviews with Ecuadorian and US Fair Trade
network actors, plantation managers, and worker organization leaders, focus
groups with 40-56 female flower workers, and a random sample survey of 160 male
and female workers. Integrating qualitative and quantitative data collection and
analysis, the study gains both depth and breadth of understanding of Fair Trade
flower networks and socio-economic production conditions.

This study will provide the first detailed analysis of Fair Trade's impacts on
plantation enterprises and gendered labor in Latin America. The project
contributes to key debates within Sociology and related social science
disciplines. It informs and advances theoretical and empirical understanding in
three key areas. The research strengthens our understanding of globalization and
new forms of regulation by focusing on an initiative that is both a social
movement and a certification system. It provides insights into how global
commodity chains operate, focusing on how alternative norms of fairness may be
integrated into trade relations and participating organizations. And, it sheds
light on the implications of Fair Trade for workers, exploring particularly the
integration of female workers.

Broader Impacts

This project integrates research and education activities in training a US
graduate student and working closely with counterparts in Ecuador. It broadens
the participation of underrepresented groups, giving voice to Ecuadorian flower
workers in general and female workers in particular. The project lays the
groundwork for future collaborations between US and Latin American researchers.
Data will be shared with Ecuadorian counterparts and with affiliates of the
Center for Fair & Alternative Trade (CFAT) with documents added to the CFAT
collection at Colorado State University. Project findings will be disseminated
broadly to US and Ecuadorian academics, policy-makers, practitioners, and
concerned citizens. The project will have strong societal impacts, providing
access to needed information and pointing to avenues for strengthening existing
programs that seek to ameliorate potential negative consequences of
international trade.