* 0920316
* Interactions of Cholesterol and Gangliosides with Lipids
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ka Yee Lee, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,042,153.00

The study of lipid rafts has attracted the attention of biological and physical
scientists alike, and researchers have used model lipid systems as well as
natural biological membranes to try to better understand these entities. It has
been postulated that lipid rafts form due to complex formation between lipids
and cholesterol, and elucidation of the interactions between lipids and
cholesterol has formed the basis for this project. The project will use 3
different types of model system: monolayers, bilayers, and natural membranes of
red blood cells, and a suite of biophysical techniques (surface-pressure
measurements, fluorescence, beta-cyclodextrin desorption assays, grazing
incidence x-ray diffraction, x-ray reflectivity as well as displacement assays
in cells) to probe the nature of the interactions involved. The objectives of
the research fall into three areas: (1) Nature of Condensed Complexes of Lipids
and Cholesterol. What is their thermal stability? Can they only be formed
between cholesterol and high melting point lipids? Are the structural and
chemical activity data consistent with other models on lipid/cholesterol
interactions besides the complex formation model? (2) Membrane Intercalators.
What are the structural attributes of an effective membrane intercalator capable
of disrupting the interactions between lipids and cholesterol? How would
alterations in the hydrophobicity of the intercalator affect its displacement
performance? Would other sterols be effective in displacing cholesterol? (3)
Lipid Ordering Involving Gangliosides. How do gangliosides, thought to be
enriched in lipid rafts, affect the organization of their surrounding lipids? Do
they coordinate with high melting point lipids in a similar fashion as
cholesterol? Or do they form other types of structures? The success in
addressing these questions will help elucidate interactions between lipids and
sterols as well as those involving lipids and gangliosides. It will also bridge
the gap between model and natural membrane systems, and resolve some of the
seeming inconsistencies found in various model systems. The knowledge gained
from this work will greatly add to our fundamental understanding of lipid
rafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will provide training
opportunities for the researchers in a highly interdisciplinary area, and will
help train the next generation of interdisciplinary research scientists. The
project will further enhance the content of a graduate course in membrane
biophysics, as well as the curriculum development of a new interdisciplinary
degree-granting program in Biophysical Sciences. Apart from graduate students
and postdocs, research opportunities will be extended to high school,
undergraduate, summer research as well as international exchange students. The
PI has spearheaded and will continue to participate in a 7-week summer research
program, Summer Link, placing 10 high school seniors from the University of
Chicago Laboratory Schools in laboratories across the Biological Sciences
Division and the Physical Sciences Division at the University of Chicago. An
early exposure to research can help entice these young students to consider a
career in science. The PI will continue to host undergraduates and REU students
for research in the laboratory. International research collaboration will be
promoted via a summer exchange student program established by the PI with the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, as well as the Chile Exchange Program of the
University of Chicago MRSEC. Science, especially the concept of
interdisciplinary science, will be brought to schoolchildren through outreach
activities. The PI is committed to increasing the representation of women in
academic science. Efforts will be made to address the opportunities for women in
academic science through the PI's work with the Office of the Provost and her
involvement as the Chair of the Women in Physical Sciences Committee of the
Physical Sciences Division at the University of Chicago.