* 0920955
* Risk and Inequality in a Global Economy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 608,400.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, the key intellectual framework for examining
the distributional consequences of trade has been the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem
of the Heckscher-Ohlin model. Recently, however, several limitations have
emerged concerning the use of this model as a framework for understanding the
distributional consequences of trade liberalization. In particular, while the
Stolper-Samuelson Theorem emphasizes the return to skills as the prime driver of
income inequality, a substantial component of the recent rise in income
inequality is accounted for by residual wage inequality that is unexplained by
observed personal characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by empirical evidence
from micro datasets on firms and workers, the PI's have developed an alternative
theoretical framework for examining the distributional consequences of trade
liberalization. Their approach incorporates three key features that together
enable one to better address the limitations of the neoclassical model: (1)
heterogeneity in productivity across firms; (2) heterogeneity in unobserved
ability across workers; (3) search and matching frictions in the labor market.
The combination of these three features generates residual wage inequality and
unemployment that helps in matching the patterns observed in the
data.&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the PI's plan to develop our research on the
distributional consequences of globalization in three major directions. First,
they propose to generalize their framework in order to allow for idiosyncratic
risk faced by individual workers (which is assumed to be perfectly diversified
within families in their previous work). This will allow them to study more
realistic general equilibrium implications of globalization, and in particular
its impact on earning volatility and occupational risk that is of major concern
to policy makers. Second, they propose to examine empirical predictions of their
theoretical framework using matched employee-employer trade data for Brazil and
Sweden. In particular, they will use the model to study the impact of trade
liberalization on inequality and unemployment. Third, the PI's will generalize
their model to a dynamic framework in order to study the time pattern of
reallocation of workers over time in response to trade liberalization: (1)
across firms; (2) across industries; and (3) between employment and
unemployment.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;This
project will contribute to a better understanding of globalization, emphasizing
individual income risks on the one hand and the required reallocation of workers
across firms and industries on the other. It will also provide an analytical
framework and a quantitative assessment of the impact of trade liberalization on
inequality and unemployment, which are of major concern to policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;