* 0920443
* The roles of the AMP-activated kinase in metabolic homeostasis in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Erik Johnson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2012
* USD 330,278.00

Food availability is a dynamic aspect of most environments and places
significant challenges on organisms to maintain constant energy stores. The
consequences of energy shortage include changes in behavior and physiology that
reflect changes in the allocation of energy. Part of the decision process on how
energy is utilized depends upon the actions of the AMP-activated kinase, a
highly-conserved molecule that becomes active during energy shortages. It is
also clear that different cellular populations have differential responses
during energy deprivation, although it is unclear the extent that the AMP-
activated kinase partakes in these processes. This project takes advantage of
the unique molecular and genetic tools available in the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster, to investigate how the AMP-activated kinase regulates behavioral
and physiological changes during starvation conditions. This research will
contribute new information regarding the cellular signals within defined neural
and peripheral tissues that are responsible for generating specific behavioral
and physiological changes to maintain energy homeostasis. The evolutionary
conservation of this particular molecule, as well as the conservation of
behavioral responses to starvation, indicates results of this research will have
broad applications, from pest management to the development of potential novel
therapeutics. In addition to offering insight into the cell-specific roles of
the AMP-activated kinase, this research project will be used as a vehicle to
extend research opportunities to undergraduate students and enhance professional
development of faculty at a primarily undergraduate institution, Francis Marion
University. Lastly, this project will involve the training of graduate students.