* 0920744
* Robust Theoretical Frameworks for Ecological Dynamics Subject to Stoichiometric Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Elser, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 498,940.00

Organisms are composed of chemical elements such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, and phosphorus. Research in the area known as ecological stoichiometry
(ES) has highlighted the ecological importance of the relative abundance of
chemical constituents, known to vary considerably among species and across
trophic levels. ES deals with how the balance of energy and elements affect and
are affected by organisms and their interactions in ecosystems. It has proven to
be an important new lens through which to view and understand ecological
interactions and has gained momentum by explicitly linking the elemental
physiology of organisms to their food web interactions and ecosystem function.
Thus, ES theory covers multiple biological scales and allows, via rigid physical
and chemical constraints, the construction of robust mechanistic and predictive
mathematical models. While biology has a research tradition that is empirical in
nature and often only weakly connected to formal quantitative analyses,
mathematical and theoretical biology on the other hand has had a research agenda
that has often been somewhat distanced from mainstream empirical biology. There
is not enough effort and attention on marrying empirical results with
theoretical findings. The investigators will extend and generalize existing
well-received stoichiometry-based mathematical models to encompass a broader
range of ecological situations, including cell quota dynamics, consumer age- or
size-structures, variable consumer stoichiometry, and delayed nutrient cycling.
Once such a generalized theoretical framework is established, the investigators
will construct and evaluate models inspired by recent empirical discoveries in
ES, including one considering the effects on consumer dynamics of not only
insufficient food nutrient content but also of excess food nutrient content, and
another considering the effects of stoichiometric dietary mixing. Finally, the
investigators will challenge these parameterized stoichiometric models against
observed population growth dynamics qualitatively and quantitatively. In doing
so, the investigators hope to achieve a far-reaching synthesis between model and
experiment in the form of new theoretical applications that may allow for direct
and quantitative predictions of the effects of stoichiometric constraints on
ecosystem processes. The models the investigators will investigate may motivate
challenging but tractable problems in areas of qualitative and computational
studies of nonlinear differential equations and delay differential equations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a broad impact in both local and
global environs. The biological findings of this project may have a number of
practical applications to issues such as eutrophication, biofuel production,
global change, and biodiversity. Its theoretical outcomes will provide a solid
and user-friendly framework to build mathematical models that allow quantitative
prediction of ecological interactions. Moreover, it will find many ready
applications in cancer and other within host diseases dynamics and treatment
modeling since one can view cancer cells and pathogens as invading species in a
host ecosystem. The investigators' collaborative efforts will provide
undergraduate and graduate students of diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds with
first-hand educational experience in cross-disciplinary communication and
exploration. Finally, the investigators are partnering with Arizona State
University's School of Life Sciences award-winning Ask-A-Biologist program to
develop articles and virtual experiments related to this project to enhance
middle- and high school student learning of biological and mathematical
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;