* 0920631
* Collaborative Research: Host specificity strategies in a binary mutualism: physiological and molecular processes and evolutionary relationships
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 359,999.00

All plants and animals, including humans have evolved to live in symbiotic
association with microbes. At the cellular level, complex molecular circuitries
monitor microbial populations and respond to either defend against harmful
microbes, or recruit and maintain beneficial microbes. Current scientific
knowledge is limited with regard to how animals distinguish among different
microbes, enabling them to selectively recruit or restrict microbial
colonization. This research focuses on understanding how bacterial symbionts
interact with and affect their animal hosts, and how these interactions
influence the evolution of inter-species cooperation. Three investigators with
complementary expertise will conduct collaborative research on small soil-
dwelling roundworms (nematodes) that have evolved mutually beneficial
associations with a specific group of bacteria. Together the nematodes and
bacteria form insecticidal complexes effective against a wide range of insect
hosts, from which they derive nutrients for reproduction and dissemination.
These associations involve different species of nematodes and bacteria, and
current research indicates that different combinations have evolved varying
degrees of dependence on each other. Research on these cooperative associations
is poised to yield insights into the processes influencing selectivity and
function of microbial symbioses. To help achieve this potential, this
multidisciplinary research team will investigate for the first time specific
bacterial traits contributing to host fitness in this system. Such knowledge
will be critical to our understanding of the selective pressures influencing the
evolution of specialized versus generalized associations between mutually
benefiting partners. High school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
students at the three collaborating institutions will be trained in the areas of
evolution, molecular biology, nematology, entomology, and bacteriology through
direct scientific inquiry. Thus, this project will provide fundamental insights
into the ubiquitous process by which animals recognize, maintain, and benefit
from their beneficial microbial partners, and will help train future scientists
with the expertise to further apply this knowledge.

