* 0920127
* RIG BP: Functional Significance of a Novel Protein Interactor of TRPML2 Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Math Cuajungco, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2012
* USD 199,925.00

Intellectual merits. Our physical senses are constantly bombarded with
environmental signals. Each cell in our body translates these sensations so that
we can perceive and interpret their meanings such as seeing the blue sky,
smelling the blooms in Spring, tasting our favorite meal, hearing the sound of
wind, and feeling temperature or pain that warns us of impending danger. The
Transient Receptor Potential Mucolipin (TRPML) protein family plays critical
roles in communicating environmental signals inside cells. The TRPML proteins
consist of three members, and are strictly regulated by other proteins that
physically interact with them and control their cellular activity. Two candidate
protein partners for one of the three TRPML proteins, named TRPML2, were
identified in this laboratory. This project will confirm the nature of the
interaction of these proteins. Specifically, the goal is to verify whether they
physically bind to TRPML2 and, if so, to map the protein domains that are
necessary for the interaction. The research will show if TRPML2 and its binding
partners are within the same location inside the cell. Finally, this research
will identify the specific role that these interaction partners play in terms of
TRPML2 activity and cellular function. This research will fill the current gaps
in knowledge regarding the biological function of
TRPML2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project will introduce
graduate and undergraduate students from minority and under-represented groups
to the scientific method, and to foster their interests in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). The project will contribute to the existing
efforts by the California State University Fullerton's Biological Science
Department and the principal investigator to actively recruit students through
existing NSF-, NIH-, and HHMI-supported minority student research programs. It
will serve as a platform to continue promoting scientific curiosity and research
interests among students through a research mentoring or summer research
internship program. Through the PI's initiative to establish community outreach
activities with local high schools and nearby community colleges, the project
will open doors for talented students from these schools, who otherwise would
not have an opportunity to participate in summer research activities. Research
participants will be strongly encouraged to present their accomplishments to
their peers in a form of seminars or poster presentations within the department,
as well as at local and national meetings. Such programs will not only
significantly enhance research participation and scientific literacy, but will
also promote STEM careers among minority and under-represented groups at
California State University Fullerton. Overall, the project and research
activities of the project will contribute to the advancement of a diverse group
of young scientists -- an expected outcome that will undoubtedly benefit the
local community, society, and future generations.