* 0920199
* Multifinality Without Awareness: Implicit Value Maximizing in Dynamic Goal Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Arie Kruglanski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 400,500.00

Psychological theories about motivation often assume that people act so as to
obtain the best outcomes from their choices, or the highest (subjectively
determined) value. That is, people behave in ways that they believe will bring
about the desired results. It is also assumed that individuals are consciously
aware of the goals they are pursuing, and, to the extent that people had several
goals at once, these goals would conflict with each other, leading people to
relinquish some of the goals on behalf of the others. Dr. Arie Kruglanski of the
University of Maryland and colleagues propose research that challenges these
assumptions and explore the concept of "multifinality" in which a single means
or behavior may simultaneously serve multiple goals, even outside awareness. The
researchers propose that: (1) while individuals are busy pursuing various
explicit objectives, new goals are often activated by features of the
environment and by the individuals' dynamic stream of associations, (2) such
newly activated goals may affect individuals' behavior outside the actors'
conscious awareness, (3) in these conditions, individuals may seek activities
that afford the attainment of implicit goals without sacrificing the explicitly
pursued objectives. Finding such multifinal activities can be considered
"rational" as it maximizes subjective value by simultaneously attaining multiple
desirable ends. The proposed work examines the conditions under which the search
for multifinal activities will take place, and the potential psychological
tradeoffs involved in pursuing multifinal activities. It also examines how
individuals' search for multifinal activities is influenced by the difference in
value between the explicit and implicit goals, and how sensitive people are to
the degree to which different activities serve better the explicit versus the
implicit goals. Overall, this work promises to contribute to the general
understanding of the role of unconscious motivation that drives human action; it
also offers important insights into the psychology of choice and self-control,
including topics like addiction, violent behavior, and obesity.