* 0920370
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expanding Cultivation, Land, and Livelihood Transformations in Southern Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2010,02/29/2012
* Karen Rignall, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 5,606.00

University of Kentucky doctoral student, Karen E. Rignall, under the direction
of Dr. Lisa Cliggett, will examine the effects of livelihood transformations on
land use in arid regions. In arid and semi-arid areas around the world, lands
historically used for grazing are increasingly being converted into farmland.
This has important implications for the environmental sustainability of arid-
lands agriculture, the economic viability of rural livelihoods, and the ways
that inequality shapes people's access to productive resources. The research
will specifically examine how farmers acquire rangelands for cultivation and how
their strategies affect their own livelihood security and the security of other
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will take place in a southern
Moroccan oasis that lies between the Atlas mountains and the Saharan desert. The
research design will focus on case studies of household livelihood strategies in
order to shed light on how changes in livelihoods relate to changes in the way
people acquire, exchange, and use land. In particular, it will trace the impact
of livelihood diversification -- especially the rise of labor migration -- on
the differential abilities of households to acquire rangelands for conversion
into farmland. A series of semi-structured interviews with a larger sample will
test the broader applicability of the case studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will contribute social scientific understanding of how expanded
cultivation relates to broader processes of agrarian change. An ethnographic
focus on the cultural context of land tenure, social stratification, and
changing livelihood strategies will shed light on how expanded cultivation may
create new forms of vulnerability among households with reduced access to land.
This will have implications for scholarship, policy, and development planning
that relate rural livelihoods to land tenure and land use. The research will
also contribute to the training of a social scientist.