* 0920052
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: In the Aftermath of Displacement: Producing Vulnerable Livelihoods and Food Insecurity on Mount Elgon, Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,920.00

University of Georgia doctoral student, David K. Himmelfarb, under the direction
of Dr. J. Peter Brosius, will examine the long-term effects of involuntary
displacement on food security. Governments around the world enact projects that
displace millions of people each year. It is important for both policy and
social science theory to investigate the social dynamics of how men and women
construct new livelihoods and lifeways in the face of displacement and
resettlement. This research will address two overarching questions: (1) Does
forced displacement establish relationships of inequality that constrain
displaced people's access to resources and livelihood opportunities? (2) If so,
do these inequalities produce vulnerability to seasonal food shortages?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in the Benet Resettlement
Area, located on the margins of Mt. Elgon National Park, Uganda. Using a
comparative research design and a combination of qualitative ethnographic data
and quantitative assessments of food insecurity, the researcher will compare
livelihood activities, access to resources, relative food security, and
strategies for coping with food insecurity in displaced and non-displaced
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to social
science theory about human social resilience and adaptation by adding a long-
term perspective to the study of displacement. The project also will directly
aid policy planners in more effectively addressing the impacts of previous
policies and designing more socially and economically sensitive resettlement
initiatives in the future. The research also will contribute to the education of
a social scientist.