* 0920903
* Asymptotic Analysis of Panel Regression Models with Unobserved Interactive Individual Effects
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Hyungsik Moon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2011
* USD 67,786.00

This project studies a panel regression model where the individual fixed effects
interact with common time specific effects. This model is sometimes known as a
factor model. The main objective is to establish the general asymptotic theory
of the (Gaussian) quasi maximum likelihood estimator and the three classical
tests (Wald, likelihood ratio, and Lagrangian multiplier tests) of the panel
regression model with interactive fixed effects when both the cross sectional
dimension and the time dimension are large. This model will then be extended to
the case where the dimension of the factors is not known. The project also
investigates the dynamic panel regression model with factors when the dynamic
coefficient is close to one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The factor
model studied in the project has a wide range of economic applications. These
include arbitrage asset pricing models in finance, wage equations in labor
economics, and global economy models in international economics. While the
proposed research does not directly address these empirical applications, we
believe that the proposed research provides new and innovative econometric
techniques that can be used by empirical researchers in these areas. The results
will be disseminated through publications in high quality journals that are
widely read in the profession. The investigator also plans to make these
estimation and inference procedures available on his internet web-pages through
well documented MATLAB programs. The programs can then be used by other
researchers who want to apply these methods.&lt;br/&gt;