* 0920293
* RBSE-U:  The Implementation of Research-Based Science Education in Astronomy for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Travis Rector, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2013
* USD 474,207.00

Physics (13)

The goal of this and a previously funded project at the University of Alaska-
Anchorage (UA-A) and Indiana University (IU) is to replace the standard
introductory-level astronomy curriculum with one that is research-based.
Research-based science educational (RBSE) curricular materials have three goals:
1) to teach that science is a process of discovery, not just a body of
knowledge, 2) to increase positive attitudes towards science and STEM careers,
by giving students an opportunity to do authentic research, and 3) to develop
important skills such as critical thinking, teamwork and goal-driven work skills
that are important in any career path. RBSE naturally integrates research and
education as "authentic" research data becomes the driving force behind
instruction. In this particular project, students are analyzing data from the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope and the National Virtual Observatory, as well as
data that faculty participating in the project might have developed from their
own research endeavors. After developing materials and piloting the program at
UA-A and IU over the past three years, the project enables the implementation
and effectiveness assessment of RBSE curricula at four additional academic
institutions. Collectively this represents a widely-divergent student population
and widely-varying classroom environments. In addition to UA-A and IU,
institutions participating in the current study include: University of
Washington, Chicago State University, Pima Community College, and Truckee
Meadows Community college.