* 0920611
* Evolutionary Studies of the Heat Shock Response and Thermotolerance in Boechera:  Transcriptomics, Physiology and Gene Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Elizabeth Waters, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2013
* USD 583,415.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." This project will study four species of Rockcress plants
(Brassicaceae family, Boechera genus). These plants are native to California.
Two of these species live in deserts and two are found either on the coast or in
the mountains. These plants differ in their ability to survive and grow when
exposed to high temperatures. Plants cannot move away or avoid high temperature
stress and therefore, the ability to survive high temperature stress is a very
important trait for plants. While heat stress has been studied in some crop
species very little is known of the differences in tolerance to stress among
wild plant species. This project will address this important but yet under
studied question. In order to obtain a full understanding of how Rockcress
plants respond to high temperature stress studies will be conducted that will
examine rates of photosynthesis, and overall plant growth. In addition, the gene
expression patterns of both the heat-tolerant and heat-sensitive plants will be
examined both before and after stress. By examining the patterns of gene
expression among species that respond differently to stress the researchers will
identify novel genes and proteins that provide tolerance to heat stress. In
addition to deepening our understanding of how wild plants adapt to stress this
research will also provide information that will assist in understanding how
crop species may acquire tolerance to heat stress. During this project a wide
range of students (both undergraduate and graduate) will be trained in modern
scientific methods. Preference will be given to students that are the first in
their families to attain a university degree and/or are members of groups that
are under-represented in science. In addition, a post-doctoral fellow will be
trained during this project and will be provided with mentoring to facilitate
his or her independent research career.