* 0920600
* Collaborative Research:   Metabolomic Profiling and Functions of Oxidized Membrane Lipids in Plant Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jyoti Shah, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2014
* USD 406,452.00

Metabolomic profiling and functions of oxidized membrane lipids in plant stress
responses

Ruth Welti and Gary L. Gadbury, Kansas State University Jyoti Shah, University
of North Texas Xuemin (Sam) Wang, University of Missouri, St. Louis and Danforth
Plant Science Center

Increasing evidence indicates that environmental stresses, such as freezing,
high salinity, and pathogen infection, lead to oxidative modification of plant
membrane lipids to produce "ox-lipids". In contrast to oxylipins, such as
jasmonic acid and its derivatives, whose significance in plant growth and
defense against stress has been well documented, little is known about the
functions of ox-lipids in plants. Ox-lipids may function as mediators signaling
stress responses, they may represent damage that could serve as a protective
buffer against oxidative damage elsewhere in the cell, or they may be long-term
modifications that might function as stress "memory". Thus, ox-lipids have the
potential to be essential mediators of plant response to the environment. The
goals of the research project are to understand the role of ox-lipids in plant
responses to biotic and abiotic stresses and to determine the function of
members of two enzyme families, lipoxygenases and acyl hydrolases, which are
likely to play important roles in the metabolism of oxidized lipids. The project
will test the hypotheses that patterns of ox-lipids are fingerprints of
individual stresses and that production and/or removal of specific ox-lipids by
lipoxygenases and acyl hydrolases contributes to plant adaptation to stress.
Under freezing and high salinity stress (abiotic stress) and infection by a
fungal pathogen, Botrytis cinerea, and a bacterial pathogen, Pseudomonas
syringae (biotic stresses), the stress-response phenotype and production of ox-
lipids by wild-type plants and lipoxygenase- and acyl hydrolase-deficient mutant
plants will be documented. The data will shed light on the roles of
lipoxygenases and acyl hydrolases in stress responses and in production of
specific ox-lipid patterns. Analysis of the stress-phenotype and ox-lipid
profiles will lead to identification of ox-lipids that are candidates for
mediating plant stress responses. The function of candidate lipid mediators will
be tested by lipid analysis and phenotypic analysis of plants overexpressing
enzymes that produce the candidate lipids and by supplementing mutant and wild-
type plants with the putative mediators. The results have the potential to fill
critical gaps in understanding of how lipid metabolic enzymes, cellular lipids,
and their metabolites interact to influence plant performance.

Broader Impacts: Carrying out the proposed work will provide training for
multiple students and postdoctoral trainees at four institutions and bring
current knowledge of metabolic profiling, functional genomics, and stress
biology to the classroom. It will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research through the McNair Program at the University of North Texas,
the Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program at Kansas State
University, the Des Lee Collaborative Scholarships at the University of
Missouri, and the Danforth Plant Science Center NSF REU-Site program, which has
achieved over 30% participation by underrepresented minority groups in the past
several years. It will involve high school students in the research through the
Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science at University of North Texas and
through the Students and Teachers as Research Scientists (STARS) program in St.
Louis. Organization of mass spectral data on plant lipids, and particularly on
stress-induced lipids, into a web-accessible database will provide a foundation
for further investigation of the structure and function of lipids, and
particularly novel lipids, and will facilitate integration of lipidomics data
with other metabolomics and functional genomics data. Analytical capabilities
developed in this work will become enabling technologies available to
researchers worldwide via the Kansas Lipidomics Research Center. This work also
will provide insight into the identity of metabolic steps with potential to
enhance stress tolerance in plants and improve agricultural productivity and
quality.