* 0920870
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Accessing the State--Local Governance & Public Goods in India
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Richard Locke, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,924.00

Clean drinking water, good roads, health care, and education: these are among
the public goods and services required to fulfill basic human needs and foster
development. Such goods and services are not only integral to human welfare, but
are also important indicators of governmental and institutional performance. Yet
so-called "public" goods are rarely purely public or equally available to all.
Rather they are the subjects of struggle among different groups laying claim to
limited public resources. This project examines the variation in access to
publicly provided goods and services at the local level in rural India and, in
particular, the different paths poor people and communities pursue to obtain
such goods. Why do some villages enjoy better roads and water supply or easier
access to health and education facilities than other, similar villages? Within
villages, why are some groups and individuals more likely than others to receive
services? Why, in other words, are some places and people better able to access
and make effective demands upon the state?

India, the world's largest democracy and a decentralized system, is an ideal
setting in which to explore these questions. In India, as in other diverse
societies, access to public resources is often drawn along class, caste, ethnic,
religious, and gender lines, and may be best understood as a matter of who can
extract them from the political system. The politics of public goods in India
largely take place at the local level, where access is mediated by a wide range
of institutions, both formal and informal, public and private. Elected village
councils co-exist with a wide range of informal and non-state institutions
including "traditional" village councils, caste associations, self-help groups,
business associations, and non-governmental organizations. Together these formal
and informal institutions comprise a complex institutional and governance
environment. How do people navigate this landscape to access the state and
public resources?

To answer this question, this project uses mixed methods, applying both
statistical and case study analysis in villages across four Indian states:
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh in the north, and Tamil Nadu and Kerala in the
south. These states reflect important regional differences between northern
(less developed) and southern (more developed) India, as well as state-level
differences in the depth of fiscal and political decentralization. To allow for
both theory building and testing, village and household level surveys and case
studies including semi-structured interviews and focus group discussions are
conducted.

This dissertation provides insight into the optimal design of programs to
improve service delivery by capturing a bottom-up view of how public goods reach
the people who need them and the various channels through which people seek and
access state services. A central goal is to develop a broader conceptualization
of local governance that considers the interaction of both formal and informal
institutions in structuring access to public resources. The findings of this
project will be of interest in India and beyond, particularly in the developing
world, where the provision of essential public goods remains a major challenge
to development and where formal state agencies co-exist with myriad informal
governance structures. Finally, the project will engage scholars and colleagues
in India in developing and disseminating the findings of the study, and will
offer training opportunities to local students in carrying out the fieldwork.