* 0920802
* CAA:   Molecular Basis for the Cholinergic Modulation of Auditory Hair Cell Properties
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Ana Vazquez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2014
* USD 463,361.00

In the mammalian inner ear a subpopulation of the sensory cells receive
inhibitory inputs from the brain. Neuronal feedback pathways such as this one,
from the brain to the sensory organ are called efferent or descending pathways.
Similar neural feedback modulates sensory perception also in the lateral lines
of fish and in the inner ears of reptiles, amphibians, and birds. The fact that
this efferent inhibition has been conserved across animal classes suggests the
fundamental importance of this process. This auditory efferent pathway
contributes to the exquisite sensitivity and frequency selectivity of our sense
of hearing by modulating the excitability of the sensory cells. However, the
mechanisms underlying this modulatory feedback are not understood at the
molecular level. It is known that the acetylcholine receptors alpha 9 and alpha
10 and the small conductance Ca2+-activated potassium channels SK2, which are
often co-localized with calcium sources are required molecular components in the
mammalian auditory sensory cells. This project applies a molecular biology
strategy to identify proteins involved in the selective localization,
clustering, and functional associations between these ion channels.
Additionally, fluorescently tagged chimeras of the SK2 and of the alpha 9/ alpha
10 receptors have been constructed to apply state-of-the-art optical techniques
to the investigation of the biochemical basis of their functional interactions.
The findings will advance our understanding of the biochemical principles
underlying sensory perception including protein-protein interactions between the
ion channels involved. While completing this project graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows will be trained to utilize powerful electrophysiological and
optical research techniques as well as biochemical and molecular techniques.
These are essential techniques in neuroscience and other biological research
frontiers for which a detailed understanding of macromolecular complexes
harboring ion channels in excitable cells is fundamental.