* 0920437
* 2009 CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic mRNA Processing, August 18 - August 22, 2009
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference on Eukaryotic mRNA
Processing will convene scientists studying various aspects of mRNA processing,
transport, RNA interference, informatics and turn-over. Major advances have
recently been made in these areas, and the proposed conference will be a timely
event for discussing the latest unpublished results and exchanging ideas,
thereby fostering new developments in this rapidly moving field. The proposed
2009 conference will be held on August 18-22 and is the seventh meeting of a
conference that is held every other year at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. The
most recent meeting was held on August 22-26, 2007, and attracted 339 scientists
internationally, who are actively investigating various aspects of messenger RNA
maturation in eukaryotic cells, using genetic, biochemical, molecular, and cell
biological approaches. As in the previous meetings, a major focus will be on
nuclear events in mRNA maturation, particularly mRNA splicing and
polyadenylation, but the scope will now be expanded to encompass both the impact
of the history of an mRNA on its ultimate biological fate, the emerging fields
of RNA interference and microRNA function as well as the application of
informatics to the analysis of RNA processing. The meeting format will consist
of eight plenary sessions and three poster sessions. The main topics covered
will include: RNA transport and localization; Splicing mechanisms; 3' End
maturation; The coupling of RNA processing to transcription; The regulation of
alternative RNA processing patterns I and II; RNA decay and RNA surveillance;
and Global and genome wide approaches to mRNA Processing
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
provide excellent opportunities for sharing latest developments in the field of
mRNA processing and for building the professional networks that are essential to
scientific success. Speakers in the plenary sessions will be selected on the
basis of the submitted abstracts, which will encourage active participation by
junior scientists. In addition, support will be provided for minority and
graduate student scientists.