* 0920134
* Protein Recruitment Processes in Asymmetric Bilayer Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Christoph Naumann, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2013
* USD 442,504.00

Intellectual merit. Lipids and proteins in the plasma membrane are often
distributed in widely differing patches of close spatial correlation, as
exemplified by the well known association of particular membrane proteins to
lipid patches enriched in sphingolipids and cholesterol, also known as lipid
rafts. Unfortunately, many of the underlying molecular processes related to
functionally important protein-lipid interactions remain unclear due to the
challenges involved in characterizing functional lipid heterogeneities in plasma
membranes. To overcome these difficulties, the current project is investigating
specific aspects of protein-lipid interactions by looking at raft-mimicking
liquid-ordered/liquid-disordered phase separations which span bilayers and which
only exist in one leaflet of a bilayer, and determining how inter-monolayer
coupling affects the sequestration and functionality of select membrane
proteins. To achieve this objective, the project uses polymer-tethered lipid
bilayers of well-defined lipid compositions. The research includes three
specific aims, which are: (1) to explore the packing density of lipids in both
monolayer and bilayer-spanning domains; (2) to study the sequestering of select
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins and membrane-spanning proteins in
the presence of both monolayer and bilayer-spanning lipid domains; and (3) to
investigate the recruitment of these proteins in the presence of their native
ligands. The packing density of lipids will be determined by fluorescence
intensity and anisotropy analysis using a highly sensitive confocal fluorescence
detection system. The behavior of membrane proteins will be monitored with
single molecule sensitivity using confocal fluorescence intensity analysis and
wide-field single molecule fluorescence microscopy. By enabling the analysis of
molecular processes at the single protein level, the approach is well suited to
explore several of the poorly understood processes of protein-lipid interplay in
plasma membranes. For example, the impact of transbilayer coupling of lipids on
the sequestering of membrane proteins in lipid rafts will be elucidated.
Furthermore, new perspectives about the roles of asymmetric bilayer composition
and inter-leaflet coupling of raft domains on protein-protein interactions and
protein recruitment processes should be anticipated as an outcome of these
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The project provides a
powerful experimental and training tool to study molecular processes of a wide
variety of membrane proteins in well-defined environments. The interdisciplinary
character of the research project will provide excellent training for graduate
and undergraduate students, thus preparing them for professional careers in
emerging areas at the interface between traditional sciences, materials science,
engineering, and medicine. Being located at an urban campus with a significant
minority student population, the principal investigator will remain committed to
minority student education and will expand outreach activities at the high-
school level (internships, high-school science/math summer camp) and through the
institutional Nanoscale Imaging Center. Research results will also be integrated
into several specific undergraduate- and graduate-level courses (physical
chemistry, biomimetic chemistry, and biomaterials science).