* 0920201
* Collaborative Research: Research, Dissemination, and Faculty Development of Inquiry-Based Learning (IBL) Methods in the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2013
* John Boller, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 11/30/2013
* USD 90,000.00

Displine: 21&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inquiry-based learning has been a prominent
component in education since the days of&lt;br/&gt;Socrates. In more recent
times, one of the strongest proponents of this type of learning has been R.L.
Moore. In his approach, Moore provided the students with a bare outline of the
essentials of some mathematical topic, and the students were required to
discover the major results in this topic using only their own creative thoughts.
The students, having arrived at proofs of the main facts, would then present the
results to their classmates and to Moore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present-day
Inquiry-Based Learning (IBL) includes less strict versions of Moore's
techniques, which are in direct contrast to the traditional lecture method of
instruction. The activities of this project are designed to accomplish several
major goals related to IBL. Among these are the necessity to modify the teaching
and learning of mathematics in such a way that students gain a deep
understanding of the subject matter through their own participation in its
discovery and presentation. The method of IBL changes the focus in the classroom
from the instructor to the students. It has been found that students in IBL
classes, in comparison with their peers in regular mathematics classes, have a
deeper knowledge of mathematical structures and a stronger retention of
mathematical concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Included in this project is
dissemination of IBL mathematics teaching through three summer workshops in
different geographical locations. Participants from each workshop come from
colleges and universities in the general geographical location of the host
institution. The workshops expose the participants to the various components of
effective IBL teaching of mathematics. The workshops include model classes,
sessions on the creation of materials, film viewings, and presentations by the
participants themselves in an IBL setting. As part of the follow-up, current IBL
practitioners from the four participating universities establish regular
contacts with the workshop participants, including visits to the individual
departments. Through this follow-up, additional advice and counsel is provided
by those who have already experienced success in IBL teaching. Detailed
assessment of the project activities takes place at every stage so that each
facet of the planned activities is subjected to careful scrutiny. This includes
assessment of the effectiveness of IBL itself as well as the ability of the
workshops to communicate to faculty the methods for conducting an IBL class. The
ultimate goal is to improve mathematics education by having every undergraduate
student experience at least one IBL mathematics class during her or his college
career.