* 0920287
* Defining the molecular dialogue underlying stomatal infection during fungal pathogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Burton Bluhm, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Fungal diseases of crops are economically and environmentally costly because
they reduce yields and require large-scale applications of fungicides. Many
pathogenic fungi enter leaves through stomata, which are pores on leaf surfaces
involved in gas exchange and water movement through the plant. The mechanisms
through which fungal pathogens sense and penetrate stomata are complex and
poorly understood. This project focuses on defining the biochemical and genetic
basis of stomatal infection in Cercospora zeae-maydis, a widespread and
devastating pathogen of corn. To accomplish this goal, fungal genes involved in
infection will be identified, and their functions will be determined.
Additionally, plant-derived signals that influence stomatal infection will be
identified. This information will provide a clearer understanding of stomatal
infection by fungi in general, and a detailed model of how C. zeae-maydis
infects corn. By clarifying an often-overlooked component of plant disease, this
work will assist efforts to develop new sources of durable resistance against
agronomically important plant diseases. Integral to the project is the training
of post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students, with particular emphasis
placed on broadening the participation of groups currently underrepresented in
science. Additionally, the investigators are partnering with the Arkansas
Cooperative Extension Service to distribute findings from this project through
electronic and print media, regional and national presentations, and direct
consultations with stakeholders.