* 0920572
* RIG:   Isolation, Characterization and Evolution of Fluorescent Proteins from Indo-Pacific and Caribbean Marine Organisms
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* David Gruber, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 01/31/2013
* USD 199,263.00

Intellectual Merit Green fluorescent protein (GFP) from Aequoria victoria has
revolutionized cellular bioimaging studies. GFP has been used in viruses,
bacteria, cultured cells, yeast, transgenic plants, and transgenic animals from
worms to mice. The utility of GFP has stimulated numerous mutational studies to
enhance the usefulness of GFP as well as attempts to explore fluorescent
proteins from species other than Aequoria. The available repertoire of
fluorescent proteins remains limited for many bioimaging applications. By far,
the greatest diversity of marine life harboring fluorescence exists on the Great
Barrier Reef, located off the eastern coast of Australia. The Principal
Investigator (PI) on this project recently co-led an expedition to collect
fluorescent marine specimens from this region of the world. About a hundred
coral and anemone specimens have been collected, characterized, and are now in
cryogenic storage at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) in New York
City. The PI will establish a research program in this area at City University
of New York (CUNY), Baruch College, and undertake cloning and characterizing
novel fluorescent proteins for use as tools in bioimaging research. The research
objectives are to: (1) Construct and screen cDNA libraries for novel fluorescent
proteins from marine organisms collected from Australia's Great Barrier Reef and
to embark on a cross-comparison study on Little Cayman Island, one of the
Caribbean's most pristine coral reefs; and (2) Characterize cloned, recombinant
fluorescent proteins with respect to: (a) spectral properties; (b) chemical
stability; and (c) expression in bacteria cells. There is currently a great need
for such new tools, and it is expected that the new fluorescent proteins
characterized from this project will find wide applicability in many branches of
medicine and biology.

Broader Impact This project aims to train and inspire undergraduate students
from CUNY Baruch College (frequently recognized as the most ethnically diverse
campus in the nation) to embark on careers in biology. The student body reflects
the diversity of NYC, and over 50% of the students are the first in their family
to attend college. The PI will intensively recruit and mentor minority students
that will gain experience in both field- and laboratory-based ecological
research. Partnerships will be formed among Baruch College, The American Museum
of Natural History, Yale University and Brown University in which minority
undergraduate students will be exposed to a diversity of biological research and
will have the opportunity for additional mentoring in the laboratories of
collaborators. As a mentor to the Baruch BioMedical Society, the PI will draw
upon students from his biology classes as well as the Society and incorporate
findings into his teaching curriculum. In addition to his public outreach as a
science journalist, the PI also plans to publish findings on AMNH's Science
Bulletins website. Science Bulletins is an innovative online and exhibition
program that offers the public a window into the excitement of scientific
discovery. It is aimed toward 6th through 12th grade students and their
teachers, and had a measured audience of over 250,000 unique visitors last year.