* 0920793
* Androgens, Estrogens and the Active Nature of Feminine Reproductive Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Stephen Glickman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2013
* USD 854,753.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to contemporary
understanding, the only route to production of male reproductive structures, in
humans and other mammals, involves the action of male hormones (androgens)
during fetal life. In the absence of androgens, female reproductive structures
develop. However, within this framework, female reproductive development is
often neglected and characterized as a "default" condition. Female spotted
hyenas are the most highly "masculinized" of all female mammals, with external
reproductive structures that are, superficially, identical to those of the male.
This experiment-of-nature provides an opportunity to challenge our understanding
of reproductive development. If the hypothesis cited above is correct, the
"masculine" reproductive anatomy of the female spotted hyena must have been
produced by naturally circulating male hormones in a female mammal. Results to
date suggest that, contrary to contemporary understanding, "masculinization" of
the female spotted hyena is produced by an androgen-independent mechanism.
Moreover, preliminary data indicate that traditional female hormones (i.e.,
estrogens) play a role in the normal development of external reproductive
structures in both female and male hyenas, and in laboratory mice. During the
tenure of this award we will systematically explore the interactions between
estrogens and androgens that result in formation and development of external
reproductive structures. This research will provide the first information on the
role of estrogens on such development, and emphasize the active nature of
reproductive development in all female mammals. Our prior research has been
cited in the human medical literature, and our new results will have
implications for understanding reproductive abnormalities in human beings. In
addition, the existence of the hyena colony provides a valuable training
resource for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from U.C. Berkeley, and
other universities in this country.&lt;br/&gt;