* 0920741
* MSB Physiology and Genetics of Globally Significant Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* David Stahl, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2015
* USD 702,391.00

Studies of the marine archaeon (Nitrosopumilus maritmus) by investigators at the
University of Washington established that ammonia-oxidizing Archaea (AOA) are
capable of growing under the extreme nutrient limited conditions characteristic
of the open ocean, using ammonia and carbon dioxide as sole sources of energy
and carbon. This remarkable feature and the high abundance of AOA among marine
bacterioplankton together suggest they play a fundamental role in marine
nitrogen and carbon cycles, and also compete with marine phototrophs for
ammonia. In addition to their remarkable affinity for ammonia, the genome
sequence of N. maritimus points to a capacity to make novel phosphorous
compounds that may contribute to methane release from marine surface waters, the
use of a copper-based respiratory system that could provide ecological advantage
in iron-limited ocean waters, a novel mechanism of cell division, and a high
adaptive capability conferred by an unusually large number of transcription
factors. These investigators will collaborate with an international group of
scientists to determine how AOA are able to grow on ammonia at vanishing low
concentrations, maintain copper homeostasis, respond to changing environmental
conditions, and possibly contribute to atmospherically significant gases.

Broader Impacts. Marine systems are increasingly impacted by acidification and
by atmospheric inputs of reactive nitrogen. Since these changes greatly alter
nitrogen available to microorganisms, the research will advance understanding of
the effects that acidification and anthropogenic nitrogen inputs are having on
major ocean processes. The project will train one graduate student in
environmental science and 1-3 undergraduates through mentoring by senior
laboratory personnel. A postdoctoral associate will receive additional
professional training through participation in the University of Washington
Postdoctoral Association (UWPA), offering workshops in grant writing, teaching,
publishing, oral communication, directing a laboratory, time management,
crafting personal professional development plans, and faculty applications and
hiring. The project will also serve as a vehicle for more general science
education, taking advantage of existing outreach programs to promote better
understanding by high school teachers and students of the critical role of
microorganisms in global nutrient cycles.