* 0920520
* Mesodermal patterning modules in the evolution and development of the tetrapod pectoral region
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Ann Burke, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2015
* USD 395,854.00

Three primary tissues present in early embryos, endoderm, ectoderm and mesoderm,
ultimately develop into all body parts of vertebrates. Shortly after initial
mesoderm is established, two distinct populations of mesoderm separate,
providing the cells for axial and appendicular mesodermal tissues. Extensive
integration occurs between cells within these two forms of mesoderm to ensure
that the musculoskeletal system forms correctly. Despite recent advances in
knowledge of the genetics of muscle and bone formation in the limbs and the
vertebral axis, how integration of the axial and appendicular mesodermal tissues
is regulated is still largely unknown. The research proposed here focuses on the
changes that occur at the mesodermal boundary between axial and appendicular
systems where musculoskeletal integration is achieved. The proposal focuses on
the pectoral region where formation of the forelimb is functionally linked to
the axial system. The interface between somitic and lateral plate mesoderm is
called the lateral somitic frontier. It is proposed that genetic patterning
information is regulated independently in distinct mesodermal domains,
distinguishing the two domains as evolutionarily conserved modules in
developmental. Transgenic mice will be used to eliminate specific patterning
genes in these distinct mesodermal domains independently. Transplant surgeries
in amphibian embryos will map the frontier in amphibians to determine the
evolutionary basal state for the tetrapod lineage. This research will have broad
impact on the developmental biology community by providing detailed embryonic
context in which to study the function of molecular factors involved in
patterning the mesoderm. The data generated will be used in collaboration to
build, test, and increase the power of new biological ontologies now under
construction (e.g. AmphibAnat) and be available to the greater community. This
work will also provide broad based training experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students including hands on experience in embryology, molecular
biology, and computer assisted 3D modeling.