* 0920288
* Mechanism of Peptide Amidation: Structural and Kinetic Studies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* L. Mario Amzel, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,156,390.00

Intellectual Merit: Amidated peptides are part of signaling systems in species
ranging from Aplysia to humans. In all cases, glycine-extended intermediates are
transformed into active amidated hormones by oxidative cleavage of the glycine
N-C(alpha) bond by a bifunctional enzyme, peptidylglycine alpha-amidating
monooxygenase (PAM). The PAM gene encodes two domains that catalyze the two
sequential reactions producing amidated peptide; alpha-hydroxylation of the
glycine (PHM) and excision of the C(alpha)-N bond to give the alpha-amidated
peptide plus glyoxylate (PAL). PHM contains two redox active copper atoms that,
after reduction by ascorbate, catalyze the reduction of molecular oxygen for
hydroxylation of glycine-extended substrates. PAL is a zinc-containing lyase
that cleaves the C(alpha)-N bond after hydroxylation. As part of previous work,
the structures of reduced and oxidized PHM, alone and with substrates, were
determined. Structural and kinetic characterization of small molecule ligands of
PHM as well as selected mutants were also accomplished. In a very important
development, the determination of the structure of the catalytic core of PAL was
accomplished. This led to the determination of the structure of PAL in complex
with a non-peptidic substrate (hyrdoxyhippuric acid), proposing a mechanism, and
the design and validation of a PAL inhibitor. In addition, kinetic studies of
selected mutants were carried out to confirm the mechanism.

This project involves further characterization of the PHM copper centers using
single crystal and solution XAFS, and identification of the species that
abstracts the substrate hydrogen in PHM. Studies on PAL are centered on
addressing additional features of its mechanism by studying mutants, the effects
of reductants, and the kinetics of a new inhibitor. The structure of PAM will be
determined as a complete construct containing the PHM and PAL domains and as a
complex of the two domains. The interaction between the two domains will be
characterized using solution methods. The project will also explore whether the
two-step reaction takes place with release of the PHM product or if it occurs
processively by an internal transfer from PHM to PAL. The studies will advance
understanding of peptide amidation which is a fundamental step in signal
transduction. They will, in addition, provide an outstanding paradigm for
understanding long range electron transfers as well as processivity in two step
enzymes. Moreover, PHM is homologous in sequence and mechanism to dopamine beta-
monooxygenase -the enzyme that converts dopamine to norepinephrine, a key
neurotransmitter.

Broader Impact The PI is actively involved in bringing the excitement of science
to high school students, undergraduates and underrepresented minorities. He
teaches classes in two undergraduate courses, and has collaborations with two
laboratories at undergraduate teaching institutions. He participated in a broad
range of outreach activities that have been directed at members of
underrepresented groups. The laboratory of the PI participates annually in the
Department-wide Science Day organized in conjunction with the Baltimore City
school system for students from the inner city. The PI has a strong presence in
the Hispanic scientific community and in Latin American science. He is a
founding member and past president of the Society for Latin American
Biophysicists (SOBLA). The PI currently trains four minority students in his
laboratory.