* 0920218
* Effect of a remarkably variable genome structure on meiotic recombination in maize
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Hugo Dooner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2013
* USD 540,000.00

Intellectual merit. Homologous meiotic recombination is an important process
because it creates new genotypes by shuffling chromosomal segments that
otherwise would be inherited as blocks and promotes fertility by ensuring that
chromosomes segregate properly. Maize is the species with the most diverse
genome structure known. In many chromosomal segments, different inbred lines
share just the gene sequences, but none of the surrounding repetitive DNA. The
latter consists of transposons, retrotransposons making up more than half of the
genome. This high level of structural variation affects recombination and,
possibly, gene expression. This project aims to analyze those effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic system used is the bz locus, which has unique
advantages for studies of recombination. Previous work showed that genome
structural variation affects the frequency and distribution of recombination
events in maize in multiple ways. Although recombination is limited to genes,
its distribution is highly nonuniform: some genes are hotspots and others are
coldspots. Genes in Helitron transposons fail to recombine. Whether a sequence
recombines or not depends on its C-methylation status and transposons are highly
methylated. The presence of a retrotransposon block in only one homolog, a
common situation in hybrids, inhibits recombination in adjacent genes.
Recombination not associated with crossing over, called gene conversion, shows a
strong polarity: bz mutations at both ends of the gene convert (i.e., recombine)
more frequently than central ones. This project will continue to exploit the
power of genetic analysis in the bz region. It will elucidate the pattern of
recombination within a plant gene and will use recombination as a tool in the
genetic analysis of gene expression differences. Its specific objectives are to:
1. Test whether genomic structural variation (+/- intergenic retrotransposons)
impacts the frequency and polarity of conversion in an adjacent gene. 2.
Determine if the stretch of DNA transferred from one homolog to another
(conversion tract) at the bz 5 high conversion end extends into the adjacent
gene. 3. Investigate whether conversion tracts are generally shorter when the
recombining DNAs differ at only two sites than when they differ at many, as in
the heterozygotes commonly studied. 4. Measure recombination and crossing-over
interference in heterozygotes between identical chromosomes, i.e., an inbred,
and contrast with values obtained from standard maize F1 heterozygotes, i.e.,
hybrids. 5. Define all genes in the sh-bz interval of two well studied lines and
use recombinants to dissect the contribution of genomic structural variation to
allelic expression differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This
project will train a graduate student in plant genetics and provide summer
employment and training for students, including those from a predominantly
undergraduate institution with which the Principal Investigator collaborates. It
will incorporate several members of underrepresented groups and will help the
Principal Investigator to maintain ongoing collaborations with investigators in
developing countries. The project is relevant to the long-term improvement of
U.S. agriculture in that it studies recombination, a cornerstone of genetics and
the basis of most plant and animal breeding, and it utilizes maize, an excellent
model organism and a crop of economic importance. Much of the proposed work is
based on an earlier discovery in the Principal Investigator's lab of an
unprecedented level of maize genome structure variation. The project aims to
study how recombination and gene expression are affected by it.