* 0920921
* Interfacial Free Energy of Nanominerals in Solutions, Biofilms and Microbial Cells
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Jillian Banfield, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2013
* USD 333,461.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Interfacial phenomena are common in low temperature geochemical and biological
environments. Interfacial free energy is a key parameter that controls the
thermodynamic phase stability of nanominerals, impacts biomineralization,
determines the form and reactivity of minerals precipitated in the environment
(e.g., in soils, during bioremediation), and directly impacts surface reaction
kinetics (e.g., sorption and dissolution). Knowledge about how this quantity
varies with environment type is essential for understanding and controlling
these processes. The purpose of the present research is to determine the
interfacial free energy of goethite, an important natural nanomineral, in
various surface environments, and to use the results to analyze nucleation,
adsorption and reactivity.

Goethite nanoparticles form by mineral weathering and neutralization of acid
mine drainage and are often associated with microbial cells, sometimes as
byproducts of their metabolism. Determination of interfacial free energy of
goethite nanoparticles in various environments necessitates a technique that is
non-destructive and does not modify the nanoparticles or their surroundings.
This requirement is not fulfilled with conventional calorimetry and contact
angle measurements. This challenge will be addressed using a diffraction-based
method developed recently by the investigators, which shows that the size-
dependent interfacial free energy can be derived from integration of surface
stress data obtained from diffraction experiments.

The investigators will use both conventional and synchrotron-based x-ray
diffraction to measure the lattice parameters and hence the surface stress as a
function of particle size for ?dry? (degassed) goethite nanoparticles and
nanoparticles in water, in solution containing a small organic molecule,
attached to bacterial cells (Geobacter sp.), and coated by lipid bilayers.
Strong size- and environment-dependence of the interfacial free energy is
expected. Goethite nucleation will be analyzed by modifying classical theory to
incorporate the environment- and size-dependence of interfacial free energy. The
relationship between binding strength and interfacial free energy will be
examined and the results used to predict reactivity as a function of environment
type. The proposed research will serve as a new template for study of
interfacial phenomena involving nanoparticles in natural environments.

Broader Impacts: Nanoparticle interfacial phenomena are key to many geochemical
and biological processes near the Earth?s surface. Because the interfacial free
energy of nanoparticles determines their phase stability, reactivity and
transformation kinetics, new insights will be broadly relevant in geochemistry,
environmental and medical sciences and engineering, and for development of
environment-compatible nanotechnologies. The methodology to be developed should
also be broadly applicable. Undergraduate research is a central theme of the
project. The experimental determinations are straightforward, enabling full
participation of students in state-of-the-art research. Through the research,
students will develop critical and creative thinking skills in addition to
obtaining practical research experience. Science concepts and their practical
applications in bioremediation will be conveyed to high school students through
interactions with a local teacher who will participate in summer fieldwork at
the Rifle CO site. The knowledge acquired from the research will be disseminated
to a broad audience through professional publications and presentations,
seminars to interested groups, and posting to the Nanogeoscience web site and
the open Wikipedia web site for public access.

