* 0920648
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Transitional Justice Social Movement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Lauren Edelman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 07/31/2011
* USD 11,919.00

Transitional justice programs tend to advocate for truth commissions to protest
impunity and to prevent future human rights violations. This project examines
transitional justice as a transnational social movement. The central research
question is how a transnational social movement sets its agenda initially and
how that agenda evolves over time. The study focuses on the internal dynamics
among movement participants, the external political forces that shape movement
strategies, and the processes by which truth commission goals are formulated.

The first phase involves a broad based survey of 850 self identified movement
participants, followed by in depth qualitative interviews with key informants.
Studying self-identified movement activists will provide insight into how the
movement defines its goals and chooses its strategies as well as into tensions
among movement activists. The second phase of the study is a comparative
ethnographic study of current truth commission efforts regarding paramilitary
violence in Colombia and torture policies under the Bush administration.

The co-PI utilizes participant observation fieldwork with several organizations
that are promoting truth commissions to redress state sponsored violence. She
also conducts qualitative interviews with key informants and archival research
on media reports to analyze how the movement agendas are set and evolve over
time in these two countries. The findings will increase our understanding of how
a social movement emerges and reveal competing goals and strategies to redress
human rights abuses.