* 0920318
* RIG: Development of a General Use Phylogenomic Toolkit Using Iguanid Lizards and Phylogenetic Profiling
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* James Schulte, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2013
* USD 174,970.00

Rapid availability of genomic data from many species has significantly increased
the amount of data systematists can use to accurately recover the Tree of Life
for all species. However, some data classes are more informative than others for
recovering accurate results. This project will explore different classes of DNA
data from the nuclear genome and quantify the ability of these classes to
recover different branches in two exemplar lizard groups. Genetic information
profiles, which identify optimal time points when genes are most informative for
phylogenetic analysis, will be generated for each group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will generate a genomic toolkit that will be
of wide utility for all vertebrate systematists and that will enable them to
identify genes that are most informative for the Tree of Life region on which
they are working. As part of this project, undergraduate students will receive
extensive training in fields such as systematics, bioinformatics, database
mining, lab techniques, and statistical analysis, and will be given
opportunities to attend local and national scientific meetings. The PI and his
undergraduates will conduct a week-long summer workshop on Northern New York
Biodiversity for high school students from the Akwesasne St. Regis Mohawk
Reservation to promote greater interest in science among Native American
students in the region.&lt;br/&gt;