* 0920353
* Mechanics and Evolution of Tonal Sounds Produced by Feathers
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Richard Prum, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 448,964.00

Birds are widely appreciated as being highly vocal, and for decades researchers
have explored the mechanics and physiology of birds' vocal apparatus, the
syrinx. However, birds also produce a wide variety of non-vocal communication
sounds. Examples include the 'winnowing' sound snipe make with their tail-
feathers, or the 'whistling' sounds ducks and doves make with their wings during
flight. This research project will examine the physical mechanics of how some
feathers flutter to produce loud tonal sounds during flight, and how and why
sounds produced by feathers has repeatedly resulted in the evolution of non-
vocal acoustic communication in birds.&lt;br/&gt;Three complementary approaches
will be used. First, natural history collections (museum skins and sound
recordings) of over 20 families of birds that produce these sounds will be
surveyed to establish the feather morphologies and diversity of these sounds.
Second, wind tunnel tests will be conducted on isolated feathers to test the
biomechanics of how feathers flutter to produce sound. Third, field experiments
will be conducted on a range of hummingbird species as a benchmark for the
laboratory experiments, to explore the relationship between behavioral displays
and sounds that are produced, and to examine the evolution of these
signals.&lt;br/&gt;This research will uncover the physical mechanisms
responsible for causing feathers to produce tonal sounds, and how a diversity of
sounds can be produced with feathers of varying size and shape. These sounds are
often produced during elaborate courtship displays, and understanding the
mechanics of how feathers produce tonal sounds will provide insights into the
evolution of signals. More broadly, this research will foster scientific
development abroad through collaborations with scientists in Latin America. The
results of this research will be disseminated through peer-reviewed scientific
publications and to a broader public audience, such as through educational
modules for middle school science students. Ultimately, this research may have
technological applications, such as new types of sound production devices.