* 0920753
* Neuroendocrine Mechanisms of Reproduction in Songbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* George Bentley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The neuropeptide gonadotropin-releasing hormone-I (GnRH-I) is critical for the
regulation of reproduction in all vertebrates. Study of the regulation of GnRH-I
in passerine songbirds has been the focus of studies on subjects as diverse as
photoperiodism, puberty, stress, nutrition, processing of auditory information,
migration, global climate change and evolutionary biology. Until now, analysis
of GnRH-I in songbirds has been limited to measurement of protein that can be
visualized by immunocytochemical methods, so it has been impossible to fully
determine how and when different environmental factors influence the synthesis
of GnRH and thus affect reproduction. Measurement of messenger RNA (mRNA)
regulation has been impossible because of lack of knowledge of the GnRH gene
sequence, despite many attempts in the last 20 years to identify it. Thus, the
relative roles of environmental, social, physiological and evolutionary
influences upon songbird GnRH regulation have remained enigmatic. The recent
cloning of GnRH-I cDNA from two songbird species will now permit molecular
analysis of the regulation of songbird reproduction by physical, social and
physiological cues, along with fine scale analysis of selection pressures acting
upon the reproductive system of songbirds. It is expected that a paradigm shift
in the understanding of the neuroendocrine control of reproduction at the
molecular level will occur as a result of this proposal. Understanding of
reproduction at this level is critical if captive breeding of endangered species
is to be successful, and for effects of global change on reproduction in wild
species to be understood. The intellectual merit of the results obtained
includes advancement our understanding of the regulation of seasonal breeding in
songbirds and the regulation of puberty in vertebrates as a whole. The broader
impacts of the proposed research include training of minority undergraduate and
graduate students in labs in the USA, encouragement of minority undergraduate
participation in research and scientific meetings.