* 0920910
* Work and Crime: Experiential and Contextual Effects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Robert Apel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 118,783.00

Theory and research agree that stable employment in a high-quality job provides
a means of reducing crime at the individual level, and that tight labor markets
contribute to strong social organization that further reduces involvement in
criminal behavior independent of an individual's own employment experiences. Yet
these two influences--the experiential and contextual effects of the labor
market on individual criminality, respectively--are rarely studied as joint
determinants of behavior. This project examines how the experiential and
contextual features of the labor market jointly impinge on individual criminal
behavior. It uses panel data on the transition from school to work in a
contemporary, nationally representative sample: the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997. The survey follows individuals from the mid-teens to the late-
twenties. The questions guiding the proposed project are threefold. First, what
is the impact of an individual's work experience (e.g., work status, work
quality) on criminal behavior? Second, do area-level economic conditions
influence criminal behavior net of an individual's work experience? Third, how
do area-level economic conditions modify the work-crime relationship at the
individual level? The models will incorporate economic data at the state,
metropolitan area, and county levels for the period under study. The analysis
will attempt to distinguish short-term fluctuations in labor market conditions
from longer-term structural dislocation. A study of the experiential and
contextual relationship between work and crime has strong potential for broader
impact and intellectual merit. For example, a finding of a contingent
relationship between work and crime that is a function of area-level economic
health would strengthen support for public policies which seek to affect the
larger labor market context as part of an integrated crime-control strategy.
Additionally, it would help reconcile the relatively modest influence that
targeted employment interventions have had on the criminal behavior of high-risk
youth by situating the study of the work-crime relationship within the larger
labor market context.