* 0920421
* RIG:    Assessment of Secondary Succession in North Carolina: Advancing understanding of successional vegetation through coupled field and remote sensing studies
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Ryan Emanuel, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 01/31/2011
* USD 199,938.00

Secondary successional ecosystems are widespread across the southeastern US and,
as a whole, comprise a substantial sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide. Despite
the important role of successional ecosystems in carbon cycling and other
ecological processes, considerable uncertainty remains concerning the spatial
and temporal dynamics of these ecosystems. With this in mind, the principle goal
of this project is to understand the status of and controls on successional
ecosystems in the southeastern US through development and analysis of coupled
remotely sensed and ground based data. The project will use new and existing
datasets to evaluate successional characteristics and ecological processes
within and among five separate landscapes in North Carolina.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lay the framework for future research on
carbon cycling, hydrological process, and climate-vegetation feedbacks within
this region and other regions where secondary ecosystem succession is an
important landscape-scale process. This work also seeks to broaden participation
of underrepresented students in ecological sciences by collaborating with the
Ecological Society of America's Strategies for Ecology Education, Development
and Sustainability (SEEDS) program to recruit undergraduate students from
minority-serving and other institutions to participate in training, fieldwork,
and numerical analysis related to secondary ecosystem succession.