* 0920766
* Structure, function, and signaling mechanism of plant phytochromes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Robert Sharrock, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kent Chapman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 535,508.00

Robert A. Sharrock&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0920766&lt;br/&gt;Title: Structure, function,
and signaling mechanism of plant phytochromes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sunlight is a
major source of the energy used to drive life processes on earth. Photosynthetic
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms have existed for 1-2 billion years and,
throughout that time, have had an immeasurable influence on the planet and its
atmosphere. Land plants and their products constitute the major food and energy
sources for humans. Furthering our understanding of the ways in which plants
sense and adapt to their light environment and how they respond to environmental
light variation arising from competition, seasonality, and atmospheric change
represent critical areas of scientific study. In plants, red (R) and far-red
(FR) light directly regulate development, reproduction, and circadian rhythms. R
and FR are sensed by the phytochromes, a family of five photoreceptor types that
exhibit R/FR-reversible structural changes and biological activities. The
objectives of this project are to determine the physical and genetic
interactions between the different phytochrome forms in plant cells and between
the phytochromes and the partner proteins that transmit light signals within
cells. In addition, the roles of specific regions of phytochrome molecules in
mediating their functions will be characterized and new systems for directing
the formation of specific combinations of phytochromes in plants will be
developed. It is already clear that phytochrome interactions are critical to
light sensing/signaling in plants and the objectives of this project target a
deeper and more comprehensive understanding these photoreceptors and their
mechanisms of action. Challenges in science education facing universities in
predominantly rural areas include geographical and cultural isolation of rural
students, notably minority and women students, limited access to mentoring
relationships, and lack of opportunities to participate in enrichment programs.
This proposal will directly result in improved access for undergraduate and
graduate students to individual research experiences and interaction with the
broader national and international scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;