* 0920140
* Collaborative Research:   Phenotypic Plasticity in Feeding: Ontogenetic Solutions to Scaling Limitations
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Sandra Shumway, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 313,029.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how animals
adapt to environmental changes is an important question, and has implications
for many fields. Little is known about early life stages, especially their
ability to deal with different environments. Aquatic invertebrate animals are
very small at early life stages, and how these tiny organisms are affected by
physical properties of their environment (water), or how they respond to this
environment are not intuitive. As animals grow and develop they experience many
differences in their physical and physiological environments and can respond
through changes in structural, physiological and behavioral traits, including
how they feed. Animals that feed on small particles in the water (suspension-
feeding), especially bivalve molluscs, provide important ecosystem functions,
are important fisheries and aquaculture species, and are the current target of
restoration and conservation efforts. Suspension-feeding has been predicted to
be energetically inefficient for small sized individuals, including newly
metamorphosed animals. This research will integrate physiology, morphology and
hydrodynamics to examine size dependence of suspension-feeding efficiency for
small animals, including the smallest juvenile individuals of the suspension-
feeding gastropod mollusc Crepidula fornicata, as a model animal. These snails
can use two different feeding mechanisms throughout their life, but may
specialize depending upon the size-specific relative efficiencies of each of
mechanism. This project will use experimentation and modeling to examine limits
of suspension feeding as a function of size, including consequences of feeding
and nutrition at early life stages, which can produce energy stores needed later
in life. It will examine the early life history of suspension-feeding molluscs,
and potential physiological limits to suspension feeding at a small size, and
will have implications for understanding how molluscs adjust to changing
environments. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained, especially
women and members of groups under-represented in science, and results
communicated to the general public, managers, and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;