* 0920895
* U.S.-Russia Planning Visit:  International Collaboration in Siberia Examining the Development of Indigenous Students' Identity as Science Learners
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Eleanor Abrams, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 06/30/2011
* USD 22,201.00

OISE 09-20895&lt;br/&gt;Michael Middleton&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Hampshire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
support for a planning visit ? for the PI and three co-PIs - to Gorno-Altaisk
State University in Russia. The US principal investigator is Michael Middleton
from the University of New Hampshire. The foreign collaborator is Natalya
Yurkova. The primary purpose of this planning visit is to develop a
collaboration on Indigenous student motivation for learning science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue an international collaboration
with majority and Indigenous educators and researchers to examine science
learning in 5 different Indigenous cultures worldwide (Hawaii, Taiwan, Siberia,
Aotearoa New Zealand and Belize). While in Siberia, the PIs will work with
Indigenous teachers to receive feedback and refine the project?s conceptual
framework and research methods. They will test protocols for interviews and
classroom observations, collect pilot data on science instruction, motivation,
and the integration of traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) into the
classroom. They will continue planning for a larger research study that examines
how children in Indigenous cultures develop a positive identity as science
learners. They will also explore how incorporating sense of place into the
curriculum, integrating traditional ecological knowledge and Western science,
may foster cultural and science learning identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will extend the examination of place-based learning outside of North
America and explore unifying themes regarding the role of place-based education
in how schools can enhance Indigenous children?s identity as science learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;