* 0920617
* Role of Subgenomic RNAs in Genetic Recombination of Brome Mosaic Bromovirus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2015
* Jozef Bujarski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2015
* USD 559,420.00

Intellectual Merit. RNA viruses are among the most challenging infectious
agents. Some RNA viruses cause serious diseases in human beings, while other RNA
viruses do so to livestock or to crop plants. One of the main problems limiting
the control of RNA viruses is rapid change of their genetic information which
leads to constant emergence of new viral strains. RNA recombination involves the
exchange of viral RNA fragments and the strategies of RNA recombination are key
tools needed for RNA viruses to secure their fast adaptation and evolution. In
contrast to genetic recombination of DNA-based organisms including DNA viruses,
RNA recombination in RNA viruses is not well studied. The Brome mosaic virus
(BMV) system is an excellent well-elaborated model for the understanding of
basic mechanisms of RNA recombination. In this project the research will focus
on the characterization of the molecular factors that are responsible for
efficient homologous BMV RNA-RNA crossovers. The project takes advantage of a
previously localized region on the BMV RNA molecule that supports unusually high
frequency of recombination (defined as the RNA3 intercistronic recombination
hot-spot or "sgp") as well as a recently discovered novel subgenomic (sg) BMV
RNA (named as "sgRNA3a") in order to elucidate which of the known multiple
functions of the sgp is responsible for recombination. The experimental design
of this project relies on testing of the modified BMV RNA3 constructs in a
variety of both in vitro and in vivo assays. The intellectual merit of the
project lies in its investigation of the roles of sgRNA molecules in a model RNA
virus system. These studies will provide the scientists with new information
about molecular strategies that are utilized by RNA viruses to condition the
efficient genetic recombination. Results from these studies will contribute to a
more integrated picture of recombination mechanisms that will be applicable to
other RNA viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project. This
project will contribute significantly to our knowledge about viral molecular
adaptations, and will help to draw analogies between DNA and RNA genetics, by
using the BMV model system. BMV is a member of a larger RNA virus super-family,
and its molecular strategies are common among other viruses. This research will
provide students with hands-on training in the important areas of biochemistry,
molecular biology, plant biology, and virology. The principal investigator
teaches a molecular virology course and this work will train young virologists.
Also, the principal investigator teaches an advanced course entitled "The RNA
World". The principal investigator has a long record of undergraduate training
including those from underrepresented groups. All the students will be
encouraged to present their research at scientific meetings (e.g., Sigma Xi,
American Society of Plant Biologists, American Society for Virology). The
principal investigator's group maintains collaborations with the University of
Chicago and with an Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry in Poznan, Poland, and
keeps active contacts with several international virology groups. These
interactions will enhance the exposure of the students to the international
environment. The principal investigator is making efforts to disseminate science
by translation of English works (has translated into Polish language a book by
Matt Ridley "Red Queen, sex and evolution of human nature"). In general, social
benefits of this project rely upon improvement of our understanding of RNA
recombination in RNA viruses which will provide new potential means for control
of these important infectious agents. It will also raise the scientific literacy
of the public via outreach activities. By learning how to predict recombination
hot-spots scientists will be able to design more stable viral vectors as
important biotechnology tools.