* 0920454
* Microtubule Organization by Kinesin-12 in the Phragmoplast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2013
* Bo Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 01/31/2013
* USD 608,252.00

Intellectual merits. This project is devoted to understanding cell division
mechanisms in plants. Plant cells divide by laying down a physical barrier
called the cell plate between two daughter nuclei. In order to achieve this
goal, organisms of advanced green algae and land plants have developed a common
cytokinetic apparatus named the phragmoplast which is a key evolutionary
landmark. The phragmoplast is established by a framework of the cytoskeletal
element of microtubules, which are aligned perpendicularly to the future cell
plate. Microtubules are dynamic polar filaments with their plus ends exhibiting
more rapid growth capability than their minus ends. Phragmoplast microtubules
are organized into a bipolar array with their plus ends located at or near the
division site. Vesicles generated by the Golgi apparatus are transported toward
microtubule plus ends, resulting in the assembly of the cell plate. How
microtubules are organized into this highly ordered form is the central question
being addressed in this project for the next three years. A number of studies
suggest that microtubule-associated proteins and the microtubule-based motor
kinesins are critical players for microtubule organization in the phragmoplast.
We have been using the cress plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model for our
studies, and have discovered that three Kinesin-12 members of the kinesin
superfamily exclusively appear at microtubule plus ends in the developing
phragmoplast, and play a critical role in microtubule organization. The planned
studies are aimed at testing the hypothesis that the Kinesin-12 motors and their
binding proteins form a motor complex to regulate the bipolar organization of
phragmoplast microtubules. In order to test this hypothesis, the first objective
is to apply genetic approaches to dissect how the three Kinesin-12 motors work
together in the phragmoplast. The second objective is to understand functions of
two Kinesin-12-binding proteins by using biochemical, cell biological, and
genetic tools. The last objective focuses on understanding how the function of
Kinesin-12 is linked to that of the microtubule-associated protein MAP65-3.
Discoveries to be made are going to provide a protein-protein interactive
picture at microtubule plus ends in the phragmoplast.

Broader impacts. In this project, the use of the model organism Arabidopsis
thaliana will bring insights into molecular mechanisms that are responsible for
the invention of the phragmoplast during the evolution toward land plants.
Experimental results will be made public by journal publications. They will also
be translated into lecture materials to reach 250+ undergraduate students in a
Cell Biology class taught each year by the Principal Investigator of this
project. In the meantime, the participating graduate student receives
interdisciplinary training in areas of biochemistry, cell biology and genetics.
In addition, the project engages high school students and undergraduate students
by providing them with hands-on research experience in the laboratory. By
directly contributing to discoveries, these students share the excitement that
could inspire them to pursue a career in science.