* 0920164
* Expanding Technological Literacy through Engineering Minors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Mani Mina, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,999.00

Many Americans lack even a rudimentary understanding of the principles
underlying the technology essential for daily life. Engineering concepts are
pervasive in decision making within industry, government, education, and health
care; yet most decisions in these sectors are made by people with little or no
formal engineering education. This research is taking first steps to develop a
template for a Minor in Engineering Studies as an approach to developing
technological competence in non-engineers. It is a collaboration involving Iowa
State University, Ohio State University, Hope College, and Rice University that
is building on promising but small-scale results achieved in the Minor in
Engineering Studies Program at Iowa State University and building on engineering
courses for nonmajors that are in place at the partner institutions. The Minor
in Engineering Studies at Iowa State has attracted students majoring in
business, communications, journalism, and design. A key question being
investigated is whether a minor can be defined in terms of technological
literacy skills rather than a set of common courses. The ultimate goal is to
develop a set of technological literacy objectives and outcomes for a Minor in
Engineering Studies. These outcomes would be similar to the ABET a-k outcomes
that are used for engineering degrees, but focused on developing technologically
literate citizens rather than design engineers. The use of a standard set of
outcomes rather than a standard series of courses would allow greater
flexibility for each institution to develop a Minor in Engineering Studies that
is best suited to its local conditions and existing courses (similar to the way
engineering departments meet the ABET a-k requirements for engineering degrees).
&lt;br/&gt;First steps entail establishing more clearly the value of an
engineering minor, by determining student skills that result from current
activities, and determining current students' and employers' perceived values of
a minor in engineering. This project will also develop and test a set of common
assessment methods for desired technological literacy outcomes. Developing the
technological literacy outcomes and assessment methods simultaneously helps to
insure that the outcomes are measurable and centered on student learning.
Available assessment methods would facilitate the adoption of the outcomes by
other engineering educators. Built-in assessment will also keep participants
focused on course design that reflects best practices in engineering teaching
and learning.