* 0920299
* Collaborative Research:  Using Single-Molecule Force and Fluorescence Microscopy to Elucidate the Molecular Mechanism of Bioinspired Magnetite Synthesis in Magnetotactic Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Brian Lower, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2013
* USD 258,045.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Microorganisms are the oldest living inhabitants of planet Earth, spanning some
3.5 billion years, and their importance in shaping the Earth?s soils, oceans,
and atmosphere has long been accepted. The biosynthesis of magnetite (Fe3O4) by
magnetotactic bacteria is an interesting example that has generated a great deal
of interest because of its importance in applications such as catalysis,
electronics, nanotechnology, and biomedical sciences, its philosophical
implications concerning the origin and evolution of life on Earth, and its
potential to participate in the biogeochemical cycling of iron, nitrogen,
sulfur, and carbon in natural environments. Furthermore, the biogeochemical
cycling of iron by microorganisms (e.g., the accumulation and conversion of iron
into Fe3O4 by magnetotactic bacteria) is of particular importance because iron
is a ubiquitous and very reactive constituent of surface and subsurface
environments and, as a result, impacts regional and global scale climatic and
ecological phenomena. In addition, despite its ubiquity and because of it
reactivity, iron is often a limiting factor for growth of organisms, for
example, in some parts of the world?s oceans. From the point of view of
mineralization, biological control over nucleation and directed growth of
nanominerals is an elegant example of self-organization in complex molecular
systems.

Despite the discovery of magnetotactic bacteria over 30 years ago, the mechanism
for Fe3O4 biomineralization in these microorganisms remains unknown. The
objective of this research is to use single-molecule techniques of atomic force
(single-molecule antibody recognition force microscopy) and fluorescence
microscopy/spectroscopy (time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy and fluorescence
resonance energy transfer) to determine the molecular mechanism for the
biomineralization of nanomagnetite crystals in magnetotactic bacteria.
Investigators will identify the function(s) of the individual protein molecules
involved in the biomineralization process and determine how they control crystal
nucleation, growth and morphology, examine the organization of the protein
molecules within a bacterial membrane and with respect to nascent Fe3O4
nanoparticles, identify the amino acid sequences within these molecules required
for crystal nucleation and growth, and uncover functional protein complexes
required for Fe3O4 biomineralization.

The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity ? Understanding the
molecular mechanism by which bacteria direct the synthesis of Fe3O4
nanoparticles represents an important paradigm for bioinspired materials
synthesis that would provide enormous insight into the strategies of controlled
crystal synthesis used by other organisms, including multi-cellular organisms.
By understanding the biomineralization process of Fe3O4 in magnetotactic
bacteria, we might learn how to determine whether Fe3O4 grains in the
environment are biogenic in origin, which, in turn, might provide evidence of
reliability for the use of Fe3O4 crystals found in the environment to be used as
biomarkers for past life on Earth. Furthermore, because technological progress
often relies on a detailed understanding of the material properties of single
crystals, composites, interfaces, and nanocrystals, and because the
mineralization process in microorganisms is inherently controlled by nanoscale
structures (e.g., proteins), this knowledge will become the basis for bio-
controlled approaches to synthesize tailor-made inorganic nanostructures for
applications across a diverse span of technologies. Finally, investigators
believe that the novel imaging techniques developed as a result of this project
will emerge as powerful tools that can be used for studies in other
geobiological or biological systems.

The proposed research will support a new collaboration between the two PIs and
two Ph.D. graduate students (one student from each laboratory) who will play an
integral role in this research and be encouraged to present their findings at
international and national conferences and local seminars at each university.
One PI is an early-career faculty member who has helped pioneer efforts to
develop imaging techniques to study geobiological processes on a molecular level
and the second PI is a senior faculty member who is a world-renowned authority
in magnetite biomineralization and has authored over 150 publications in this
field. This proposal will also fund 1 female PhD student who works in the Lead-
PI?s laboratory. The results of this research will be integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate courses currently taught and being developed by the
PIs. Furthermore, this proposal will support efforts to educate elementary,
middle-, and high school age students about the burgeoning yet often overlooked
fields of nanogeoscience and biogeochemistry through hands-on demonstrations and
presentations. These efforts will be geared to encourage pre-college students to
pursue careers in biogeochemistry and/or become responsible stewardesses of the
environment.