* 0920050
* RUI: Identifying the physiological mechanisms and potential costs of elevated thermal tolerance from life-history stage-dependent changes in thermal habitat
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Jonathon Stillman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2011
* USD 199,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Marine intertidal zone organisms have evolved elevated thermal tolerance limits
in response to thermal stress associated with times that low tide coincides with
heat waves. Climate-change projected increases in the frequency and severity of
such events are hypothesized to have an impact on these organisms due to the
energetic expenditure of maintaining elevated heat tolerance. That elevated heat
tolerance has an energetic cost is a long-standing assumption in thermal
physiology but the actual costs have not been quantified. This project will
compare thermal tolerance across life-history stages (embryonic, larval
planktonic, juvenile and adult) in species of closely related porcelain crabs
from temperate and tropical intertidal and subtidal habitats that experience a
wide gradient in maximal habitat temperature. In species with different thermal
tolerances, basal metabolic rates, temperature sensitivity of metabolism and
metabolic enzymes, energy storage, and growth rates will be examined. Larvae
differ in thermal habitat from the other stages since the larvae are planktonic
and not subjected to thermal extremes of the intertidal zone. Larvae are
expected to avoid the physiological costs associated with elevated thermal
tolerance, and the largest difference between larval and other life history
stage thermal tolerance is expected in the most heat tolerant species. From the
difference between larval and adult metabolism the actual energetic cost of
elevated thermal tolerance will be quantified. Quantification of those costs
will be useful for assessing how climate change increases in thermal stress will
impact energetics of marine intertidal zone invertebrates across their
distribution in the natural environment.

The broader impacts of this project include education of a postdoctoral
researcher for one year, a MS graduate student for two years, and undergraduate
research assistants recruited through the SFSU BREED REU program as well as an
Animal Physiology Laboratory course taught by the PI.