* 0920090
* Collaborative Proposal: De Novo Genes in Drosophila: Functions, Origins, and Polymorphisms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Begun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2012
* USD 204,894.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: At the molecular
level, new proteins have typically been thought to evolve by subtle tweaks of
existing proteins, not by radical changes. New genomic data, however, are
challenging this traditional view. Genomes are, in fact, dynamic and
saltational; genes arise, evolve, and die much more rapidly than previously
thought. Making sense of how and why genes are formed or destroyed is critical
to understanding how and why organisms adapt to natural and man-made
environmental change. Drosophila (fruit flies) are uniquely suited for studies
to determine the biological processes shaping the functions and origins of new
genes. Scientists have a deep understanding of Drosophila biology, sophisticated
molecular genetic tools, and a wealth of Drosophila genomic data. Using these
tools, these collaborators will determine how new genes are formed and the
genetic mechanisms underlying their origination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of Study: Improving our understanding of what new genes do, how they
arose, or why they emerged will give insight into how organisms genetically
respond to environmental pressures. It is increasingly clear that man-made
environmental change presents a challenge to all living things, including
humans. New genes may be one type of solution to overcoming these challenges. As
some of these new genes arise from DNA sequence that ancestrally did not code
for a gene, this suggests that hidden within the genomes of all living things is
an unanticipated wealth of genetic potential. This research will help science
understand how this genetic potential has been and can be realized. Both
investigators are actively involved in broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in science. Additionally, this project will support a
program to both familiarize graduate students and postdoctoral fellows with the
opportunities available to the faculty of community colleges, and to provide
pedagogical training for such an endeavor. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;