* 0920153
* Fear Circuits in the Amygdala:   Serial or Parallel Processing?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Joseph LeDoux, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 540,000.00

All organisms use environmental stimuli to guide their behavior in adaptive
ways. One important class of adaptive behaviors involves responding to threats,
stimuli that cause or predict harm. The overall goal of this project is to
address some fundamental issues about the neural circuitry through which learned
stimuli trigger responses to dangerous or threatening stimuli. To study this
these investigators will use behavioral, physiological and anatomical approaches
to understand how neutral stimulus that has acquired threat-arousing properties
is processed in the amygdala, which is known to be crucially involved in
responding to threats. A major controversy has been whether a fearful (threat-
arousing) stimulus must enter the amygdala via the lateral nucleus, as much
research has suggested, or whether it may also enter the amygdala via the
central nucleus. These are called the serial and parallel models of the
amygdala, respectively. The studies proposed will test which model is most
viable. This project predicts that the serial model is correct. This work will
expand our understanding of how organisms adapt to dangerous environmental
conditions and the results will also further our understanding of the circuits
underlying the learning and memory storage of emotional information. The project
will offer the opportunity for training postdoctoral, doctoral, and
undergraduate students in basic approaches to the neuroscience of emotion,
learning, and memory.