* 0920857
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Functions of Immaturity: Marshallese Children as Moral Liars
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* John Lucy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 15,036.00

Graduate student Elise Berman (University of Chicago), supervised by Professor
John A. Lucy, will investigate how children, when they lie or take stances on
the truth or falsity of the statements of others, influence the flow of
information. While adults are socialized to calculate their speech, children may
not yet know how to correctly manipulate conversation. Consequently, they often
say more than they ought. This research will consider what effects this immature
speech has on social life and how it is regarded by
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in the Republic of
the Marshall Islands (RMI), where adults are known to guard their words
carefully and view maintaining social harmony as more important than speaking
truthfully. Thus the contrast between adult and child speech will be
particularly visible. The researcher will employ a combination of ethnographic
methods (participant observation and interviewing), discourse analysis methods
(analysis of naturally recorded conversations and linguistic resources), and
developmental psychological methods (videotapes of the interactions of six
children of different ages for 30 minutes, twice weekly over the course of a
year).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will contribute
to newly developing scientific theory about the social agency and effectiveness
of children, as well as linguistic analysis of communication, metacommunication,
and language ideologies cross-culturally. In addition, because it will reveal
how ideas of truth and deception may vary cross-culturally, findings from this
project will aid teachers and others who are responsible for children from other
cultures avoid miscommunication by showing them that there are reasons their
students speak as they do. This research also contributes to the education of a
social scientist.