* 0920009
* Tissue-specific repression of multigenic regions by the B-type lamin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,11/30/2009
* Dmitry Nurminsky, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2009
* USD 510,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As cells specialize to form diverse
tissues during development of multicellular organisms, they activate batteries
of genes responsible for the cell type-specific functions. Moreover, this
process of coordinated gene activity is not merely a result of cell
specialization, but also a guiding force behind determination of the cell's
fate. Accordingly, a mechanism exists which contains activation of cell type-
specific genes to the proper cell lineages and prevents their ubiquitous
expression in other tissues. This mechanism operates with certain chromosome
regions that contain clusters of cell type-specific genes, but molecular aspects
of such regulation have not been elucidated. However, it becomes evident that
packaging of the chromosomes within the nucleus plays a key role. In particular,
cell type-specific tethering of certain chromosome regions to the nuclear
envelope is associated with silencing of the genes embedded in these regions.
This silencing is probably associated with modifications of the DNA-associated
histone proteins which alter accessibility of genes to the transcription
machinery. This research project is focused on understanding of the mechanism by
which the major protein component of nuclear envelope, Lamin B, regulates
silencing of nuclear envelope-tethered gene clusters through histone
modifications. Animal model system such as the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster
is essential in this research because ablation of Lamin B-dependent mechanism(s)
in Drosophila does not kill cells right away, unlike in mammals. Therefore, in
Drosophila the Lamin B-mediated gene repression system can be dissected through
modulation of its components, using the vast array of existing genetic models.
Mechanisms that regulate cell type-specific gene clusters appear to be well
conserved, therefore research findings using Drosophila will be applicable to
other animals in which such studies are not feasible or practical.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly contribute to general
knowledge of regulation of gene expression and will strongly advance mechanistic
understanding of development and cell differentiation. The studies capitalize on
the lab's experience in molecular genetics, molecular biology, and genomics, and
will provide broad laboratory training in cutting-edge techniques to graduate
and undergraduate students with a special emphasis on involving minority
undergraduate students in active laboratory research. Young aspiring scientists
will receive educational benefit of personal involvement in new discoveries, and
will have opportunities to disseminate their exciting findings through
presentations at scientific meetings and publications in peer-reviewed journals.
Such training and accomplishments will strongly foster their interest in basic
research and provide a tremendous boost to their future careers in science.