* 0920156
* Cellular Responses to Quaternary Ammonium Compounds by Pseudomonas Syringae that Influence its Interactions with Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Gwyn Beattie, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 581,732.00

Intellectual Merit Plants are colonized by a diversity of microorganisms,
including many that influence plant and environmental health. Plants produce a
class of compounds called quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs) that are
important to plant membranes and to plant tolerance to drought and salinity
stress. These compounds, including betaine, carnitine, and choline, may also
benefit plant-associated bacteria. For example, betaine can confer protection to
stresses, choline can serve as a building block for some bacterial membrane
lipids, and choline-O-sulfate may help store sulfur. Most plant-associated
bacteria, including the plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae, cannot synthesize
QACs and thus are dependent on production by the host. Consequently, these
organisms have likely evolved mechanisms to import and exploit these compounds.
In support of this, the ability to transport choline was recently shown to
provide a clear fitness benefit to P. syringae during its colonization of
plants. Moreover, studies characterizing the full set of P. syringae
transporters for choline and betaine uptake identified additional novel cellular
components that may be involved in QAC metabolism and regulation. The goals of
this project are to characterize the responses of P. syringae to specific plant-
derived QACs and evaluate how these responses influence P. syringae interactions
with plants. To address these goals, first, carnitine will be examined as an
attractant and nutrient source by investigating the role of a newly identified
carnitine-responsive chemotaxis protein in directing bacterial movement to
germinating seedlings, and by identifying the genes required for carnitine
catabolism and their contribution to fitness. Second, choline-O-sulfate will be
evaluated as a source of sulfur and nutrients by characterizing how the loss of
transport and catabolism impact P. syringae fitness on plants and by more
extensively characterizing the cellular components involved in choline-O-sulfate
uptake. And third, betaine, choline, phosphorylcholine and phosphatidylcholine
will be evaluated as signal molecules for bacteria by examining global gene
expression patterns in P. syringae mutants that lack the ability to degrade
individual compounds and thus are able to accumulate them. These studies will
significantly advance our understanding of how the perception, signaling and
metabolism of this special class of compounds by P. syringae influences the
ability of this widely studied bacterial pathogen to colonize plants. Plant-
associated P. syringae populations are relevant not only as reservoirs of
pathogens for plant disease, but also as reservoirs of biological ice nuclei
that may have a role in atmospheric processes leading to rain. Insights into the
impact of QACs on leaf-associated bacterial populations are of timely importance
because increases in drought, as predicted by global climate change models, and
salinity, as is occurring in large areas of irrigated agricultural lands, can
result in increased QAC abundance in plant tissues, due to either natural
accumulation or agricultural engineering to improve drought and salinity
tolerance.

Broader Impacts This project will contribute to education by providing training
for one graduate student and significant research experiences for at least five
undergraduate students, several of which are expected to be members of under-
represented groups in the sciences. Outreach activities will provide internships
for two biology teachers (7th-12th grade) through an established program at Iowa
State University for biology teachers, with the subsequent co-development and
implementation of discovery-based curricula based on bacterial ice nucleation
and leaf colonization. Outreach activities will also include directing at least
two workshops to advance the involvement of middle school students from under-
represented groups in the sciences through the Science Bound program at Iowa
State University, and co-directing a workshop on plant pathogens for elementary
students and their parents.