* 0920822
* Spatial Population Games in Epidemiology and Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Timothy Reluga, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators are
using mathematical methods from game theory, dynamical systems, and stochastic
processes to study how behavioral patterns emerge in spatially structured
populations, to help account for these patterns in the development of natural-
resource, health, and environmental management programs. New advances in the
applications of game-theoretic methods to epidemiology problems show how large-
population approximations can be used to predict the limitations of specific
public health measures. By leveraging the substantial body of existing research
on the dynamics of populations distributed in space, including metapopulations
and reaction-diffusion equations, this project applies and extends the recent
research to explain patterns the daily activities of individuals. In particular,
the investigators are addressing epidemiological questions of how geographically
heterogeneous risks of infection influence prophylactic measures. The team seeks
to understand how spatially explicit mixing alters Nash equilibrium strategies
and determines how far the influence from hot spots of risk can extend. We are
also undertaking studies to expand classical theories like that of Isaacs so
that we can study basic behaviors in few-player games like predation avoidance
which are potentially important in the dynamics of ecosystems. These
explorations should reveal foundational challenges regarding the specification
of problems and their solution, and translational challenges like algorithm
development and numerical approximation. The project as a whole opens up new
exciting avenues of applied mathematics research in spatial ecology and
sustainable management that intersects the fields of ecology, economics,
sociology, and epidemiology, which can attract talented junior and senior
mathematicians in analysis, dynamics, and numerics. The graduate student
training funded by the grant is highly valued in both industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of the sustainable management of
resources, ecosystems, communities, and our environment is complex, requiring
the simultaneous accounting of economic processes, natural processes, and the
feedbacks between the two. One aspect of sustainable management theory needing
more attention is the identification of how geography and spatial distributions
of resources and risks mediate the feedbacks between economic and natural
processes; from pollution to water supplies to agriculture, the actions of
economic agents can have unintended consequences for near-by and distant
neighbors. Geographic effects can make it hard to anticipate the full
consequences of an economic activity or regulatory action, to the extent that
important information is often missing in the policy-design process.
Mathematical models like the ones under development are valuable supplements to
this missing information, and help us allocate scarce community and government
resources efficiently. This project contributes to the development of some basic
predictions of how populations should react to the geographically dispersed
risks, allowing more rational risk mitigation. These results and the research
they stimulate lead to a better understand ecological processes so that the
nation may confront the long-term environmental challenges that now exist.