* 0920972
* TRANSITION TO TAIL-POWERED SWIMMING IN THE FIRST FULLY AQUATIC WHALES OF EOCENE TETHYS (EGYPT)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Philip Gingerich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 265,001.00

Transition to Tail-Powered Swimming in the First Fully Aquatic Whales of Eocene
Tethys (Egypt) P. D. Gingerich, University of Michigan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Whales are mammals that evolved from land to sea during the
Eocene epoch of geological time. The transition was made by Archaeoceti or
archaic whales that are ancestral to modern Neoceti (Mysticeti or baleen whales
and Odontoceti or toothed whales). Four stages of the transition are known from
complete or virtually-complete skeletons: I, Eocene artiodactyl land mammals;
II, the protocetid archaeocetes Rodhocetus and Maiacetus; III, the basilosaurid
archaeocetes Basilosaurus and Dorudon; and IV, modern whales, which first
appeared in the latest Eocene or Oligocene. Stage II archaeocetes were
semiaquatic, foot-powered swimmers that fed in the sea but still gave birth on
land. Stage III archaeocetes were fully aquatic, tail-powered swimmers that were
the first to give birth at sea. The two stages differ morphologically in many
skeletal characteristics, and the temporal gap between them is on the order of
10 million years (spanning the middle Lutetian through Bartonian ages of the
middle Eocene). Skeletons of new morphological and temporal intermediates are
required to understand the transition from semiaquatic to fully aquatic whales.
Field work carried out from 2005 through 2008 in collaboration with the Egyptian
Mineral Resources Authority and the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency
demonstrated that it is possible to collect well-preserved and exceptionally-
complete skeletons of archaeocete whales from middle Lutetian through Bartonian
glauconites (greensands) of the ancient Tethys Sea that are spectacularly
exposed in the Western Desert of Egypt. Field research proposed here includes
three annual two-month expeditions in Egypt, with the objectives being the
discovery and analysis of new fossil whale material that fill gaps in early
whale evolution. Such new evidence is essential for advancing knowledge of
macroevolution across adaptive zones (in this case the transition from land to
sea). Broader impacts of this project include enhancement of infrastructure for
research and education through discovery of new skeletons representing early
stages of whale evolution and training a postdoctoral fellow.