* 0920212
* Enzymatic C-Methylation Reactions of Phytosterol Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* William Nes, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2014
* USD 912,463.00

In certain ways all sterols are the same, yet in other respects, they are quite
different. Cholesterol, ergosterol and sitosterol are among the compounds which
are not only widely recognized but are also commonly associated with the
membranes of animals, fungi/protozoa and plants, respectively. The major
difference in the structure of cholesterol with that of ergosterol and
sitosterol is at carbon-24 in the sterol side chain; C24 is an H, beta-CH3 or
alpha-C2H5 group, respectively. It would appear, therefore, that there is some
sort of association between the size and direction of the C24-alkyl group(s)
added to the "cholesterol" side chain and that the unique biology of microbes
and plants require distinct types and amounts of phytosterols (24-alkyl sterols)
to grow and reproduce. Understanding the structure and function of the
(S)-adenosyl-L-methionine-delta24-sterol methyltransferase (SMT), the crucial
transalkylating enzyme(s) involved in phytosterol biosynthesis and homeostasis,
are of significant importance as insights gained from these experiments may
facilitate the design of methods to control or mimic their
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With previous NSF support, variant SMTs were
cloned and characterized and a series of sterol derivatives with modified side
chains were investigated as mechanistic probes for this enzyme. A family of
structurally similar enzymes was discovered to exist in nature, which catalyzes
the successive C-methylations of a sterol acceptor molecule from a common active
site according to a similar mechanistic plan (the steric-electric plug model of
sterol C24-alkylation). Through site-directed mutagenesis experiments, three of
four substrate binding regions in the active site topography were identified to
affect the complement of C1/C2-activities and product diversity. Now, in this
project, SMTs with novel properties will be created by a combination of rational
design and activity assay. In addition, the properties of SMTs from different
phyla across kingdoms will be determined. Thermodynamic analysis that determines
the entropic as well as enthalpic components of the C24-methylation reaction
toward substrates and inhibitors of this reaction type will be conducted; this
information will be correlated to the enzyme-generated product distributions.
The location of active site residues in cloned SMTs and an estimation of the
active SMT enzyme concentration in cell-free preparations of different organisms
at different times in their life history will be determined utilizing protein
chemistry and X-ray crystallography utilizing synthetic fluorinated analogs and
mechanism-based inactivators to afford phyla-specific information on phytosterol
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together a number of different efforts centered on phytosterol and SMT
structure, biochemistry and evolution. This project presents an opportunity for
cross-talk of scientific concepts between undergraduate and graduate students
with the postdoctoral associates and PI. Knowledge gained from the SMT
characterization and redesign experiments will define relevant topographies in
the active center of SMTs to affect catalysis. The hallmark of enzyme evolution
that relates to the energetics of enzyme efficiency (the lowering of activation
barriers to promote catalytic superiority of the extant enzyme over the
ancestral form) will be addressed for the first time by studying
phylogenetically different SMTs. The project will give rise to other broader
impacts through the education of students by providing them mentoring and
experimental approaches used routinely in biochemistry, molecular biology and
the study of natural products.