* 0920274
* Biochemistry and Physiology of Novel Acetate Kinases from Eukaryotic Microbes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2014
* Indrani bose, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2014
* USD 752,967.00

Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of this research is to define the mechanism
and role of the enzyme acetate kinase. Acetate kinase catalyzes the
interconversion of acetate and acetylCoA. As acetylCoA is a key metabolite at
the crossroads of many metabolic pathways, understanding acetate kinase
structure, function and regulation is key to understanding basic metabolism.
Although previously thought to be present primarily in bacteria, acetate kinase
has now been identified in eukaryotic microbes such as fungi and protozoans.
Initial characterization of acetate kinases from these organisms has revealed
unique properties, suggesting that the acetate kinase enzyme family is far more
diverse than previously thought. The biochemical differences between bacterial
and eukaryotic acetate kinases suggest that this enzyme may serve a different
physiological function in eukaryotes. This is further evidenced by the fact that
phosphotransacetylase, an enzyme that functions with acetate kinase in bacteria,
is absent in fungi and protozoans. The specific aims of this project are to
understand the basis for the biochemical differences among the eukaryotic and
bacterial acetate kinases and to determine the roles of this enzyme in fungi and
protozoans. This will be the first investigation of eukaryotic acetate kinases
and should shed light on additional physiological roles for this enzyme and
provide unique insights into the biochemical mechanism of this important
metabolic enzyme. Furthermore, acetate kinase is part of a wide family of
related enzymes, which includes hexokinase, other sugar kinases, actin and Hsp70
heat shock proteins; these studies will thus provide insight into evolution of
this enzyme superfamily.

Broader Impacts: The project has a broad educational impact at the graduate,
undergraduate, and high school levels. The research provides a wealth of
projects for students at all levels of education and ability. Projects will
afford training in biochemistry, molecular biology, and microbial cell biology.
Graduate students will play an essential role and will each direct an
undergraduate student as well, providing an important mentoring opportunity. The
research will involve high school students from the Summer Program for Research
Interns at Clemson University. In addition to providing a number of graduate and
undergraduate research projects at both Clemson University and Western Carolina
University, this joint project also offers the Western Carolina students greater
exposure to a Ph.D.-granting research university. Students involved in this
project will present their research at state and regional scientific meetings as
well as national meetings.