* 0920081
* Co-evolution of auditory coding and vocal behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Sarah Woolley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Coppola
* 05/31/2013
* USD 659,995.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major issue in understanding how
evolution has shaped social communication is determining how the brains and
behavior of communication signal sender and receiver are matched so that signals
such as vocalizations convey meaningful social information. Songbirds are used
to address this issue because they have innate predispositions for producing and
hearing the complex vocalizations (songs) of their own species. Yet, they must
learn to produce their own songs during development and to recognize the songs
of other birds. The aim of this project is to determine how the interplay of
nature and nurture builds the brain mechanisms that mediate vocal communication
by testing the relationship between species-specific vocal acoustics and neural
auditory tuning, and the role of developmental experience in song production and
auditory processing. Three related species that produce very different songs
will be raised in the laboratory. Some will be cross-fostered so that birds of
one species experience and learn the songs of another species. Using the
integrated analysis of behavior, neurophysiology and anatomy, the contributions
of genetic identity and experience to the matching of sender and receiver in
vocal acoustics and auditory processing in the brain will be determined. Clear
contributions of both genetic identity and developmental experience are expected
to be demonstrated by hybrid songs and differences in auditory processing
between birds raised by their own species and cross-fostered birds. This work
will provide a demonstration of how perceptual mechanisms that guide learning
and social behavior are created in the brain. Understanding how sensory function
differs across species and how those differences are related to species-specific
social behavior will describe general mechanisms whereby the brain evolves to
support speciation and functional matching between sensory and motor systems.
These studies are designed specifically to maximize the participation of
undergraduate students in research, and the project includes outreach to the
local middle school system.