* 0920850
* Collaborative Research: Novel mathematical methods for retrieving mechanical properties and microstructural information of cancellous bones
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Gilbert, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2013
* USD 287,112.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to provide
a mathematical background for understanding the use of ultrasound methodology
for osteoporosis diagnosis and for the investigations of the dynamics of
osteoporosis. For low frequency range (&lt; 100 kHz), the proposed methods are
based on homogenization theory. A typical scale for trabecular bone spacing is
between 0.5 to 2mm with trabecular thicknesses of 5 to 150 mm. In this range,
the wavelength is longer than 15 mm; hence, homogenization theory can be
applied. Modified Biot equations (i.e. no ad hoc effective parameters),
effective equations for cancellous bone with pore space filled with blood-marrow
modeled by the Careau law, and those derived from first principles without the
restrictive assumption of periodic microstructure are considered. Two different
mathematical approaches are applied in order to go beyond the periodic
microstructure assumption: one by a variant of Tartar's method of oscillating
test functions, the other by stochastic-two-scale homogenization. These
effective equations are to be incorporated into our existing numerical solver
for comparison with experimental data. A novel mathematical method is proposed
for the inverse problem of retrieving mechanical properties relevant to the
strength of bone from ultrasound measurement. This is an ill-posed, nonlinear
inverse problem. This novel method is based on an iteration scheme utilizing
dehomogenization, which is a linear inverse problem. This is made possible by
quantifying the microstructure through relating it to moments of the spectral
measure of the associated operator, rather than using directly the
characteristic function of the microstructure. A method for estimating porosity
distribution from phase velocity by utilizing its frequency dependence is also
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the challenges in
detecting osteoporosis, a major public health threat affecting more than 44
million Americans. Both treatment and prevention of the disease rely on the best
assessment possible of the condition of the patient's bones. Currently, the
diagnosis is done using X-ray images and/or bone mineral density test by X-ray
type of device. However, as is well known in the field of biomechanics, this
approach does not always correctly predict the likelihood of bone fracture.
Using a detailed CT image of microstructure, various effective parameters can be
computed using numerical method but this is very expensive. The method developed
will quantify the mathematical link between strength and microstructural
information (statistics of the microstructure), rather than the detailed image.
This in turn will lead to the discovery of a way of calculating the strength of
bones without detailed image of microstructure. This microstructural information
will be obtained by utilizing the frequency dependence of the effective
mechanical properties of bone, which can be measured by an ultrasound device.
The gains are manifold. First, this approach reduces the patients' exposure to
radiation. Secondly, ultrasound is much cheaper and portable than an X-ray type
device. Thirdly, this microstructural information can be used for quantifying
the area of high concentration of strain, which is another indicator for
mechanical failure such as bone fracture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;