* 0920013
* Molecular Mechanisms in Photolyase and Cryptochrome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Johannes Schelvis, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 07/31/2013
* USD 419,453.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The blue-
light photoreceptors in the photolyase/cryptochrome family all bind a flavin
adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and need to absorb a blue-light photon, a step
required to initiate their physiological function. Photolyases repair
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) that form in DNA through exposure to
ultraviolet light, and cryptochromes are involved in regulation of the day-night
cycle in animals along with seedling development and stem growth in plants.
Members of the cryptochrome-DASH (cryDASH) subfamily are capable of repairing
CPD lesions, but unlike photolyases, they only repair single-stranded DNA. All
photolyases and cryptochromes contain three highly conserved tryptophans that
are essential for photoreduction of the FAD cofactor. Although photoreduction
may not play a direct role in DNA repair, it is considered a critical step in
the signaling function of cryptochromes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
characterize the effect of protein-FAD and protein-DNA interactions on the
physical and chemical properties of photolyase and cryDASH and elucidate the
differences in their CPD binding and repair capabilities. It will reveal new
structure-function relationships in these enzymes that will provide detailed
insight into the molecular mechanism by which they use light energy to transfer
an electron to repair DNA. This project will also determine the mechanism of
protein electron transfer (PET) following photoreduction of FAD by tryptophan in
photolyase and cryDASH and test a proposed proton-coupled electron-transfer
(PCET) model. The elucidation of the role of tryptophan radicals in PET and PCET
in photolyase and cryDASH will contribute to a deeper understanding of their
role and function in signaling in cryptochromes and in PET and PCET, in general.
PCET is of great timely interest, and photolyase and cryDASH are two natural
systems that allow for a detailed study of this important biological process. A
combination of steady-state and time-resolved absorption and resonance Raman
spectroscopy will be used, and the vibrational normal modes of flavin and
tryptophan radicals will be obtained from isotopic labeling and computational
chemistry. These assignments are necessary to relate the observed molecular
vibrations to structural changes and, since no assignments are currently
available, will be important contributions to the permanent literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The project provides research
training in time-resolved laser spectroscopy and career mentoring for a
postdoctoral associate and a graduate student. Undergraduate research is of
great importance for the development of the next generation of scientists, and
the project provides meaningful research opportunities for undergraduate
students. Local high-school students will also have the opportunity to
participate in the research through several outreach programs at the university.
The outcome of the research will be disseminated through seminars, presentations
at meetings, and publications in peer-reviewed journals, while some of the
research will be used as examples during lectures in the classroom. A better
understanding of the factors that determine the conversion of light energy into
electron transfer in blue-light photoreceptors will also deepen the knowledge
base for the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy.&lt;br/&gt;