* 0920355
* Quantifying the importance of deep and shallow roots for plant water use and redistribution using a novel cave system to 20 m depth
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Robert Jackson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2013
* USD 317,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uptake of water is essential for
trees, grasses, and crops to grow and survive, particularly during droughts and
hot summer months. While many scientists have studied water uptake and movement
from the ground to the top of trees, half or more of plants remains unstudied in
most species and ecosystems. The goal of this proposal is to compare the
functioning of deep (5-20 meters underground) and shallow roots for trees
growing in the southern United States. It uses a novel cave system developed by
the PIs in central Texas to study tree roots underground and uses molecular-
based fingerprinting of these roots to match them to their respective shallow
counterparts, much like the forensic approaches that detectives use. The
research questions include, 1) How much water that trees use comes from deep
underground? 2) What are the unique physical characteristics of deep roots that
promote water transport? and 3) To what extent do specialized water channels in
plants contribute to their ability to take up and transport water? The proposed
activities provide numerous potential benefits to society, including
measurements of groundwater use and recharge by trees in the central U.S. For
outreach and training, the Jackson lab has involved more than 30 undergraduate
students and nine high school students (three of them minorities) in NSF-funded
research in the last five years. Jackson has also done extensive outreach with
local high schools, including teaching in 8 Environmental Studies classes at
Broughton High School in Raleigh, NC and mentoring in an environmental science
class at High Point High School in High Point, NC.