* 0920096
* Characterization of a LATD-dependent ABA signaling pathway in Medicago truncatula roots.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Jeanne Harris, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant hormone Abscisic Acid (ABA)
is essential for coordinating the response of plants to environmental stresses,
such as drought, salinity and cold. In response to drying soil conditions, ABA
is rapidly mobilized through the plant, triggering physiological changes in the
leaves that will reduce water loss and stimulating roots to grow deeper into the
soil. Although the importance of ABA as a rapid root-to-shoot warning system has
been known for years the events that follow the exit of ABA from the vasculature
are largely unknown. Medicago truncatula plants that lack a functional LATD
protein are unable to maintain growing regions at the tips of plant roots unless
extra ABA is added to the growth medium. In addition, movement of ABA through
these plants is altered suggesting that the LATD protein might be involved in
transporting ABA into or out of plant cells. This project proposes to examine
ABA transport more closely. As a part of this project, the location of the LATD
protein in plant cells will be determined. In addition, this project proposes to
identify regulatory proteins that function before or after the LATD protein in
the plant ABA response. Finally, the function of LATD-like proteins in the model
plant, Arabidopsis, will be elucidated. Together, these experiments will
increase our understanding of how plants use ABA to modulate plant developmental
processes, such as root growth and the formation of nitrogen-fixing nodules.
This project will provide scientific training for undergraduate and graduate
students. In addition, this project also contains an outreach component that
involves the design of inquiry-based science projects for middle schools in
Vermont.