* 0920045
* Human Development and Political Leadership: The Influence of Personal History on Foreign Policy Decision.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Allan Stam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,738.00

Academics, policy makers, and the electorate all take as given that the life
experiences of presidents, prime ministers, and other executives profoundly
affect the way they will behave once in office. In the last presidential
election, for example, we compared John McCain's background as a fighter pilot
and POW in the Vietnam War to Barack Obama's experiences as a community
organizer and law school professor to try to anticipate how those experiences
would shape their behavior once in office. Somewhat surprisingly, however, most
international conflict research focuses primarily on system and state-level
variables, not necessarily because those are the variables with the largest
explanatory power, but because those are the variables for which data currently
exists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research challenges the assumptions of
traditional international relations research by turning the analytic focus to
leaders and their personal developmental backgrounds. Institutions do not make
decisions, people do. Leaders make their choices within a context of predictable
and systematic motivations, incentives, goals, and desires, both personal and
professional. A growing literature within comparative politics and international
relations spotlights the attributes of national leaders and the way variations
in leadership style and ability may affect international politics. By focusing
on leaders, our research program represents a powerful challenge to the neo-
realist, or domestic institutional paradigms of international
politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We argue that the personal characteristics of
leaders vary in decisive ways precisely because of background, preparatory, and
psychological differences between them. In particular, we suggest that
individual differences in background affect relative risk taking and competence
in situations involving interstate conflict. We investigate the factors that
best predict leaders willingness to entertain high levels of policy risk, and
what factors best predict competence and keen judgment in the context of
interstate crises. We test these propositions by developing and employing a
unique data set encompassing factors such as education, family structure, age,
and the military and occupational background of leaders across the globe from
1879-2004. We examine the influence of these forces on the initiation and
escalation of interstate disputes and the outcomes and costs of associated
wars.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Systematically testing what are called "first image"
variables within international relations scholarship, will serve an important
role within the literatures on international relations literature and foreign
policy. Our research has the potential to contribute to growing debates across a
number of academic disciplines, including political science, psychology,
evolutionary biology, genetics, and others. Our data will serve as a locus for
future research by scholars interested in how the background experiences of
leaders shape their behavior in a number of areas. While we are primarily
concerned with the initiation and escalation of armed conflicts, other scholars
will be able to use our research to study how leader backgrounds influence
things like economic and social policy choices, as well as a host of other
issues.