* 0920101
* Intramolecular Vibrational Excitation of Protein Unfolding and Refolding Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Warren Beck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 486,056.00

This project employs time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy to study how small
proteins change in structure when they are displaced from the equilibrium or
native structure. The planned research exploits a new method developed in this
laboratory that uses the vibrational energy transferred from an excited-state
electronic chromophore to drive the host protein to which it is attached from
its native structure to a range of partially unfolded states that probably
correspond to late intermediates along the folding/unfolding pathway. Because
the intermediate structures are generated optically under the solution
conditions that favor the native structure, the refolding reactions that follow
the production of unfolded intermediates can be characterized with independent
control of the solvent composition or temperature over a very wide range of
timescales, over the picosecond to millisecond regime, through the use of prompt
and delayed fluorescence methods. Zinc(II)-substituted and metal-free
cytochromes c are the main systems to be studied. The porphyrin chromophore in
cytochrome c serves in the planned experiments as both the trigger and the
sensor for the unfolding and refolding reactions. A tryptophan residue will also
be used as a remote sensor for the reactions that are triggered by the
porphyrin. This research provides a direct test of the central hypothesis that
proteins fold rapidly under physiological conditions because they move randomly
on a funnel-shaped potential-energy surface that has the native structure at the
funnel's minimum. The research will also have an impact on the broader fields of
protein structure and function that relate to the barrier-crossing processes
that lead to conformational changes during photobiological and enzyme-catalyzed
reactions.

This project plays an integral part in the teaching of undergraduate and
graduate courses by the PI and co-PI. It provides key lecture topics and
applications even in introductory courses. Research participants are exposed to
a wide range of disciplines ranging from structural biology to chemical physics.
Undergraduate students are encouraged to start working in the laboratory in the
freshman year, and they usually contribute to publications by the senior year.
Additionally, this project is associated with a new outreach program that will
feature visits by the PI and co-PI to high schools in the Lansing, Michigan area
to give presentations to Chemistry and Physics classes on the use of laser
spectroscopy in biophysical chemistry, structural biology, and related
disciplines. Interested students and their teachers will then be invited to
visit the PI, co-PI, and their graduate students, to see the research
laboratories, to talk about careers in science and engineering, and perhaps to
get involved in research projects. This outreach plan will lead to interactions
with students from underrepresented groups who will be recruited to undertake
undergraduate studies in the sciences at Michigan State University. This effort
is intended to augment an existing effort by the Department of Chemistry at MSU
to recruit and retain students from underrepresented groups.