* 0920364
* Symposium: Society Developmental Biology Annual Meetings 2009-2011, July 23-27, 2009 at the Hyatt Regency, San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 06/30/2012
* USD 60,000.00

The field of developmental biology encompasses several scientific disciplines
that explore how complex organisms, from plants to humans, arise from a single
fertilized egg. The Society for Developmental Biology, founded in 1939, has
organized the major worldwide meeting in this subject for the past 70 years,
missing two during World War II. At these meetings, scientists at all career
levels communicate and share their latest results. A recent example is the first
public report on the isolation and culture of human fetal stem cells by Dr. John
Gearhart, paving the way for the field of regenerative medicine. Other basic
findings on regulation of the process of development using different model
organisms have contributed to improvements in health of people as well as of
animals and environment. Although the majority of participants are from the
United States, many of whom receive grants from the National Science Foundation,
some investigators attend from around the world. The meetings rotate across the
country to ease the travel burden for investigators from various regions, as
well as to showcase a range of hosting universities. Students, postdoctoral
trainees and junior faculty are given ample opportunity to present their
experimental results in poster sessions, and the best ones are chosen to give
short talks. In addition, workshops are offered at these meetings to promote
career advancement of junior-investigators and teach them skills to navigate the
challenges along their career path. There is long-term interest in the subject
of developmental biology, which is a central biological problem, as well as
increasing public interest in issues such as birth defects, cloning and stem
cells. This highlights the importance of the subject both in terms of scientific
advancement and public education.