* 0920578
* Peptide-mediated Pausing of Translation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Janice Zengel, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 609,851.00

The ribosome is the organelle that translates the genetic code into proteins in
all types of living cells. The ribosome has two subunits, a small subunit that
is responsible for decoding the genetic information, and a large subunit where
coupling of amino acids into a protein takes place. Newly synthesized proteins
exit the ribosome through a long, narrow tunnel in the large ribosomal subunit.
Under some circumstances, growth of specific proteins is interrupted for short
or long periods of time. This project addresses the mechanisms that control
which proteins are subject to such arrest of synthesis. Current evidence
indicates that the stoppage involves interactions between the portion of the
protein that was synthesized immediately before the polymerization arrest and
RNA and/or protein components of the tunnel. The project focuses on a very short
protein (CrbCmlA; only 9 amino acids long), which is involved in the regulation
of another protein (CmlA) that makes cells resistant to the ribosome-targeting
antibiotic chloramphenicol. A low concentration of chloramphenicol (insufficient
to inhibit ribosomes synthesizing other proteins) is required to arrest the
polymerization of CrbCmlA, but it is not known how or why chloramphenicol
specifically inhibits synthesis of this protein. The hypothesis is that the
growing protein and chloramphenicol both interact with ribosomal RNA and
proteins to bring about the conditions that stop synthesis. The experiments in
this project are designed to define which features of each of the three
interacting components (CrbCmlA, the ribosome and chloramphenicol) are required
for this tri-component interaction and how these interactions establish
translation arrest. The bacterium Escherichia coli is chosen as the experimental
organism because of the ease of its genetic manipulation and the availability of
procedures for biochemical analysis of its ribosomes. Specifically, the study
will employ a mixture of genetic, biochemical, and physiological methods to (1)
identify critical features of the CrbCmlA pausing peptide (length, sequence, and
electrostatic properties), the ribosome, and the co-inducer necessary for
pausing, (2) characterize the interactions between CrbCmlA, ribosomal
components, and chloramphenicol, and (3) probe the effect(s) of CrbCmlA on the
interaction of chloramphenicol with the ribosome. For context, pausing of Crb
will be compared with translational arrest of another protein (SecM), which does
not require binding of a separate molecule to the ribosome. The collective
results of these experiments will provide model(s) for the molecular mechanism
of translation arrest and comparison of the results for experiments with the two
proteins will reveal whether peptide synthesis pausing can be explained by a
single mechanism or if there are different pausing pathways in the
ribosome.&lt;br/&gt;This research will have impact in two areas. First, it will
generate a more comprehensive understanding of the function of the ribosome, an
organelle that is universally required for the survival and growth of all types
of biological cells. Second, it will provide training opportunities for both
graduate and undergraduate students in biological research that integrate
molecular genetics with advanced biochemical probing of interactions in a major
multi-component complex.&lt;br/&gt;