* 0920618
* Molecular Control of Ovule Development
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Charles Gasser, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 06/30/2013
* USD 433,000.00

Charles S. Gasser Proposal # IOS-0920618 Molecular Control of Ovule Development

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Seeds comprise at least 70% of the calories consumed by the world's human
population. Ovules are the plant structures that develop into seeds. A combined
genetic and molecular approach is being used to define the mechanisms
responsible for regulating ovule development. One part of the proposed work will
focus on two genes, INNER NO OUTER (INO) and ABERRANT TESTA SHAPE (ATS), that
have been shown to encode transcription factors critical for formation of the
ovule integuments (sheathing structures that differentiate to form the seed
coat). Proteins that interact with the INO and ATS proteins will be identified
through a protein interaction screen in yeast. The nature and biological roles
of these interactions will be evaluated thorough further interaction studies and
analysis of the effects of loss of function of the corresponding genes. Genes
regulated by the INO transcription factor will be identified through studies on
the specific sequences within the genome with which INO interacts. Transcription
profiling has identified other genes expressed during ovule development and
these will be evaluated genetically for roles in this process. The work will
provide a better understanding of the factors controlling early development of
this critical component of human nutrition and provide tools for potential
manipulation of seed and fruit formation. Students and postdoctoral researchers
will be instructed in the latest methods of genetic analysis enabling them to
join the workforce in education or industry. Existing campus programs will be
utilized to aid in recruiting members of underrepresented groups in the research
program.