* 0920776
* Protein Arginine Methylation by PRMT1
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Joan Hevel, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2013
* USD 575,200.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to increase the functionality
of the small number of proteins encoded by mammalian genomes, proteins are often
decorated with a variety of chemical appendages that alter the behavior of the
protein. Having the ability to alter proteins in this way is a hallmark feature
of any cell's ability to adapt its response to the environment. In the first
aim, this project will use novel methods and mechanistic approaches to clarify
how one of these enzymes, called protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1),
recognizes its target proteins and how it performs the chemical transformation
(protein arginine methylation). In particular the project will study a novel
regulatory mechanism to control how PRMT1 performs its job inside the cell. In
the second aim, the project will determine the mechanistic role of a portion of
PRMT1 called the tail. Of the 11 different kinds of PRMTs, the tails on each of
the enzymes are very different; suggesting that the tail may be involved in
specifying which proteins should be targeted by each PRMT. The results will
provide a framework for studying the other PRMT enzymes. These studies will be a
much needed counterpart to the cell biological approaches that predominate in
the field of PRMTs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
inclusion of undergraduates in the research endeavor will be a primary focus of
the PI. In addition to undergraduates mentored personally by the PI, portions of
the research will be conducted by students in the senior-level undergraduate
Biochemistry laboratory course. Web-based reporting will allow students to track
the progress of the research providing context for the experiment. These efforts
will help to transform the outdated laboratory course into a more interactive
and novel experience for the students. The PI will continue to participate in an
Undergraduate Research Program to reach students at institutions that do not
have internal research opportunities. As a form of outreach to K-12 education,
the PI will continue to participate in the development and implementation of the
Department's high school summer research program, from which students will be
selected and incorporated into the multi-disciplinary research team over the
duration of the project. In summary, the PI will integrate the training of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students with high level research
efforts that will answer fundamental questions about the biochemistry of PRMT1.