* 0920851
* Synchronization of Transport And Supply: The Role of Nearshore Processes In Beach-Dune Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Christopher Houser, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2011
* USD 47,286.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Existing beach-dune models do not consider how and when sediment gets
transferred to the backshore where they become available for transport by the
wind. Rather, existing models largely ascribe regional variations in dune
morphology to fixed constraints on the beach slope and sediment budget. The lack
of information in this regard remains a central barrier to the development of a
theory of beach-dune interaction that can form the basis of effective predictive
models that can be translated across scales and between sites. Recent (process-
scale) transport studies have shown that the transfer of sediment is both
spatially variable and temporally intermittent as a result of transport
limitations across the beachface. While these studies have identified varied
controls on sediment transport and exchange, there remains a limited capacity to
predict the evolution of beach-dune systems, largely because the beachface tends
to be viewed as a static transport surface and without regards to supply.
Understanding beach-dune processes has important implications for understanding
how barrier islands recover from tropical storms and hurricanes, which in turn
determines how the next storm impacts the island.

This project, conducted by Dr. Christopher Houser at Texas A&M University will
confirm and quantify the role of nearshore processes and morphological change on
the exchange of sediment between the beaches and dunes. The exchange of sediment
between the beach and dune depends on the synchronization of transport potential
and available sediment on the beachface as the beach-state evolves. The specific
goals of this study are: (1) to quantify time-dependent variations in the
morphology and volume of the beachface in relation to the wave forcing and
changes in the morphology of the nearshore bars, (2) to identify and quantify
the time-dependent controls on aeolian transport (e.g. beach geometry, moisture,
lag, etc.) in relation to the transport potential (wind speed and direction),
and (3) to determine if the delivery of sediment from the beach and accumulation
in the dune depends on the synchronization of transport potential and available
supply of sediment deposited by nearshore processes in the upper-foreshore and
backshore.

This study represents a fundamental change in understanding of the beach-dune
system. While process-geomorphologists are accustomed to thinking about small-
scale processes as the building blocks of landforms, they typically consider
these processes independent of the collective context, the specific landscape in
which they are acting, to make sense to the evolution of landforms. Dune
recovery requires sediment to be delivered first to the backshore by nearshore
(surf and swash) processes and then delivered to the dune by the wind. With few
exceptions, little attention has been paid to the mechanisms of dune recovery
following storms, despite the importance of dune recovery to the impact of the
next storm. Characterizing the factors that control the rate and mechanism of
barrier island dune recovery is of great interest to coastal managers who need a
means to predict the type of impact expected during the next storm and in
determining if beach or dune restoration is required to protect property and
infrastructure. In this respect, the study provides benefits to the communities
of geographers, engineers and planners concerned with various aspects of beach
and dune management.