* 0920918
* What Do People Want to Feel? Strategic Emotion Regulation in Negotiations
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Maya Tamir, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 08/31/2013
* USD 299,997.00

Emotions can shape the outcomes of social interactions. For instance, by
communicating power or by cultivating trust, emotions such as anger and
happiness can decide between failure and success in negotiations. If people can
strategically regulate their emotional experiences, they could help shape the
outcomes of social conflicts. The goal of the research, therefore, is to examine
whether people engage in strategic emotion regulation and identify the factors
that determine when and how they do so. The idea is that emotion regulation
research should be informed by self-regulation research, more broadly construed.
Previous research has demonstrated that people prefer experiences that they
believe are useful and that are consistent with their goals. This project
extends these ideas to the domain of emotion regulation. Although research in
emotion regulation has been typically based on the assumption that people always
want to feel good and avoid feeling bad, recent research has demonstrated that
people can, in fact, be motivated to experience even unpleasant emotions when
such emotions have strategic benefits. Building on such findings, the current
project involves two lines of research. The first set of studies will examine
whether beliefs about the usefulness of emotions determine what people want to
feel in negotiations, how they regulate their emotions, and how this influences
negotiation outcomes. The second set of studies will examine whether the goals
people pursue as they negotiate give rise to different beliefs about the
usefulness of emotions, which in turn, determine how they regulate their
emotions and how they feel as they negotiate. By identifying what leads people
to cultivate certain emotions in social contexts and how doing so influences the
outcomes of negotiations, the research has important theoretical and pragmatic
implications. The research will guide researchers and practitioners in
identifying how emotional experiences can promote beneficial outcomes in
negotiations and how people can cultivate useful emotions to promote adaptive
behaviors in social conflicts.