* 0920888
* On the Traditional Noun Phrase: Comparing Languages With and Without Articles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2016
* Jon Gajewski, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2016
* USD 290,792.00

The main goal of the project is to compare the structure as well as the
interpretation of the noun phrase in languages with articles and languages
without articles. With a few exceptions, it is standardly assumed that languages
without articles have a phonologically null (i.e. unpronounced) article, so that
the difference between English "The stone broke the window" and Russian "Kamen'
razbil okno" is essentially phonological, the article being null in Russian. The
project hypothesizes that there are more substantive differences in both the
syntax and the semantics of noun phrases in languages with and without articles.
In particular, an important piece of structure that is present in the noun
phrase of languages with articles and is missing in languages without articles.
The project will explore a number of cross-linguistic generalizations where
articles seem to play a crucial role and attempt to explain how they follow from
the hypothesized structural difference. Some of the phenomena involved in the
generalizations include question formation, relative clause formation,
adjectival placement, negation interpretation, free word order, number
morphology, null pronominal subjects, superlatives, tense, and nominal
complementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this research is to show how
one salient property of a language--the presence or absence of articles--
accounts for a wide range of seemingly unrelated phenomena in that language.
This research will thus contribute to a view of language as a complex system in
which small changes in one area have significant ramifications throughout the
grammar. The project will involve several subdisciplines of formal linguistics
(syntax, morphology, semantics, typology) and, given the nature of the
generalizations under investigation, will have important consequences for
several fundamental domains in linguistic theory. The research will also inform
work in language acquisition and neurolinguistics, as articles are typically
absent in early child speech and in the speech of some aphasics. Independent of
the theoretical contributions, the project will contribute data on numerous
understudied languages, for example American Sign Language, Native American
languages, as well as languages of Asia and Africa.