* 0920411
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Uncovering the Kinetic Mechanism of Base-Pairing and Stacking in RNA Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Shi-Jie Chen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2014
* USD 164,448.00

This research project will use advanced fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy
(FFS) techniques combined with state-of-the-art biophysical theory and modeling
to develop an elementary reaction rate model for intramolecular base-pairing and
base-stacking in RNA secondary structure formation. The model to be developed
will predict all experimentally observable kinetics properties of RNA secondary
structure formation for any given sequence, including reaction rates, reaction
mechanisms, and the structures and stabilities of the reaction intermediates.
Development of the model will be based on experimental-theoretical comparisons
of the folding and unfolding kinetics of designed RNA hairpins. Several
competing theoretical reaction rate models will be used to predict the
temperature dependent folding kinetics of the hairpins. The kinetics of these
reactions will then be assessed experimentally using FFS. The experiments will
measure reaction rates and identify reaction intermediates occurring over a
broad range of time scales, from nanoseconds to hundreds of milliseconds.
Different reaction rate models predict qualitatively and quantitatively
different folding kinetics, including different Arrhenius plots, reaction
intermediates, and reaction time scales. It is not possible to determine which
reaction rate model is accurate based on theoretical calculations alone.
Experimental comparisons to different model predictions will thus reveal which
rate model is most consistent with experimental observations. Once the most
likely model has been identified, it will be refined to account for the solvent
viscosity, heat capacity, temperature, and counterion dependencies of the
kinetic and thermodynamic parameters. The model will be validated by predicting
the folding kinetics of RNA hairpins with arbitrary length and sequence and
verifying the predictions experimentally. Modeling of more complicated tertiary
structure forming RNA will proceed from that point.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project include the development of a model that can aid
researchers in uncovering the biological function of any given RNA sequence. RNA
is one of the fundamental molecular building blocks of living systems and plays
a crucial role in a host of biological processes. This research will also
contribute to the education and training of a new generation of scientists
capable of applying rigorous quantitative experimental and theoretical research
tools to important biological problems. Finally, new pedagogical materials based
on this research will be developed for an emerging curriculum at the interface
of the biological and physical sciences.