* 0920286
* Collaborative Research: Transformational Learning through Undergraduate Research: Comprehensive Support for Faculty, Institutions, State Systems and Consortia
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2010,12/31/2013
* Mitchell Malachowski, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 152,888.00

Undergraduate research is a proven form of engaged learning that engenders a
transformational experience for undergraduates as a consequence of deep student
involvement and frequent student-mentor interactions. The Council on
Undergraduate Research (CUR) intends to address the critical national need for
continued and more comprehensive dissemination of effective practices for
initiating and sustaining faculty-student collaborative undergraduate research.
This project is a comprehensive expansion of the impact and reach of CUR's Phase
2-supported regional initiative and the organization's national-level
"Institutionalizing Undergraduate Research" workshops (held from 1996-2006). The
Phase 3 project is providing a series of "Institutionalizing Undergraduate
Research" workshops for groups of colleges and universities drawn from state
systems, private consortia, and mission-similar institutions (e.g., minority-
serving), and employing a structured program of workshop follow-up activities.
Training workshops to develop the skills of CUR members to serve as workshop
facilitators will enhance the mentoring received by workshop participants,
provide avenues for leadership development, and further sustain the initiative
with a cadre of trained facilitators throughout the country. More than 150
facilitators and coordinators will be directly involved. The Phase 3 project
will be extensively evaluated with the assistance of an independent external
evaluator and a distinguished external advisory board.