* 0920619
* Non-canonical functions of two-component signaling proteins in the cell cycle of Caulobacter crescentus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Ryan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 593,789.00

Two-component signal transduction is a mechanism used by nearly all bacteria to
organize intracellular events and respond to changes in the environment. In a
two-component signaling pathway, the upstream histidine kinase protein senses a
signal and autophosphorylates on a conserved histidine residue. The phosphoryl
group is then passed to a downstream response regulator protein, which generates
a cellular response, such as a change in gene expression, metabolism, or
motility. Although this linear paradigm is correct in most cases, some two-
component proteins with important cellular roles appear to function by
alternative mechanisms, or in branched networks. The project focuses on two
proteins, DivK and DivL, that are essential for cell cycle progression in the
aquatic bacterium Caulobacter crescentus. The aim is to determine how the
response regulator DivK suppresses the activity of a histidine kinase, CckA,
which functions in a separate two-component pathway. Suppression of CckA
activity at the correct time is necessary for Caulobacter cells to begin
chromosome replication. The other aim is to establish the function of an
essential protein, DivL, which is homologous to histidine kinases, but which
appears to act by a mechanism other than phosphoryl transfer. In particular, it
is proposed that DivL participates in essential protein-protein interactions
which are modulated by binding and hydrolysis of ATP. Experiments are proposed
to measure the ATP binding and hydrolysis by DivL mutants that cause distinct
cellular phenotypes, and to identify new proteins that interact with DivL to
mediate its effects on the cell division cycle. This research will expand the
repertoire of biochemical activities used by histidine kinases and response
regulators to influence each other and cellular events.

Broader Impacts This project will provide an intensive summer lab course in
microbiology for 10 students per year. This course is different from many lab
classes in that the students do experiments whose results are not known
beforehand. In addition to fundamental techniques in microbiology and molecular
biology, they learn how to design and troubleshoot experiments so that their
results are interpretable and reliable. In past years, each student has deleted
a previously unstudied gene in Caulobacter crescentus and characterized the
resulting mutant strain. In upcoming years, the students will do projects
closely related to the scientific goals of this research, such as generating
specific mutations in divL and determining their cellular effects, or performing
genetic screens to identify proteins that interact with DivL or DivK. Students
learn how new scientific knowledge is generated, and they gain experience that
prepares them for independent research projects. Women and students from
underrepresented groups are encouraged to undertake research projects in the
applicant's laboratory.