* 0920624
* Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases in Pollen Tube Tip Growth
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Jeffrey Harper, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2014
* USD 390,000.00

The long-term goal of this project is to understand the functions of calcium-
dependent protein kinases (CPKs) in regulating many aspects of plant growth and
development. CPKs (which are defined by a novel structure in which the kinase
domain is fused to a calmodulin-like regulatory domain) appear to be unique to
plants and certain single-celled organisms, and have not been found in animals.
In the model plant Arabidopsis, there are 34 CPKs, 12 of which are expressed in
pollen. While many plant CPKs are thought to be involved in regulating the
response to environmental stresses, such as drought, heat and cold, recent
genetic evidence has been obtained that identifies two of these CPKs as critical
to pollen tube tip growth, which is a developmental program. Genetic knockout of
CPK17 and 34 results 1) in pollen tubes that are short and slow growing and that
are disrupted in their ability to locate and fertilize ovules, and 2) in plants
that are essentially sterile. The ability to restore normal fertility by
transferring CPK34 genes into these plants provides an unprecedented opportunity
to determine the features of a CPK that are important for their functions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key hypothesis guiding the research is that specific
functions of CPK17 and 34 are encoded in the kinase domain. The aims of this
project include 1) defining the molecular pathways by which these CPKs promote
pollen tube tip growth and tropism, 2) delineating the cellular processes
regulated by these CPKs, starting with endocytosis and exocytosis at the tip of
a growing pollen tube, and 3) identifying how these CPKs regulate vesicle
trafficking and cytoskeletal dynamics, which are critical processes in polarized
pollen tip growth. This research will provide new insights into how calcium
signals are coded and decoded in plant systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The research will have additional impacts that derive from educational
and mentoring contributions. The Harper lab is actively engaged in mentoring
research activities at all academic levels, from early career assistant
professors to undergraduates. The planned research will provide training for
both undergraduate and graduate student in the area of molecular biology,
confocal microscopy, genetics and proteomics. Project results will be
communicated to the public through publications, data base contributions,
scientific seminars, and lectures to undergraduates and K-12 students.