* 0920229
* Global Approaches to the Function of the Eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factor elF3e in Fission Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Dieter Wolf, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2013
* USD 660,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses the
intricate interplay between global and messenger RNA-specific control of protein
synthesis. The overall problem is exemplified by the environmental stress
response pathway. When cells experience stress, they shut down their
biosynthetic activity and mount an integrated response. Global protein
translation ceases, in order to prevent the accumulation of misfolded proteins
and to conserve amino acids and energy required for recovery. Against this
backdrop of translational repression, however, certain proteins must be made for
recovery to occur. These considerations illustrate the need for mRNA-specific
translation control mechanisms that tightly interlock with global
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the fission yeast eIF3e
protein, a component of the multisubunit eukaryotic initiation factor 3 complex
(eIF3). Cells deleted for eif3e have several cellular alterations. Firstly,
under routine culture conditions, the mutant displays defects in cell morphology
and growth, suggesting that eIF3e regulates the synthesis of proteins involved
in these processes. However, these functions are not essential for cell
viability. Secondly, eif3e mutants display broad stress sensitivity. This
includes sensitivity to nutrient starvation, osmotic, oxidative, and thermal
stress. Therefore, eIF3e has essential functions in the stress response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biochemical basis of the essential and non-essential
functions of eIF3e in stressed vs. unstressed cells is not known. This research
addresses the hypothesis that lack of eIF3e leads to the observed defects
because protein synthesis is impaired at either at a global or mRNA-specific
level. The goal is to distinguish between these two models and to identify the
essential and non-essential target mRNAs of eIF3e. Unbiased global
transcriptomic and proteomic profiling will be employed to identify those mRNAs
that require eIF3e for their translation into protein in unstressed and stressed
cells and to determine at what stage during protein synthesis eIF3e is
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This research will generate
several unique large scale datasets that will be publicly available. These
include quantitative data on global protein expression and translational
competence in stressed and unstressed fission yeast cells. Due to the high
degree of conservation of basic cellular pathways in fission yeast, these data
will also be relevant to other biological systems, including plants and mammals.
This research will also create a variety of training opportunities for students
at several levels. As part of the research effort, graduate and undergraduate
students will become familiar with modern high-throughput technologies such as
DNA microarrays and peptide tandem mass spectrometry. Quarterly training
sessions will be offered to familiarize technicians, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates with quantitative proteomics techniques. Finally, the
project will be integrated into an ongoing partnership with the California State
University, Fresno, which is a primarily Hispanic-serving institution. Within
the framework of this liaison, minority undergraduate students from Fresno State
will be visiting the Burnham Institute for 10-week lab rotations over the summer
to work on this project.