* 0920924
* SGER: Fate and Transport of Carbon and sediments During a Mississippi River High Water Event
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2008,11/30/2009
* Alexander Kolker, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2009
* USD 24,095.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award will take advantage of
the ~10-year peak-flow to occur in April, 2008, in the Mississippi River to
gather direct measurements of carbon and sediment flux. In particular, this rare
event provides an ideal opportunity to answer the following questions: 1) How is
organic carbon of varying sources transported and processed by rivers? and 2)
How do flooding rivers accumulate and distribute sediments to adjacent wetlands?
A two stage sampling program (ship-based and land-based) will be employed to
sample the suspended load, total organic carbon, bulk organic carbon age
spectra,nutrients, and hydrology of the river during the peak-flow event. Hydro-
acoustic techniques will be used to determine the velocity structure of the
river in flood. Short-lived, naturally occurring radioisotopes&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.
7Be) will be used in combination with x-radiographs and classical sedimentology
methods to quantify recent deposition. Long cores will be collected to
ultimately compare these rates to long-term sedimentation
histories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of the environmental destruction that
occurred in the Mississippi River delta region in 2005, coupled with the
region's vulnerability to current and future climate changes, this project
tackles issues that are highly relevant to both society, to policy and decision
makers, and to a broad spectrum of environmental and engineering scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;