* 0920830
* Testing for high-frequency (104-105 yr) glacio-and thermo-eustasy  in greenhouse and transtional climates using oxygen isotopes of conodont apatite
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Zachary Sharp, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2013
* USD 298,427.00

Testing for high-frequency glacio- and/or thermo-eustasy during greenhouse and
transitional climates using oxygen isotopes of conodont
apatite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maya Elrick and Zachary Sharp&lt;br/&gt;University
of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0920830&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;High-
frequency (104-105 years) upward-shallowing carbonate cycles are common
sedimentary features and are generally attributed to orbitally driven glacio-
eustasy (changes in ice volume). But in warm, greenhouse conditions, glacial ice
is thought not to have been significant, making this interpretation for high
frequency carbonate cycles less compelling. We will evaluate the possibility
that glacio-eustasy did occur in warm climates by analyzing oxygen isotope
ratios of conodonts, a common fossil composed of diagenetically-resistant
phosphate. Glacial ice strongly incorporates the light stable isotope of oxygen.
Therefore, when large ice volumes are present (low sea level), the oxygen
isotope ratio of the ocean becomes measurably heavier. The diagenetically
resistant conodonts will allow us to search for this signal and address the
long-debated origin of temporally persistent and widespread meter-scale
carbonate cycles/parasequences, specifically whether the controversial proposal
that transient ice sheets can form even in warm climatic periods is reasonable
and supported by geochemical evidence. Our study will center on three greenhouse
(Late Silurian, Early Devonian and Early Triassic) and one transitional (Early
Mississippian) climatic mode. We plan to incorporate local middle and high
school science teachers into our research project to help bring scientific
inquiry into the classroom. This will be accomplished through collaboration with
the Science Education Institute of the Southwest (SEIS), and by conducting a
series of week-long summer workshops for professional teacher development in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;