* 0920337
* RUI:   Analysis of LIN-31, a transcription factor with multiple roles in C. elegans development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Leilani Miller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2013
* USD 427,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate choice of cell fate is crucial
for the proper development of multicellular organisms. The overall objective of
this project is to study how cell fates are specified in the soil nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. An understanding of how cells choose their fates in this
simple model system may provide insight into the developmental processes of more
complex organisms, including humans. &lt;br/&gt; LIN-31, a winged-helix
transcription factor, is required for proper vulval development in the soil
nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. This protein is believed to play two roles
during specification of vulval cell fates: (1) to promote non-vulval cell fates
(when bound to another transcription factor, LIN-1), and (2) to promote vulval
cell fates (when not bound to LIN-1). &lt;br/&gt; This project will use genetic,
molecular, and biochemical approaches to study LIN-31's role in vulval cell fate
specification. One set of experiments will focus on obtaining a better
functional understanding of different regions in the LIN-31 protein. Other
experiments will focus on protein interactions, first by continuing an analysis
of the known LIN-31/LIN-1 interaction, followed by a powerful, high-throughput
genetic screen in yeast in order to identify other proteins that may interact
with LIN-31.&lt;br/&gt;This project will allow a better understanding of the
pathways by which cell specification occurs. It has the potential to shed light
on how cells interact to create a complex phenotype. In addition, this project
will simultaneously make significant contributions to teaching, training and
learning. Undergraduate students will be an integral part of the project and
will improve their critical thinking, analytical, and problem-solving skills. In
addition, exposure to an authentic research experience will encourage students'
interest in science and give them the skills and motivation to pursue a science
career. Finally, many of these undergraduate students will be women and/or
underrepresented minorities.