* 0920238
* NMR Studies of the DNA Target Search Process by a Multi-zinc-Finger Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Junji Iwahara, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 06/30/2012
* USD 407,968.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Gene-regulation by DNA-binding proteins is vital for living systems. Such
proteins control gene expression by binding to particular DNA sequences, and the
association must be rapid for quick response to cellular signals. The overall
objective of this project is to obtain a physical understanding of the target
search process whereby DNA-binding proteins rapidly and efficiently locate their
target DNA sites in the presence of an enormous background of nonspecific DNA.
In particular, the research component of this three-year project focuses on the
structural, dynamic, and kinetic aspects of the target search by a gene-
regulatory protein with multiple zinc-finger DNA-binding domains (DBDs). Using
NMR spectroscopy, this project will analyze the target search by the Zif268
protein that contains three zinc-finger DBDs as a model system. This protein is
an inducible gene-regulatory protein involved in neuronal plasticity and memory
formation, and must efficiently find its target DNA sequences to mediate rapid
cellular responses to neuronal signals. The Zif268 protein is an ideal model for
the study of the target search process, because it has been extensively
characterized in biochemical, structural and functional terms, and also exhibits
excellent NMR spectra for both specific and non-specific DNA complexes. This
project will address three major questions: 1) In terms of structure and
dynamics, how does the Zif268 protein use the three DBDs for the target search
while it moves on the nonspecific DNA 2) How efficient is the so-called direct
transfer mechanism for the Zif268 protein 3) What is the relative contribution
of the sliding mechanism to the target search at high DNA concentrations To
answer these questions, various NMR approaches that have been developed in their
previous studies will be used. This project will provide important and general
insights into the target search by zinc-finger proteins, the most abundant class
of eukaryotic gene-regulatory proteins. Experimental data obtained in this
project will immediately be shared and discussed with Dr. Yaakov Levy's group
(Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel), which has been studying theoretical and
computational aspects of the facilitated target location by DNA-binding
proteins. This international collaboration will integrate experimental and
theoretical approaches to lead to more realistic views of the target search
process.

Broader Impacts: By integrating research and education, this project aims to
establish an institutional environment where students and researchers can
effectively take advantage of NMR spectroscopy in their research. The education
component offers opportunities whereby graduate students and research staff in
the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) can learn NMR as a research tool.
The principal investigator (PI) of this project will design Mathematica-based
syllabus for NMR spectroscopy, and also initiate an elective course to teach
practical aspects of NMR spectroscopy, demonstrating actual data collection and
analysis. Furthermore, the PI will continue to organize the NMR seminar as an
effective means to share knowledge and tools. The educational component of this
project includes science education for high school students and international
student exchange with the collaborators laboratory. Through UTMB's HSSRP
program, high school students are involved in the research in the context of
this project. This offers a fascinating project for high school students, in
which they combine their separate knowledge in biology, chemistry, physics and
mathematics to conduct scientific research in a professional environment. The
high school students will be supervised primarily by the graduate students
involved in this project, which will give the UTMB students an excellent
opportunity to teach at an institution with no regular undergraduate program.
The international student exchange will provide opportunities for graduate
students with different cultural backgrounds to learn the importance of wider
vision in science, because each of the two groups is investigating the same
subject by totally different and complementary approaches.