* 0920869
* SGER: Finding Interesting Patterns through Analysis of Complex Prediction Models
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2009,02/28/2010
* Mirek Riedewald, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2010
* USD 56,047.00

With data mining techniques it is possible to train accurate prediction models
for large high-dimensional data. Unfortunately, complex prediction models per se
are not easy to understand. To make them 'digestible', analysts need simpler
patterns that summarize the complex functions extracted by the model. The number
of such function summaries is overwhelming. Each slice of a lower-dimensional
subspace of the original data space could contain an interesting function
summary.

The goal of this project is to develop techniques for finding the most
'interesting' function summaries automatically and efficiently. This is done in
three steps. First, by formalizing the notion of interestingness for a wide
variety of pattern types. Second, by developing a declarative language for
specifying these interestingness measures. With a declarative language analysts
define what they find interesting, but they need not specify how to find it
efficiently. Third, an optimizing compiler for a small language fragment handles
the performance efficiency. A major research challenge is to strike the right
balance between expressiveness of the language and making it amenable to
effective query optimization.

The results of this project will pave the way for powerful exploratory analysis
tools. They will also enable future research on optimizers and user-friendly
interfaces for the declarative language. The approach will be validated using
the rich data resources being organized by the ornithological community in the
Avian Knowledge Network (AKN). This will have a tremendous impact on the ability
to identify the most significant environmental variables that affect
biodiversity on the planet. For example, land managers could discover the
possible impact of their decisions on an ecosystem's health.

A component of the language will be available to the public through Web services
on the AKN Web site (http://www.avianknowledge.net/content). Additional results
will be disseminated through the project Web site
(http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~mirek/Projects/FunctionSummaries). This will enable
a broad audience, from researchers to land managers or bird watchers, teachers
or school children to derive novel knowledge from the data resources gathered.