* 0920350
* Phase II: Building a Community around Modeling, Statistics, Computation, and Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2009,11/30/2015
* Nicholas Horton, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 11/30/2015
* USD 424,185.00

Discipline Code: 21&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the early
college-level STEM quantitative curriculum. Connecting the modeling, statistics,
computation, and calculus (MSCC) subjects among themselves is important for
aligning the quantitative curriculum with other STEM disciplines. The first step
is to connect calculus to modeling and statistics. Doing so often involves the
use of computer technology.&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a community of
educator-scholars who can inform each other about the connections among the MSCC
subjects, increase awareness of the advantages of integrating the MSCC subjects
among themselves and with other STEM disciplines, improve and expand resources
that can be useful in teaching in a variety of institutions, create faculty
development opportunities to disseminate successful approaches, and develop
materials useful in assessing student mastery of concepts relating to
MSCC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National reports, from a wide range of STEM (and
other) disciplines, call for interdisciplinary alignment and the enhancement of
the traditional quantitative curriculum to emphasize modeling, statistics, and
computation. This Phase II proposal draws on successful demonstrations at
individual institutions which achieve this alignment by unifying the MSCC
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;One example is the Applied Calculus/Statistical Modeling
first-year courses at Macalester College in which students from a range of
disciplines gain strong skills and conceptual understanding of multivariate
quantitative topics and mastery of important statistical techniques such as
analysis of covariance. Modeling is a major theme of both course, and modern
computation is integrated into both.&lt;br/&gt;Another example is the bio-
calculus program at Appalachian State University designed to integrate
mathematics and statistics into the biology curriculum. In this program,
calculus is successfully introduced to students by dealing with discrete models
motivated by the analysis of scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics
emphasized in this project are at the heart of a solid quantitative education
for STEM students. The project engages faculty in diverse institutional
settings, helping to ensure that the materials developed are broadly adoptable.
Assessment in the form of a concept inventory is an integral component of the
project, which helps demonstrate the effectiveness of the innovations. The
emphasis on faculty development opportunities, both webinars and summer
workshops, provides a mechanism for uptake of the innovations by faculty from a
broad range of institutions.