* 0920800
* Expansion of "The Math You Need , When You Need It" Through Widespread Implementation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2015
* Helen Burn, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2015
* USD 283,129.00

This CCLI Phase 2 project addresses the need for student-centered resources that
introduce quantitative skills into introductory geoscience courses to increase
the quantitative literacy (QL) of students, particularly general education
students. This project reduces the significant challenges faced by faculty due
to students' varied mathematical preparation and attitudes towards mathematics.
It builds upon a CCLI Phase 1 project, "The Math You Need, When You Need
It."&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: TMYN are self-paced, web-based student
modules that support teaching and learning of quantitative topics in
introductory geoscience courses. Pilot projects at the University of Wisconsin
Oshkosh (UWO) and Highline Community College (HCC) combined several proven
pedagogies: student centered instruction, online modular resources and Just-in-
Time Teaching. TMYN is being expanded: 1) to develop a variety of implementation
models; and 2) to further facilitate the teaching and learning of quantitative
skills in the geosciences. The effectiveness of the TMYN modules is being
explored by training faculty in their versatility and working with interested
faculty to design effective and innovative implementation models. Ten additional
modules are being developed to bring the collection of TMYN collection to 16
quantitative concepts. A large dataset and web-based resources, including a
tutorial in the use and implementation of TMYN, are being produced. The expanded
TMYN program is building resources related to teaching that could make this
project self-sustaining.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project contributes to
increasing QL for undergraduates. Increasingly, colleges and universities are
recognizing QL as an important outcome for their graduates. The modular design
of TMYN allows for tailoring to individual courses and can support increased QL
for the more than 350,000 students that take introductory geoscience every year.
The project is designed to support geoscience faculty that want to integrate
quantitative aspects of geoscience in their courses with little additional
effort and minimal alienation from under-prepared students. Geoscience faculty
with experience and leadership in the use of QL in the classroom are
participating in workshops and using web pages that detail the results of the
use of TMYN modules at many different institutions. The use of the SERC web
server ensures widespread dissemination.