* 0920335
* A Comprehensive Framework for Timely Introduction of Emerging Data-Intensive Computing to STEM Audiences
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* John Van Benschoten, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,875.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
improve the big-data preparedness of diverse STEM audiences by defining a
comprehensive framework called TIDE (Timely Introduction of Emerging Data-
intensive computing). The project creates a certificate program and provides
methods to institutionalize the framework developed. The project is motivated by
and guided by collective experiences in grid computing and in solving domain-
specific problems in life sciences and environmental engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-intensive computing has been receiving much attention
as a solution to address the data deluge that has been brought about by
tremendous advances in distributed systems and Internet-based computing. An
innovative programming model called MapReduce and a peta-scale distributed file
system to support it have revolutionized and fundamentally changed approaches to
large scale data storage and processing. However there exists no systematic
approach to teach the big-data concepts to STEM undergraduates. TIDE addresses
these issues through the following objectives: (a) Define a set of core
competencies that are required for research (to advance the field) and for
practical application design (to build systems) in data-intensive computing
areas; (b) Define a certificate program that consists of five courses that
effectively addresses the competencies defined above: data structures and
algorithms, distributed systems, data-intensive computing, a domain-specific
course, and a capstone project solving a data-intensive problem. These courses
are developed from existing courses as part of the TIDE project; (c) Define and
develop the curriculum for the courses, including teaching materials such as
laboratory exercises and case studies for practical experimentation; (d) Broaden
participation in the certificate program; (e) Assess the progress and the
effectiveness of the program; and (f) Provide strategies for educators to
effectively adopt the TIDE framework.