* 0920632
* jGRASP: Toward Effortless Program Visualization with a Canvas of Dynamic Objects
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* James Cross, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 250,000.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Software visualizations
are recognized mechanisms for teaching fundamental programming concepts, yet
their classroom potential is seldom fully realized. Lack of integration of a
variety of visualizations into a common, easily used framework is a primary
obstacle. This project removes this barrier by providing a robust framework for
recognizing dynamic objects and then rendering them in a single unified canvas
view. This new canvas view, which complements other visualizations such as
control structure diagrams, UML class diagrams, and individual data structure
diagrams, is a significant step toward effortless program visualization. The
fully developed canvas framework is based on jGRASP, which has been extremely
well received by students, educators, and publishers. &lt;br/&gt;The project's
objectives are to: (1) Create a framework that recognizes multiple dynamic
objects and renders them in a single unified canvas view to complement other
visualizations and pedagogical features such as an object workbench and
interactions pane; (2) Guide development through formative evaluation by faculty
and students to support CS1, CS2, Algorithms, and other courses in the computing
curriculum; (3) Determine the impact of the framework on the curriculum as an
aid to teaching and learning; and (4) Disseminate the framework via the
Internet, conferences, workshops, and textbooks. &lt;br/&gt;