* 0920747
* The Exocyst and Vesicle Trafficking In Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* John Fowler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 446,415.00

PI: John E. Fowler NSF Proposal # IOS-0920747: "The Exocyst and Vesicle
Trafficking In Plant Development"

Inside each plant cell, tiny membrane-bound vesicles carry a variety of
materials essential for plant growth and development to the plasma membrane,
which helps form the cell?s boundary. The mechanism by which these vesicles are
delivered to the correct location on the plasma membrane at precisely the right
time is not well understood, even though this tight regulation is fundamental to
such processes as cell division, cell wall elongation, defense against
pathogens, and intercellular communication (e.g., plant hormone signaling). This
project will study the role of a particular complex of eight proteins, the
exocyst, in such vesicle trafficking. Based upon work in yeast and mammalian
systems, the exocyst is hypothesized to work as a tether between a vesicle and
its intended location at the plasma membrane, helping to target vesicles to
specific sites at developmentally appropriate times. The importance of the
exocyst in plants is demonstrated by mutations in exocyst proteins, which cause
defective pollen tube growth, reduced stem elongation in the dark, and dwarfism
(including short roots). This project will utilize genetic, biochemical, and
cell biological methods to more specifically investigate the exocyst?s possible
roles in vesicle trafficking, phytohormone signaling, and cytokinesis (cell
division), and will examine both pollen tube elongation and primary root growth
in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. This work is likely to have broader
impacts by informing applied work that seeks to modify plant growth, cell walls
(e.g., for biofuels), or pathogen response in agricultural crops. This project
will train a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student, foster a productive
collaboration with researchers in the Czech Republic, and provide science
outreach to local elementary and high school students.