* 0920855
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Performance and Community Mobilization in Post-Apartheid South Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Dorothy Hodgson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,540.00

Doctoral candidate, Omotayo Jolaosho (Rutgers University), under the guidance of
Dr. Dorothy Hodgson, will investigate the role of embodied performance in
community mobilizations for social change through ethnographic and archival
research in South Africa. Freedom songs and dances created within anti-apartheid
struggles continue to flourish well after apartheid's demise as South Africans
adapt anti-apartheid performances and create new forms in response to current
conditions. To situate contemporary performance activism within a longer
historical trajectory, the researcher will examine continuities and
transformations between earlier anti-apartheid performances and current
adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will investigate the
relationship between performance and mobilization in three contexts: 1) internal
organizational practices; 2) the interaction of activists with external
audiences; and 3) the everyday events and common routines from which articulated
strategies develop. She will employ participant observation in a community
organization and conduct interviews to collect detailed interpretations from
organizers and their audiences. She also will collect and analyze archival
materials to provide a historical backdrop for contemporary practices. Through
these methods, the researcher will develop a comprehensive analysis of how
bodily expressions mobilize collectivities for social change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating an integrative bodily approach to political
performance, the researcher will further recent innovations in the study of
collective action. The research will produce insights into how citizens respond
to the effects of changing macro-economic policies and advance international
social science research that investigates local manifestations of trends that
transcend national and regional boundaries. Funding this research also supports
the education of a social scientist.