* 0920865
* Face Perception: Mapping Psychological Spaces to Neural Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kalanit Grill-Spector, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 479,992.00

The ability to recognize faces is essential for navigating our social world. The
human visual system can effortlessly categorize, identify, and remember
thousands of faces over a lifetime. Research using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) has identified several regions in the human visual cortex that
specifically and selectively respond to faces, but key questions remain with
respect to the neural mechanisms underlying face recognition. For example, it is
unclear whether face-selective regions are equally responsive to all human
faces, or how perceptual measures of similarity correlate with neural measures
of similarity between faces. With support from the National Science Foundation,
the investigator will use recent methodological innovations that enable high-
resolution fMRI, combined with innovative psychophysical methods and
computational models to study the neural basis of within-category representation
of faces. The project will identify the fundamental properties that drive
responses in face-selective regions, determine whether these responses are tuned
to the distribution of faces experienced by individuals over their lifetime, and
determine whether measures of similarity of neural responses are tightly related
to measures of perceptual or physical similarity among faces. Overall, this
research will provide significant advancement in the understanding of how neural
responses support our ability to identify individual faces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have significant implications beyond
providing support for a particular computational theory of face representation.
It would provide a useful tool for comparing the representations of any other
visual category, for example, comparing between neural responses to faces and to
objects, which is an issue of central debate. The understanding of neural
correlates of normal face identification also provides an important baseline for
understanding impairments in face identification as manifested in cogenital
prosopagnosia, Asperger's Syndrome and Autism, and as such has broad health and
societal implications. This project also aims to advance neuroimaging methods by
further developing high-resolution fMRI techniques and by examining whether
different experimental designs and analyses for high-resolution imaging show
convergent results. Finally, this research will provide training opportunities
for students at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral levels.