* 0920217
* Doctoral Disseration Research in Political Science: Foreign Investment and Political Attitudes toward Social Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Celeste Beesley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The relationship between globalization and social policy has become an
increasing focus of scholarly research. Does globalization increase insecurity?
If so, who is most affected? Are governments able to respond by providing
adequate social protections? Or does globalization itself limit their capacity
to do so? To date, much of this research has focused on government spending and
provision; it has not investigated how globalization affects the policy
preferences of individuals. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project explores whether
and how individuals? exposure to foreign-owned firms causes them to favor more
social spending. The research is located in post-socialist Ukraine; it therefore
focuses on the attitudes of citizens in a new democracy that is also in
transition to a market economy; the research will therefore speak to important
political as well as economic issues in this important set of cases. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In order to study individual attitudes, this project generates
original data, using a survey design that minimizes many of the problems
inherent in existing surveys. The survey sites are four smaller cities, two in
western Ukraine and two in Eastern Ukraine. In each region, the selected pairs
of cities are matched along population and economic variables, but differ
drastically in their levels of FDI. This design is particularly strong at
approximating the effect of FDI on political attitudes. By comparing individuals
within a single country, this research avoids questions about whether country-
specific cultural, social or political institutions, rather than FDI, explain
observed differences in political attitudes. Furthermore, this design controls
for political or geographic variables that influence foreign investors' choice
of destination. Thus, this research design allows us to draw more precise causal
inferences about the relationship between individuals? exposure to foreign
investment and their political preferences over government social
policy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has broader impacts on long-standing
debates in international political economy about the effects of globalization on
domestic politics. It makes a unique contribution in assessing the direct
effects of foreign investment on citizens, rather than on elites and
institutions. In addition, this project measures political attitudes in
"regional" populations, which are a significant portion of the population in all
post-communist countries, yet tend to be underrepresented in national politics
and understudied even in area studies. The original data produced by this
research will be of use to other scholars interested in the formation of
political attitudes in new democracies, "economic voting" in transition
economies, social policy preferences or globalization.