* 0920138
* Physiological constraints of symbiont switching: An experimental study of cultivar fidelity and cultivar re-association in fungus-growing ants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jon Seal, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 398,590.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutualistic alliances
between different organisms generate common goods for the interacting organisms
that often exceed the sum of the parts. For example, attine fungus-growing ants
provide their fungal cultivars with growth material, shelter, and protection
from pathogens, while the fungus in turn serves as the ants' main food source.
The fungus also provides the ants with digestive enzymes. Fungal cultivars are
transferred to offspring ant nests from parental nests, but on rare occasions
cultivars are also passed from one ant species to another ant species, creating
new ant-fungus combinations with novel properties and novel common goods. This
proposal aims to elucidate the novel common goods that are generated in natural
and experimentally induced ant-fungus associations, focusing on enzyme
efficiency, growth rate, and health (pathogen resistance) of different ant-
fungus combinations. The project therefore elucidates general principles
governing mutualism and cooperation in a social, symbiotic organism. Because the
project focuses specifically on several ant-fungus mutualisms occurring in the
USA, the research also presents rich opportunities in teaching and outreach
(e.g., workshops at public schools and nature centers) to promote education of
students and the public on the importance of symbiosis in local biodiversity and
local environments.