* 0920894
* Collaborative Research: New Chemo- and Biostratigraphic Framework for the Lower Triassic of the Western U.S.: Towards a high-resolution understanding of Early Triassic events
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2011
* Margaret Fraiser, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2011
* USD 69,240.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: New Chemo- and
Biostratigraphic Framework for&lt;br/&gt;the Lower Triassic of the Western U.S.:
Towards a high-resolution&lt;br/&gt;understanding of Early Triassic
events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pedro Marenco, UC Riverside,
EAR-0921127&lt;br/&gt;Margaret Fraiser, Univ. Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
EAR-0920894&lt;br/&gt;Matthew Clapham, UC Santa Cruz, Ear-0918184
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The cause of the end-Permian mass
extinction remains controversial. However, some combination of CO2 or H2S
toxicity and/or climate change, triggered or catalyzed by the eruption of the
Siberian Traps, appears to be the most likely kill mechanism. The biotic
recovery from the end-Permian mass extinction has received less attention,
despite the fact that the Early Triassic recovery was unusually long (~5m.y.)
The occurrence of ?anachronistic facies? (e.g., seafloor precipitated crystals,
subtidal stromatolite bioherms, and wrinkle structures), multiple carbon
isotopic excursions, and elevated seawater sulfate sulfur isotopic values in
Lower Triassic strata suggest a prolonged period of anomalous environmental
conditions following the mass extinction that may have delayed the biotic
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;Multiple lines of evidence imply that the Early Triassic was
a time of elevated atmospheric CO2 most likely resulting from the extreme
volcanism of the Siberian Traps. At the same time, metazoan reefs disappeared
from the fossil record until the Middle Triassic, while calcifying marine
invertebrates tended to be small. These observations and experimental work on
living organisms have raised concerns about the ecological consequences of ocean
acidification, in reef ecosystems in particular. Laboratory experiments with
extant corals have demonstrated that as pH drops, corals survive as polyps
without skeletons until pH returns to favorable levels. It has been suggested
that similar ocean acidification during the Early Triassic inhibited growth of
large calcareous shells, favoring small organisms, and prevented corals from
forming skeletons. Thus, if the protracted recovery reflects a suppressed
ecosystem due to elevated CO2 levels, Early Triassic communities may represent
an ancient analog for the effects of greenhouse gas-forced ocean acidification
on Earth?s ecosystems. Considering the extreme importance of coral skeletal
frameworks in supporting the biodiversity of modern reef ecosystems, the
inability of corals to produce skeletons will most likely have severe and
negative effects on fisheries and the economies that depend on them. Thus,
unusual Early Triassic deposits may provide a preview of marine ecosystems under
conditions of increased atmospheric pCO2 and reduced ocean pH.&lt;br/&gt;The
Lower Triassic of the western U.S. was deposited in two basins on the western
coast of Pangaea, which together comprise a nearly complete record of the entire
Early Triassic. Studies of the biotic recovery in the western U.S. have largely
focused on fossil abundance and diversity patterns and the occurrence of
anachronistic facies. These studies have demonstrated that anachronistic facies
such as seafloor-precipitated aragonite fans and large subtidal stromatolite
bioherms are found exclusively in deeper water settings, below fair-weather wave
base (except for the immediate P-T boundary interval). Crystal fans have been
reported only from slope or basinal sections while stromatolite bioherms occur
on flooding surfaces at the bases of parasequences in more proximal
environments. Both seafloor crystal fans and stromatolite bioherms are
interpreted to have formed under anaerobic conditions. The facies-dependent
occurrence of anachronistic facies has led to the conclusion that anoxia was a
deep-ocean phenomenon during the Early Triassic, and that shallower settings
were a refuge from anoxia in the aftermath of the mass extinction. The lack of
evidence for shallow-water anoxia during the Early Triassic suggests that the
biotic recovery in the shallow realm may have been hindered not by anoxia, but
by hypercapnia and ocean-acidification due to high atmospheric carbon
dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of atmospheric carbon dioxide and ocean
acidification during the Early Triassic has received little study. In order to
understand the nature of the recovery, the independent and synergistic effects
of deep-water anoxia and shallow-water acidification on marine ecosystems need
to be examined in greater detail. Because of the different environmental range
of each stress, evidence for the two phenomena is rarely found in a single
section; thus studies are currently hindered by the lack of a robust
stratigraphic framework for the precise correlation of proximal to distal
depositional settings both within and between the two Lower Triassic
successions. PIs will address this issue by creating a high-resolution bio- and
chemostratigraphic framework for the western U.S. and then use those results to
test two hypotheses related to the nature of the biotic recovery: 1) The oxygen
isotopic composition of conodont phosphate and brachiopod carbonate indicates
that the Early Triassic was a time of recurrent climate warming and ocean
acidification resulting from increased atmospheric carbon dioxide from Siberian
Trap volcanism, and 2) spatially and temporally variable environmental
conditions facilitated ecologic change in the Paleozoic Fauna that can be
tracked in the immediate extinction aftermath and through the prolonged Early
Triassic biotic crisis.&lt;br/&gt;