* 0920240
* Properties of the Denatured States of Thermophilic versus Mesophilic Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Vincent LiCata, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 08/31/2013
* USD 590,426.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
addresses why certain proteins remain stable at very high temperatures. Proteins
in living organisms must fold into specific shapes in order to function. The
properly folded state is called the "native" state, while the disorganized,
unfolded state is called the "denatured" state. Several lines of thermodynamic
evidence have led to the hypothesis that the properties of the denatured states
of some proteins hold the key to how stable the proteins are to high
temperature. This project experimentally tests this hypothesis in several
different ways by examining the properties of the denatured states of pairs of
homologous proteins, where one member of the protein pair is highly temperature
stable (the thermophilic protein), while the other member of the pair is easily
unfolded with temperature (the mesophilic protein). A central focus of the
project is to compare the denatured states of a thermophilic versus a mesophilic
DNA polymerase. DNA polymerases are proteins that replicate DNA. Klenow and
Klentaq DNA polymerases, from E. coli and Thermus aquaticus, respectively, share
an almost identical native structure, yet Klentaq polymerase is stable at
temperatures 50 degrees Celcius higher than those that fully denature Klenow
polymerase. Thermodynamic studies suggest that the denatured state of Klentaq
polymerase is significantly more compact and/or less dynamic than the denatured
state of Klenow, despite the fact that their native states are highly
homologous. This project will extensively characterize the global structure
(size and shape), dehydration upon folding, and dynamics of the denatured states
of these two different polymerases, and then will begin to test the generality
of these results with other similar pairs of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work includes the fact that it will directly
contribute to helping solve the "protein folding problem". Understanding how
proteins fold to their native states, and why some proteins are energetically
stable while others are not, constitutes one of the most important questions in
biology, with impact from fundamental biochemistry to protein-engineering.
Understanding the denatured state of proteins is "half the problem", yet nearly
90% of all work on the protein folding problem has thus far examined only the
native states of proteins. This project will be the first direct structural
comparison between the denatured states of a thermophilic and mesophilic protein
pair, and it will directly, experimentally link those changes to the energetics
and thermodynamics of folding. The preliminary data for this project already
indicate that there may be significant size differences between the two
denatured states, and this project would be the first direct structural
observation and characterization of such differences. Such differences would
alter the current widely held view that denatured state size is sequence
independent and solely a function of protein chain length. This project thus
aims to utilize thermodynamics and methods of polymer structural analysis to
provide one of the most integrated structural-thermodynamic views of the
denatured state for any protein system. Further, the design of an easily
applicable suite of methods for quick determinations of the global properties of
the denatured states of other thermophilic-mesophilic protein pairs, so that
other researchers will be able to more quickly perform similar comparisons, will
also be an intellectual benefit of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The broader impact and educational goals of this work include: 1)
Introducing a more up-to-date view of the denatured state of proteins into the
General Biochemistry and Physical Biochemistry courses at Louisiana State
University to help decrease the gap between textbook information and real
research; 2) Significant integration of undergraduate researchers into the
project and 3) Development of a play for general audiences about protein
folding, with strong scientific content, to be produced in collaboration with
the Communication Studies Department at the Louisiana State University.