* 0920941
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Shifting Borders on Ethnic Identity: The Case of Bulgarian Turks
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2009,11/30/2010
* Robert Hayden, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 11/30/2010
* USD 14,946.00

University of Pittsburgh doctoral student Hande Sozer, with guidance from Dr.
Robert M. Hayden, will undertake research on how ethnic identity develops when
ethnic groups are internally and externally fragmented. The focus of her
research will be a case study of Bulgarian Turks. With the creation of the
Ottoman-Bulgaria border in 1878, the Turkish population in Bulgaria took on a
multifacted identity, divided not only by the border, but also, in both
countries, by internal hierarchical divisions along religious lines (Alevi
Muslim versus Sunni Muslim) and regional lines (whether they originated in
northern or southern Bulgaria). The complexity of the situation of Bulgarian
Turks provides an ideal opportunity for refining social science understanding of
ethnic groups and boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will
investigate multiple aspects of the situation of Bulgarian Turks: How do members
of a minority's different subgroups accommodate their disadvantages vis-Ã -vis
other subgroups and in the broader society? Does it help or hinder them to
maintain relations across borders and divisions? When, how, and why have members
of some subgroups realized these connections while others did not? She will
conduct archival research in Bulgaria and Turkey, and undertake ethnographic
fieldwork, including participant observation and focused interviewing among
Bulgarian Turks in two sites in Bulgaria (Razgrad and Kardjali) and one site
Turkey (Bursa).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Governments often develop policies that are
based on the assumption of homogeneity within minority populations. This
research will test those assumptions and, in so doing, contribute to better
social science theory of ethnic differentiation and the effects of borders, as
well as better policy for minorities. The award also contributes to the
education of a social scientist.