* 0920845
* Stimulus representation and spontaneous activity in recurrent networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Carina Curto, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 109,635.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research consists of three projects that will develop new theoretical
approaches and experimental predictions about recurrent networks in the
mammalian brain. The first two projects are primarily concerned with stimulus
representation via recurrent networks, while the third project focuses on
spontaneous activity. Project 1 formalizes and develops an algebra-geometric
framework previously introduced in joint work with Vladimir Itskov. The main
idea is to associate geometry and topology to population spike train data --
primarily from electrophysiological recordings in cortex and hippocampus.
Project 2 explores the relationship between stimulus space topology and
recurrent network connectivity. The goal of this project is to find experimental
predictions about the connectivity of recurrent networks in cases where either
the stimulus space structure or the topographic structure of the underlying
network is known. Project 3 investigates the interaction between the activity of
single neurons and the population activity of the local network.

Building accurate representations of the world is one of the basic functions of
the brain. When a stimulus is paired with pleasure or pain, an animal quickly
learns the association. However, we also learn the (neutral) relationships
between stimuli of the same type. For example, a bar held at a 45-degree angle
seems closer to one held at 50 degrees than to a perfectly vertical one. Upon
hearing a pair of distinct pure tones, one seems higher than the other. We do
not perceive the world as a stream of unrelated stimuli; rather, our brains
organize different types of stimuli into structured stimulus spaces. Regardless
of immediate relevance to survival, it appears to be beneficial for the brain to
reflect as much structure as possible of the outside world. The main goal of
this research is to improve our understanding of how stimulus spaces are
represented via recurrent networks in the brain. To this end, we develop ideas
and techniques coming from geometry and topology to extract novel insights from
neuroscience experiments. How the brain represents the world is a fundamental
and age-old question. Progress in understanding how the structure of neural
circuits underlies representational functions may also provide clues in the
study of neurological disease.