* 0920449
* RIG:   Role of Cdx transcription factors in the control of neural plate competence to FGF pattering signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Isaac Skromne, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

A neural progenitor cell encounters numerous cues during its development, but
acquires a distinct fate from hundreds of possible fates. The PI is interested
in understanding how neural progenitor cells choose the cues to respond to
during their development. For example, his previous work demonstrated that a
cell's decision to become brain or spinal cord was controlled by Caudal/Cdx
genes. This project examines the role the Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs)
signaling in regulating Caudal/Cdx activity during the cell?s decision. He will
address this issue by altering Caudal/Cdx and FGF gene expression at different
times and places during zebra fish development. He expects to uncover the
conditions where FGF signaling promotes proliferation and differentiation of
brain and spinal cord progenitor cells and where these processes are prevented
from occurring. These studies should provide new insights into the mechanisms
governing the ability of cells to respond to environmental factors during the
development and adult life of an organism. In particular, this research should
have broad intellectual implications in the fields of immunology, neurobiology,
developmental and cancer biology. This research program is also designed to
foster inquiry-based research and communication skills and advance knowledge
among graduate and undergraduate students, particularly those from
underrepresented minorities.