* 0920182
* Integrating Test Design into Computing Curriculum from the Beginning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Viera Proulx, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 08/31/2013
* USD 249,959.00

Computer Science (31)

This project involves the building of a tool that supports test design in the
context of Java-based object-oriented programming from the very beginning and
throughout the undergraduate curriculum. Concurrently, curriculum materials are
developed that support learning test design for both the novice programmers, and
for the advanced learner, along with a comprehensive introduction to the design
of test cases, the design of methods that perform test evaluation, and the
design of the test reporting. The goal is to introduce gradually the techniques
for test design and the understanding of the underlying concepts arising from
test evaluation (equality, cloning, circularity of data definitions, handling
exceptions, testing effects, etc.) so that students acquire gradually all skills
needed to understand and master both test design and test evaluation.

Intellectual Merit: The importance of software test design is self-evident. The
project's intellectual merit is in making software testing an integral part of
computing curricula, producing students who understand both the benefit of well
designed tests and the art of designing both the tests and software that
supports systematic testing. An additional merit is the development of the
pedagogy that is needed to guide the student through the gradual introduction to
the design of tests as well as software that supports testing.

Broader impact: The goal of this project is to change in a fundamental way the
teaching of programming at all levels, so that the habit of proper test design
is ingrained in students' minds from the beginning. Such a change has a lasting
impact on students' programming practice and in the long term will impact the
software industry the students enter upon graduation. Through a web site,
workshops, mailing list, and other outreach activities, results are disseminated
to impact instructors and students at hundreds of colleges and universities.
Additional dissemination of the results is through papers and tutorials at
conferences.