* 0920432
* Role of Unpaired3 in Janus kinase signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Douglas Harrison, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anthea Letsou
* 07/31/2013
* USD 400,000.00

The development of multicellular animals from a single-celled fertilized egg is
a complex process that requires extensive communication between enormous numbers
of cells. It is the long-term goal of this research to better understand how
cellular signaling is used to direct activities that sculpt a multicellular
organism. The approach taken in this project is to study the mechanisms by which
one evolutionarily conserved signal cascade, the Janus kinase (JAK) signaling
pathway, regulates development in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, as a
model for developmental cell signaling in other animals, including humans. Study
of JAK signaling in fruit flies is particularly attractive because it is
amenable to genetic and developmental manipulation and because only the three
Unpaired (Upd) family proteins are believed to act as signals for the JAK
pathway. Previous studies have examined the developmental functions of Upd and
Upd2. The current project will use genetic, developmental, and biochemical
methods to determine the functions of Upd3 in development and JAK signaling, as
well as to determine the mechanisms by which the Unpaired family proteins act
together to regulate JAK signaling during development. It is expected that
mechanisms uncovered in this system will be applicable to multi-gene families of
cell signaling proteins found in other animals. This project will provide
opportunities for the education and training of young biologists and will be the
primary training activity of graduate students in the laboratory, with
additional roles played by undergraduates seeking to learn about biology through
conducting independent research projects.