* 0920893
* Gene Amplification: Acinetobacter baylyi as a bacterial model system
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,12/31/2013
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls
* 12/31/2013
* USD 523,943.00

Abstract

This project focuses on a new bacterial system for studying chromosomal
rearrangements involving gene duplication and further amplification. Gene
amplification, which is a common process in all organisms, has significant
consequences. It is essential to evolution, genetic diversity, and the ability
of organisms to adapt to variable environments. Gene amplification also
contributes to serious problems such as drug resistance, cancer, and microbial
virulence. Despite its importance, many aspects of gene amplification remain
poorly understood. Unlike other types of genetic change, amplification is
dynamic and reversible. It may leave no evidence of its position or frequency.
In this research project, an unusual characteristic of a soil bacterium,
Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1, facilitates the systematic study of gene
amplification. The critical characteristic is that A. baylyi naturally takes up
DNA from the environment with exceptionally high efficiency and incorporates it
into the genome via homologous recombination. This natural competence for DNA
uptake permits the use of a transformation assay to detect the precise endpoints
of duplicated chromosomal regions in mutants that arise spontaneously. The DNA
sequence of such duplication sites provides information about the underlying
genetic recombination event. This project builds on intriguing results from
initial studies in which a new type of position specific illegitimate
recombination (PSIR) process was discovered. The PSIR events lack DNA features
that characterize typical site-specific recombination. One objective of this
project is to determine the mechanism of PSIR, which appears to be novel.
Additionally, a genome-wide approach will be used to characterize spontaneous
duplications. Important features of DNA that contribute to gene duplication will
be investigated such as DNA sequence and genomic context. This strategy will
improve our understanding of a fundamental, common and important genetic
process.

Broader Impacts. Students will be trained in important multidisciplinary areas
that bridge genetics, physiology, biochemistry, and computation. The project is
accessible to students at all levels and will involve undergraduate and graduate
students. Additionally, a postdoctoral researcher will conduct related
investigations and help mentor the project participants. Ongoing programs at the
University of Georgia will enhance the opportunity to train a diverse group of
scientists. Such programs include an NSF-supported Research Experiences for
Undergraduate (REU) site program in prokaryotic biology. The long-term impact of
this research has the potential to offset harmful effects of gene amplification
through a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Moreover, gene
amplification can be developed for beneficial biotechnology applications.
Ideally, chromosomal gene amplification could be used for desired manipulations
to avoid the problematic use of plasmids and antibiotic selections in genetic
engineering. Furthermore, computational analyses of chromosomal rearrangements
have predictive value that will expand the utility of DNA sequences deposited in
databases.

