* 0920555
* Plant Cortical Microtubule Array Organization.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Sidney Shaw, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2012
* USD 632,852.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each individual plant cell forms an
outer covering of carbohydrate materials that must be stretched and remodeled
over time to create cell shape. The collective integration of those cell shapes
gives rise to plant form. The goal of this project is to identify key molecular
factors responsible for determining how cell expansion is regulated. Small
polymers called microtubules form temporary patterns inside the cell which
template the deposition of carbohydrates into the cell wall. Those carbohydrate
patterns, in turn, play a significant role in determining how plant cells expand
to create tissues, organs, and ultimately plant form. This project uses
molecular and cell biological techniques to test hypotheses about how the
microtubule polymers become arrayed into specific patterns for plant
development. Proteins that act on the polymers to trim them to size or to bundle
them into super-structures have been identified and their role in patterning the
microtubule array during morphogenesis are being assessed. The successful
completion of this project will provide critical insight into the most basic
mechanisms of plant growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The growth
mechanisms under study are directly responsible for the compact axial growth
habit of crop plants desirable for efficient conversion of light energy to
biomass. This project will provide information both about the role of the
microtubules (a common herbicide target) and the organization of cellulose
polymers (e.g. biofuels feedstock) in creating the axial plant morphology. This
project provides advanced training for a post-doctoral research fellow and a
graduate student using state of the art imaging technologies and integrated
mathematical modeling approaches for hypothesis testing. Two undergraduate
honors students will also participate in this project, gaining valuable research
experience toward their stated professional goals. Biological materials
developed for this research are being incorporated into an undergraduate honors
biology course and a graduate imaging course. Special techniques developed for
time-lapse imaging in 3-dimensions and subsequent quantitative analysis are
being disseminated through technical publications, lectures, and web based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;