* 0920653
* RIG:  Mechanisms of Molecular Recognition by the Transcription Factor LMO7 at the Nuclear Envelope and the Adherens Junctions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Gabriela Perez-Alvarado, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2013
* USD 175,000.00

LMO7 is a transcription factor that has two distinct roles. At the nucleus it
regulates the transcription of genes important for heart, muscle and retina
formation. It also plays an adaptor role in stabilizing communication between
proteins (cadherin and nectin) that are involved in cell-to-cell junctions. This
project will determine at the molecular level 1) the structure-function
relationships associated with the recognition processes of two conserved
structural domains (PDZ and LIM) within LMO7, and 2) how variations in these
domains influence the two functions (adaptor and transcriptional regulator) of
the LMO7 protein. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular
biological, biochemical and biophysical methods will be employed to understand
specific interactions and the dynamic structural changes that occur upon
binding. Results from the atomic level high-resolution structures will provide
information for the design of mutagenesis experiments that will advance our
understanding of the protein-protein assembly process. These studies will define
the differences and similarities between the interactions that are relevant to
multi-molecular assembly within the cadherin-nectin containing complexes, as
compared to those interactions required for the regulation of gene transcription
in the nucleus.

Broader Impacts This project will provide graduate, undergraduate and high
school students the opportunity to participate in structural biology research on
the structure of proteins, the regulation of gene expression, and specific
mechanisms of molecular recognition. A special emphasis will be placed on the
recruitment to this project of students from economically disadvantaged
backgrounds as well as members of minorities under-represented in scientific
research. High school students will be mentored through a Project SEED program
of the American Chemical Society. Aspects of this project will be integrated
into courses at both graduate and undergraduate levels, and students involved in
this research will have the opportunity to present their results at regional and
national conferences.