* 0920801
* Enhancing the Relevance and Effectiveness of Course, Program and Department Evaluation: Improving the Utility and Usability of the Student Assessment of Learning Gains Site
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Robert Mathieu, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2013
* USD 481,685.00

Assessment/Research (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
the development of interactive help and support systems for novice and expert
users of the Student Assessment of their Learning Gains (SALG) course,
department, and evaluator websites. The SALG is a web-based, course-evaluation
instrument that focuses on students' assessments of how effectively course-
design and teaching methods help them make learning gains. The expanded help and
support systems increase the usability of the SALG sites for course, program,
and departmental evaluation and enhance the power and number of ways that users
have to interact with each other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to the SALG
websites include three types of enhancements. First, the user-support functions
expand the help sections on course, department, and evaluator sites by the
inclusion of interactive tutorials and "Tips and Tactics" sections. These
sections consist of advice about strategies and best practices and an archive of
white-papers/articles on the SALG and links to articles on the use of SALG by
others. An interactive forum provides a platform for users to access immediate
practical help and to engage in discussions on broad issues concerning the
assessment of learning. Second, the department site contains additional
functions to assist users in exploiting the capabilities of the site by
incorporating additional controls and features to assist in departmental level
evaluation. Third, in addition to increased functionality to support program
evaluation using the SALG, the evaluator site is a repository for SALG-like
instruments (e.g., the Undergraduate Research Student Self-Assessment (URSSA)
instrument) and includes an interactive forum for sharing information,
resources, and expertise on assessment, evaluation, and student learning.