* 0920261
* Free Energies in Biomolecular Systems: Development and  Applications of Theoretical and Computational Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Benoit Roux, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 688,134.00

Biology, at the atomic level, is fundamentally controlled by the activity and
interactions of a wide range of different molecules. Some, such as proteins and
nucleic acids, are large and highly complex chemical structures called
macromolecules. Others are small chemical compounds, which can be as simple as a
single water molecule. One of the most basic questions about any of the
molecules in the living cell is the manner by which they interact and associate
with one another. How molecules recognize and bind to a specific partner plays a
key role in biology. For example, this is one of the ways biological "signals"
and information are transmitted and communicated within and between living
cells, and how specific processes are triggered and synchronized. The research
project consists in improving the theoretical and computational methods to
calculate and predict accurately how molecules bind to one another. According to
the theory of statistical thermodynamics, the quantity that controls the
association of molecules is the "binding free energy". This mathematically well-
defined quantity can be calculated using computer simulations of atomic models
of the molecules of interest. One method, which is called "molecular dynamics"
simulation, can help elucidate the fundamental principles governing the binding
of biological molecules at the atomic level. Efforts in this area have great
intellectual merit because biology is entering a quantitative era that requires
an ability to predict the binding of molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is carried out in an academic environment and one essential aspect to
the broader impact is the education and training of highly qualified personnel.
The students and postdoctoral researchers involved in the research project will
ultimately join the job market, either in academia or in industry, and their
advanced skills will contribute to the vitality of society. Furthermore,
improving the ability to predict binding accurately using computations has great
pragmatic value and is expected to have a broad impact on a vast array of
fundamental problems in biology and chemistry. For example, technological
advances in this area could be used to engineer and design better method to
detect, capture, and extract toxic molecules from the environment
(bioremediation). Lastly, all the new knowledge produced by the research in the
form of theories, explanation, and computer programs is freely disseminated via
the PI's lab web site for the benefit of the entire community.