* 0920719
* Collaborative research: Hands-on exercises on DETER testbed for security education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2012
* USD 112,842.00

Computer Science (31) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative
project is to develop a public repository of practical security exercises for
undergraduate curriculum. These exercises involve students in hands-on security
experiments, demonstrating realistic threats and defenses. They provide active
learning opportunities in computer security curriculum which has been typically
taught using passive learning methods. The exercises are hosted on the shared,
public and free DETER testbed at the lead institution, University of Southern
California; the remaining four collaborating institutions, including Colorado
State University, University of California Los Angeles, Lehigh University, and
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte offer a unique and diverse
experience in security education and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The setup of
each exercise is fully automated with tools for customization of exercises;
accompanied by detailed guidelines about common pitfalls; and supported by
experiment health management to send students automated alerts when their
experiment is not configured properly. The DETER testbed contains several
traffic generation, visualization and experiment monitoring tools which allow
students to work at a high-level via a simple GUI interaction as well as at low-
level, command-line activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project delivers
portable, shared and publicly accessible exercises available from anywhere, at
any time, making it more accessible than having to share a computer lab or
requiring a complex physical setup. This project has a potential to reach a
large number institutions via outreach activities such as tutorials at security
conferences; workshops, and the DETER newsletter.