* 0920931
* Collaborative Research: The Analysis and Simulation of Biologically Active Suspensions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Saintillan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 290,403.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologically active suspensions, of
which a bath of swimming bacteria is a paradigmatic example, are fluid systems
whose microstructure is alive and motile. As the system's "active particles"
propel themselves through the surrounding fluid, they produce disturbance flows
that communicate their motions to other swimmers, thereby altering their
swimming direction and speed. This reciprocal interaction can result in
correlated, large-scale, and complex fluid flows that move on length- and time-
scales much larger than those of any single swimmer. These swimmer-driven flows
have important implications for the evolution and survival of micro-organismal
colonies, as they impact nutrient delivery through both particle transport and
fluid mixing, and may also play a role in other important phenomena such as
quorum sensing and biofilm formation. They are also fundamental examples of non-
equilibrium pattern-forming systems. In this project, we propose to further
deepen our understanding of biologically active suspensions using a combination
of analytical models and numerical simulations. The research will focus on the
modeling and analysis of the coherent structures that arise in these systems and
on their relation to fluid mixing. Specifically the effect of boundaries and
boundary conditions, confinement, and system scale will be examined. New
multiscale approaches allowing hundreds of thousands of interacting swimmers to
be simulated will also be developed, thus approaching biological
realism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this study, an improved theoretical
understanding of active suspensions will be achieved and will reveal the core
biophysical mechanisms underlying nutrient transport and mixing in colonies of
motile microorganisms. It may also shed light on the evolution of locomotory
strategies, particularly for microorganisms that live and thrive cooperatively,
as in biofilms. The broader impacts of this research lie in the importance of
active suspensions to several key areas of science, including biology, human
health and medicine, soft-condensed matter physics, and engineering. An
understanding of active suspensions and what drives (or stops) their large-scale
mixing could lead to new ways of controlling infection. It provides to physics a
well-characterized example of nonequilibrium pattern formation arising in
biology, and in engineering this understanding could lead to new devices that
exploit biological materials for tasks such as mixing and pumping. This
project's impact also lies in the development of new and important areas of
inquiry for applied and computational mathematics, and in its adding to the
theoretical and computational tool-kit that applied mathematicians and
theoretical engineers can bring to problems in biological and complex fluid
dynamics.