* 0920022
* Collaborative Research:  Manatee Vibrissae-a Mammalian Lateral Line?
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2010,03/31/2014
* Gordon Bauer, New College of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Coppola
* 03/31/2014
* USD 280,271.00

Endangered Florida manatees have a number of unusual anatomical and behavioral
adaptations related to their unique role as mammalian aquatic herbivores. Chief
among these is the presence of sensory hairs over the entire body, whereas in
most mammals these are only present as facial whiskers. The present research
uses two captive manatees at Mote Marine Laboratory to assess the ability of
this system of specialized hairs to detect water-borne vibrations associated
with other moving animals, river currents, and tidal flows, all of which are
cues likely to be used in navigation. This research relates not only to the
normal behavior of manatees, but also to their ability to detect and avoid
approaching boats. These two animals have been trained on a number of related
tasks and are able to report behaviorally whether a stimulus has been detected.
It will be possible to determine the range of frequencies and amplitudes to
which the animals are capable of responding, and their degree of directional
localization ability. It will also be possible to discover whether certain
portions of the body are more sensitive than others. Anatomical experiments on
postmortem brains will be performed at the University of Florida to map the
neural connections that mediate these abilities. This work utilizes special
fluorescent tracers that travel down nerve fibers by diffusion over a period of
several months. In addition, a significant portion of this project includes
educational interactions with students and teachers at Mote, New College, the
University of South Florida, and the University of Florida.