* 0920927
* A Whole-Life Model for Hormonal Regulation of the Reproductive Cycle of Women with Applications to Age-Induced and Pathological Changes in the Cycle
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* James Selgrade, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 254,390.00

Using state-of-the-art mathematical modeling, this research project aims to
understand the norm and pathology of the female reproductive cycle. Changes in
patterns of the secretion of one to six or more different hormones alter the
normal female physiology. For example, some 6-9% of adult women have the
disorder known as polycystic ovarian syndrome PCOS) making it the most common of
all endocrinopathies. PCOS has a profound adverse impact on the health of many
women since it commonly causes infertility, is associated with unhealthy body
composition, and increases key risk factors for Type 2 diabetes and
cardiovascular disease. The menopause transition is another example of changes
in hormones secretion with resulting symptoms that might be mild, moderate or
severe and lead to significant medical intervention. To study cycle
abnormalities in a mathematical setting, this project will develop a model for a
woman's reproductive life span. Using data sets from three consecutive age
groups, three submodels will be integrated into one whole-life model represented
by a system of delay differential equations with some slowly varying time-
dependent coefficients. The resulting model will be the first endocrine system
model which encompasses three time scales (days, months and years), with
possible ensuing mathematical difficulties. For such systems, techniques for
parameter identification and parameter sensitivity will be developed. The tools
of dynamical systems such as stability, bifurcation and perturbation theories
will be used to study model behavior.

Mathematical simulations will be used to investigate cycle abnormalities due to
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and to the menopause transition. These
studies may help to identify subtle hormonal changes in the aging process and to
predict optimal types, doses and durations of hormonal therapies for young and
aging women. In turn, given the broad consensus that hormone therapies be used
at lowest doses for the shortest intervals necessary to achieve specifc
therapeutic aims, the impact of these studies on women's health could be
beneficial. A key ingredient for understanding PCOS is the relationship between
the endocrine (hormone) system and the glucoregulatory (blood sugar) system. A
working model incorporating the hormonal imbalances of PCOS may illuminate the
connections between excess androgens, insulin resistance and PCOS. Thus, in
addition to applications to the treatment of infertility and menopause, this
work may also advance our understanding of diabetes and metabolic disorders, the
incidence of which has increased dramatically in recent years.