* 0920838
* Elite Communications and Racial Group Conflict in the 21st Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Robert  W. Mickey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/29/2012
* USD 257,331.00

In the past few decades, the racial and ethnic composition of the United States
has undergone dramatic changes. During this period Latinos have eclipsed African
Americans as the single largest ethnic minority group in the country and they
have increasingly settled in large numbers outside of traditional gateway cities
in the west and northeast. The percentage of African Americans in the country
has not increased nearly as fast but it continues to grow as a share of the
overall population and as a share of registered voters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
light of the changing racial and ethnic landscape, this study will address the
prospects for inter-group conflict or cooperation in the new century. The
investigators are particularly interested in the ways that co-ethnic political
elites and interest group leaders can shape the attitudes that African
Americans, Latinos, and Whites have about one another. The study will address
whether statements by group leaders that are reported in the mass media can
inflame or diminish inter-group hostility. For example, are Whites more likely
to bring their racial identity to bear on their policy preferences if political
leaders provide them with a license to do so? Are similar appeals also effective
for African Americans and Latinos? Additionally, the study will explore whether
appeals of this sort are more effective when delivered with indirect or coded
language, rather than more explicit appeals and whether political appeals
designed to cleave the electorate along racial lines are more effective in the
American south. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two distinct experiments will be embedded
in a nationally representative Internet survey to test hypotheses about group
conflict. The study will test, and potentially modify, a number of theories
concerning racial attitudes and identity politics in the fields of political
science, sociology, social psychology, and communication studies. This work will
explore the contingent nature of racial and ethnic identities and seek to
identify the circumstances in which they can be brought to bear on policy
preferences and other political decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
also has implications beyond advancing the social science literature. With the
inauguration of Barack Obama as the nation's 44th President, many political
observers predicted that the country would enter a new, "post-racial," era.
However, it may be the case that Obama's victory, coupled with the demographic
changes outlined above, will make race and ethnicity more salient in the future.
It is also possible that some political figures will have an incentive to
capitalize on lingering racial fears and resentments. If scholars can generate
an improved understanding of the possibilities and limitations of these appeals,
then society will be better equipped to combat divisive racial rhetoric.