* 0920075
* Stratigraphic Paleobiology of Marine Quaternary Successions of Po Plain, Italy
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Michal Kowalewski, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 227,555.00

Stratigraphic Paleobiology of Marine Quaternary Successions of Po Plain,
Italy&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michal Kowalewski (Department of Geosciences, Virginia
Tech)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is funded under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Quantitative
integration of stratigraphic and paleontological data derived from sedimentary
rocks can enhance informative value of both the geological and fossil records.
This approach will be applied to the depositional system (sedimentary basin) of
the Po Plain Delta, Italy. The goals include (1) assessments of stratigraphic
biases that may affect quantitative data based on fossils; (2) numerical
calibrations of the regional sequence stratigraphic model; and (3)
reconstructions of eco-environmental changes during high-frequency sea-level
fluctuations that shaped the recent geological history of this culturally and
economically important region. To achieve those goals, Quaternary marine
successions of the Po Plain, which contain abundant fossil mollusks, will be
sampled to quantify commonly studied paleontological patterns (e.g., diversity,
body size, etc.). The resulting data, based on numerous samples from multiple
cores, will be integrated with the regional sequence-stratigraphic model,
bathymetric surveys of present-day Mediterranean mollusk populations, and high-
resolution geochronology (radiocarbon-calibrated amino-acid racemization
dating). The intellectual novelty of the project resides in data-intense
integration of paleoecology, sequence stratigraphy, and geochronology, which
should produce a time-controlled 3D reconstruction of eco-environmental and
depositional histories of the Po Plain basin. In terms of broader impacts,
research efforts will be interfaced with educational and outreach activities at
multiple levels. At the graduate level, a Ph.D. student will be trained in
integrating disparate data and developing transferable skills in geological and
statistical methods. At the undergraduate and K-12 levels, a new interactive
educational exhibit (evolved from research activities) will be developed at the
Virginia Tech Museum of Geosciences, an outreach/education outlet of rural
Appalachia. The exhibit will make the process of multifaceted quantitative
research and discovery accessible to K-12 students, science teachers, and the
general public. The exhibit-based lab exercises for undergraduate college
courses in paleontology and historical geology will also be developed. In
addition, with assistance from the on-campus Department of Multicultural
Programs and Services, undergraduates from underrepresented groups will be
recruited as paid interns in order to participate in the exhibit development and
to establish competitive professional portfolios. Finally, the project will
involve long-term international interactions between Virginia Tech and
University of Bologna. The participating researcher and students will benefit
from international collaborations, thus gaining a broader perspective on
scientific and societal issues. The project will offer logistic and intellectual
support to 1 graduate student and up to 3 undergraduate interns. Senior
personnel will include a museum outreach coordinator.