* 0920236
* A systems approach to brain and behavioral state in the honey bee
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Charles Whitfield, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 497,001.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how genes and environment
act through complex biological networks to influence social behavior is a
fundamental challenge in biology. This proposal addresses long-duration
behavioral 'states' in honey bee workers, which are known to be influenced by
many factors including genotype, social and physical environment, nutritional
status, physiology (including hormones), neurochemistry, and regulation of gene
expression in the brain. Despite knowledge of these multiple influences, there
is little understanding of how these factors interact to produce behavioral
state in the honey bee or in other analogous behavioral systems. The goal of
this proposal is to apply a 'systems' (or holistic) approach to study how a
well-defined hormonal system involving the key regulator juvenile hormone
interacts with pathways in the brain to influence behavioral state in the honey
bee. This will be achieved by perturbing genotype using a genetic cross, then
measuring the resulting effects on circulating juvenile hormone level and
expression of approximately 11,000 genes in the brain, and behavior. A modeling
approach will then be used to explore the network of interactions including
causal relationships between particular genetic variations in the genome,
juvenile hormone level, brain gene expression, and consequent behavioral state.
The honey bee is an economically and ecologically important species that
provides a unique combination of attributes facilitating a systems approach. It
is economical, has well-studied and easily observed behaviors, and has the
necessary genomic resources to conduct a systems approach. By exploiting these
attributes, the current study is expected to provide information and important
new insight into the genome-hormone-brain network controlling honey bee
behavioral state. More generally, it will address broad questions about how
genetic variation can influence physiology, brain, and ultimately social
behavior. This work also will provide an innovative and valuable training
experience for students, including undergraduates, in technologically advanced
and integrative biology.