* 0920384
* Collaborative research on the Reacting to the Past Pedagogy for science education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Mark Carnes, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/2012
* USD 84,598.00

This project adapts the successful Reacting to the Past (RTTP) pedagogy to
science courses (STEM). RTTP consists of simulation games in which students
adopt roles in seminal scientific debates. RTTP increases student engagement,
shifts attitudes, and improves critical thinking and communication skills in
STEM courses. RTTP necessitates a multidisciplinary approach that bridges gaps
existing between different disciplines. This project develops STEM curricular
materials to meet the needs of both non-science majors as well as science
majors. By engaging non-science majors in scientific debates, the project
improves the understanding and perception of science. This approach leads to
well informed citizens and competent decision-makers. Course materials are
disseminated through a web site at www.barnard.edu/reacting and publication by
Pearson Education. The project trains a cohort of new RTTP faculty through
summer RTTP Institutes and workshops at regional and national professional
conferences. Special efforts are underway to recruit educators from two-year
colleges, those serving large minority populations and ESL populations. Faculty
learn to bring the advantages of RTTP to their traditional science courses. The
project is conducting formative and summative assessment of RTTP for the
acquisition of content knowledge and on the understanding of and attitudes
toward science. The results of the assessment are being published and presented
to science educators to encourage the widespread adoption of RTTP science games.
The evaluation process developed by this project is being shared with developers
of other RTTP games.