* 0920258
* Functional analysis of multi-gene complexes regulating photoperiod-dependent flowering time
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Ben Holt III, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy Litt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 239,000.00

PI: Ben Ford Holt III,&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: IOS-0920258&lt;br/&gt;Project
Title: "Functional analysis of multi-gene complexes regulating photoperiod-
dependent flowering time" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For even the most casual
observer, it is well known that plant flowering (reproduction) is coupled to the
seasons. This is no accident - like all successful organisms, plants evolved
with the unique problems of their native environments and have developed the
ability to grow and reproduce under optimal conditions. Because agricultural
productivity depends heavily on the timing of developmental events, discovering
how plants use changes in their environment to determine when to begin flowering
is an important question in plant biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In temperate
climates, such as the United States, many environmental variables change
throughout the year. As changes in day length (or "photoperiod") are essentially
identical between years, many plants use this as an accurate signal to trigger
flowering at the correct time. Although scientists are beginning to unravel the
underlying molecular mechanisms used by plants to determine photoperiod, there
is still much to learn. This project is focused on several new genes that are
necessary for the appropriate timing of flowering in response to changing
photoperiod. Plants with mutant versions of these genes lose the ability to
properly use day length as a cue to flower; instead, they flower several weeks
or even months later than normal. Although the identity of these genes is known,
it is not known how theses genes help plants flower at the right time. These
same genes are involved in a second developmental transition - the shift from
seed dormancy to germination. Using the combined tools of genetics, molecular
biology, and biochemistry, this project will address 1) how these genes are
acting to turn on flowering in the plant cell, and 2) how they are functioning
to simultaneously control seed germination. Because both flowering time and seed
dormancy are important agricultural traits, understanding how these processes
intersect is essential to enhancing future crop performance.