* 0920837
* Perceptions of Women in Academic Science
* EDU,EES
* 06/30/2008,08/31/2011
* Elaine Howard Ecklund, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2011
* USD 300,460.00

Intellectual Merit: The findings from this study further knowledge of underlying
reasons for the lack of gender diversity in academic science. Building on the
nexus of existing research, this study examines women's and men's self-reported
reasons for pursuing academic science careers as well as the perceptions both
genders have of women's contributions to academic science. The research expands
recent scholarly findings related to the role perceptions have in decisions
related to pursuing careers in academic science. Expanding research on this
topic provides new directions for understanding the origins of and remedies for
the under-representation of women in academic science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary conceptual model used to understand science careers has been a rigid
pipeline of ordered stages in which success is measured by early entry,
consistent progress through consecutive educational steps, and subsequent
employment in a science career. Under this model, failure is marked by an exit
from the pipeline. Neither entry from another career track nor reentry is
typically conceptualized as a success. Yet, research has shown that, unlike men,
most women who earn bachelors degrees in science and engineering transition from
non-science majors. Therefore, while the science pipeline metaphor accurately
describes the experiences of many men, it fails to capture the experiences of
many women. In contrast, this study develops the research metaphor of a freeway,
with entry on-ramps and exits possible at multiple points along the way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a survey administered to 2,500 individuals coupled
with 150 life history interviews, this research illuminates the recalled
experiences of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows as well as assistant,
associate, and full professors in two core academic science fields, biology and
physics, from the twenty top U.S. graduate programs in these fields. Researchers
show that recalled experiences shape current beliefs, actions and interactions.
Understanding the recalled experiences of this population is particularly
important because those in elite programs train future leaders who shape science
policy related to industry, government, and academics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Findings practically illuminate effective
approaches to encouraging the presence of women in science, make faculty more
aware of their preconceptions about women in science, and have broad media
appeal. In particular, understanding experiences and perceptions at the crucial
turning point in the science career process--decisions made during undergraduate
education--provides the necessary research underpinnings to build university
policies and practices that encourage interest in science majors and careers
among women.