* 0920721
* Teaching robot motion planning through an integrated software environment
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Computer Science (31)

This project aspires to transform how college students learn robotics by
offering a motion planning curriculum that enhances deep learning and is
supported by an integrated software environment.

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in (a) developing an extensible
software tool for teaching motion planning to college students, (b) promoting a
robotics curriculum while examining its effectiveness for diverse learners at
three institutions, and (c) engaging a broader spectrum of faculty and students
in the emerging user community in developing motion planning technology and user
practices. This work leads to a new way of teaching robotics courses by building
on prior knowledge of calculus and programming, and providing hands-on
experiences with state-of-the-art planners. Students work on challenging
problems, and develop deeper knowledge by reflecting on and formally evaluating
their results. This project offers students hands-on experience with state-of-
the-art planners, teaches them how to compare them, modify them, and build
challenging applications. The intention is to scaffold learning by freeing
students from tedious details and heavy programming and help them through a
hands-on problem-based learning approach to develop critical thinking within
robotics and outside robotics.

The broader impact of this proposal is implemented through a number of
coordinated activities. Documentation and assignments that have been tested in
the robotics classes are shared through the Rice Connexions Project and the
National Science Digital Library so that they can be used by other robotics
instructors. The efforts to develop a collaborative user community also helps in
this direction, providing support to the instructors who choose to use the
material in their courses and encouraging feedback and discussion of teaching
practices among users through online communication technology. Students who
participate in robotics clubs at universities and high-schools are asked to
review and give feedback on the materials and the software environment. In the
long run the software environment developed with this proposal can be used with
younger students to motivate them to pursue careers in computer science and
engineering fields.