* 0920266
* Needs Assessment of Chemistry Instructors for Educational Measurement Professional Development Materials
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Thomas Holme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 168,872.00

Chemistry (12) This project is carrying out a needs analysis within the
community of chemical educators at the college level in order to identify the
level of understanding of educational measurement and assessment by this
community. The results are expected to elucidate fruitful avenues for future
professional development activities within this field. The analysis is being
carried out in two stages. In the first stage, focus group level work allows the
setting of parameters for larger scale survey work and thus allows for the
development of broader survey tools for the second phase. For this second phase
a field survey is used to conduct a needs analysis that measures the gap within
the community between current educational practices related to assessment and a
more thorough understanding of assessment within chemistry. This phase utilizes
random stratified samples of instructors in terms of both institutional type and
years of experience teaching chemistry. With this strategy, factors that
influence how people learn about educational tools are able to be identified.
The intellectual merit of this project lies along three vectors. First, research
to be done with focus groups provides a qualitative-level description of the gap
between current knowledge and some definable ideal state of knowledge about
assessment methodology. This research can identify ways that larger scale survey
work can be conducted and sets an initial level of expectation about the nature
of faculty knowledge of educational measurement. Second, the large scale field
survey requires the development of tools that allow the assessment of needs when
the target audience is potentially unfamiliar with not only the utility of the
material but even the vocabulary commonly used. Finally, the analysis of the
large-scale needs assessment survey is expected to provide a snapshot of where
the chemistry education community is in terms of understanding of assessment
methodologies and limitations. This snapshot, for a large educational community,
can serve as a prototype for understanding the professional development needs of
related communities - in other scientific disciplines and at other levels of
chemistry education. The broader impact of this work derives primarily from the
scale of the project and the nature of the needs being assessed. College-level
instruction is largely carried out by faculty with little formal training in
educational topics, including assessment. Chemistry represents a typical
community in this respect, so results from this study are likely to provide (a)
models for understanding professional development needs in other science fields;
(b) hypotheses for designing appropriate professional development materials and
conducting meaningful assessment of their efficacy and; (c) insight into how
researchers in related STEM fields may conduct similar needs assessments. A
broad spectrum of factors that potentially influence faculty awareness of
educational tools (in this case for assessment) is anticipated to be identified.
Knowing these factors is likely to be useful to others in developing templates
for assessing needs of chemists and other scientists related to any educational
methodology.