* 0920581
* The Molecular Genetics of Light-Sensing in Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2012
* Alexander Idnurm, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2012
* USD 565,948.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Light is a ubiquitous environmental
signal that regulates many aspects of the behavior of organisms, including the
majority of species of fungi. In the fungal kingdom light can influence the
production of sexual or asexual spores, pigmentation, and the setting of a
circadian clock, all of which are required for survival and success. Almost all
of the estimated 1.5 million fungal species, with some notable exceptions, are
thought to sense and respond to light. A conserved set of two proteins, known as
White Collar 1 and White Collar 2 (WC-1 and WC-2, encoded by the madA and madB
genes), are required for sensing blue and ultraviolet light in evolutionarily
diverse fungi. Phycomyces blakesleeanus, a zygomycete filamentous fungus, is
remarkable in having at least eight additional genes required for responding to
light, in contrast to just the two white collar genes needed in other species.
The identity of these eight mad genes is unknown, and in this research they will
be sought through map-based cloning. The central hypothesis is that genes
altered in mad mutants encode two classes of interacting proteins for the
WC-1/WC-2 complex: (a) madC encodes a novel type of blue light photoreceptor and
(b) madD-madJ encode regulators of, or targets for direct transcriptional
regulation by, madA, madB and madC. A high-resolution genetic map of Phycomyces
will be generated based on crosses between two wild type strains whose genomes
have been sequenced. The map will be created using conventional markers combined
with high-throughput analyses of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers on
microarray chips. This genetic map will serve as the platform for mapping light-
insensitive mad mutations and the identification of genes affected in the madC-
madJ mutants. A complementary genome-wide screen will be performed for proteins
that interact physically with the Phycomyces WC-1 and WC-2 proteins. This
approach provides an independent method to identify genes that regulate fungal
photobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
places an emphasis on the importance of learning basic biology through research.
The PI trains undergraduate and graduate students, including individuals from
under-represented minority populations, at a campus in a city setting with many
non-traditional undergraduate students. Undergraduate and high school students
will participate in the proposed research. The research will advance ongoing
programs to train students in scientific thinking using genetic and molecular
biological approaches in a model organism that occupies an important place in
the history of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;