* 0920026
* Collaborative Research: Implementation of Vertically Integrated Curriculum for Cognitive Communications
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2009,12/31/2011
* Tamal Bose, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Finger
* 12/31/2011
* USD 79,999.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
between the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) and Norfolk
State University (NSU) is developing a total of eight learning modules covering
topics in software defined radio (SDR). Software defined radio is an emerging
design paradigm in which many system components are implemented in software
rather than hardware. This enables a single radio to adapt to different
communication protocols, bandwidth constraints and channel conditions which can
significantly improve the utility and efficiency of the device. Two modules are
being developed for each year in a typical four-year electrical engineering
degree program so that software defined radio can be vertically integrated into
the curriculum. The modules are being developed with an inclusive pedagogy
utilizing a combination of teaching strategies and learning activities that have
been documented to be compatible with gender, ethnic and generational diversity
in both formal and informal learning environments. The completed modules are
being vertically integrated into the curriculum at both VT and NSU. The learning
modules and project results are being disseminated through workshops held at VPI
and at the SDR Forum. The project includes a comprehensive assessment and
evaluation plan coordinated by an independent evaluator that utilizes both
quantitative and qualitative methods.