* 0920254
* Mechanisms of Animal Desiccation Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Steven Hand, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Inna Sokolova
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Fluctuation in water content is a universal problem confronting all animals, and
environmental stresses that impact the amount of water present in the cells of
animals pose a threat to life. Tolerance to water stress is most likely governed
by several different mechanisms that are in place to protect cells and tissues
during water loss, as well as to repair injuries after rehydration. However,
scientific understanding of these mechanisms is incomplete. &lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate whether or not certain types of naturally-occurring
proteins [Late Embryogenesis Abundant (LEA) proteins], when combined with small
sugar-like compounds, are able to protect cellular components, isolated cells,
and intact animals during water loss and subsequent recovery. These LEA proteins
and sugars are predicted to preserve biological structures because they have
been repeatedly found in species that possess extreme tolerance to water loss
(anhydrobiotic animals). The mechanisms by which these proteins and sugars may
stabilize the structure and function of cellular components (e.g., enzymes,
membranes, mitochondria) will be investigated using biochemical, physiological
and genetic approaches. The anticipated result is that cells and tissues that do
not possess tolerance to desiccation stress will be protected by LEA proteins
and sugars against damage normally incurred during water loss.&lt;br/&gt;
Successful completion of this project has the potential to offer important
practical applications. For example, storage of biological components and cells
in the dried state will extend their shelf-life, which could represent enormous
savings of time, effort and money for scientific researchers in both basic and
applied fields. Investigators using model species like Drosophila melanogaster
(fruit fly) for genetic studies would benefit immensely from the ability to
store early developmental stages in a dried (dormant) state, thereby reducing
the costs of maintaining genetic variants of this species. Finally, this project
will provide exciting opportunities for the training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students from a wide diversity of backgrounds in the
fields of biochemistry, physiology and molecular genetics. &lt;br/&gt;