* 0920179
* Collaborative Research: Hands-on exercises on DETER testbed for security education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,09/30/2011
* Brent Kang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Victor P. Piotrowski
* 09/30/2011
* USD 98,627.00

Computer Science (31)

The objective of this collaborative project is to develop a public repository of
practical security exercises for undergraduate curriculum. These exercises
involve students in hands-on security experiments, demonstrating realistic
threats and defenses. They provide active learning opportunities in computer
security curriculum which has been typically taught using passive learning
methods. The exercises are hosted on the shared, public and free DETER testbed
at the lead institution, University of Southern California; the remaining four
collaborating institutions, including Colorado State University, University of
California Los Angeles, Lehigh University, and the University of North Carolina
at Charlotte offer a unique and diverse experience in security education and
research.

The setup of each exercise is fully automated with tools for customization of
exercises; accompanied by detailed guidelines about common pitfalls; and
supported by experiment health management to send students automated alerts when
their experiment is not configured properly. The DETER testbed contains several
traffic generation, visualization and experiment monitoring tools which allow
students to work at a high-level via a simple GUI interaction as well as at low-
level, command-line activities.

The project delivers portable, shared and publicly accessible exercises
available from anywhere, at any time, making it more accessible than having to
share a computer lab or requiring a complex physical setup. This project has a
potential to reach a large number institutions via outreach activities such as
tutorials at security conferences; workshops, and the DETER newsletter.