* 0920911
* An Orphaned Kinesin with a Leading Role in Plant Cell Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Richard Cyr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Roberts
* 12/31/2012
* USD 531,228.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

During plant development, plant cells undergo a highly orchestrated series of
cell divisions and elongation events that contribute directly to the shape of
the adult plant. Central to both cell division and elongation are microtubules,
which are subcellular elements that act as guides and transport rails. Kinesins
are a class of cellular motors that interact with microtubules and serve to
assist in both transport of cellular components and to affect the function and
configuration of microtubules themselves. Evolutionary forces have acted upon
the ancestral kinesin motor in diverse ways, to the extent that 15 subfamilies
are now recognized throughout all eukaryotic cells. The research to be carried
out will investigate how one kinesin, termed ATKINUA, acts during plant
development to affect growth and development. Genetic evidence indicates ATKINUA
is absolutely required for early development in the most basal of all organs,
the shoot apical meristem (which houses the cells that give rise to all aerial
portions of the plant), and in more derived tissues and cells, including leaf
stomata (which are involved in gas exchange and water regulation). Experiments
will be carried out to isolate and characterize plants that do not express this
protein normally, and this will provide insight into how it usually functions.
Additional experiments will be carried out using transgenic plants in which a
fluorescent protein is engineered into ATKINUA; this will enable the researchers
to visualize this kinesin in living cells during development. Because this
kinesin shows preferential association with the microtubule array that assists
in determining the plane of cell division, the researchers will engineer
mutations into the kinesin that predictably should disrupt this localization;
the effects of this mis-targeted kinesin will be studied in transgenic plants.
Bioinformatic analysis of this kinesin indicates it has the potential to
interact with signaling moieties in the cell. Therefore, a series of experiments
will be carried out to identify its interacting proteins; the researchers
anticipate the identification of these interacting proteins will lead to further
experiments aimed at understanding how plant cells integrate the activity of
this kinesin to affect normal plant growth and development.

Broader Impacts Plants comprise the foundation for all agricultural activities,
so understanding the basic mechanisms that facilitate their normal development
is critical if researchers are to pursue a strategic effort in improving crops.
This project seeks to provide information that will contribute to such a
strategic effort. The project will also provide training for two critical groups
of young scientists. First, a postdoctoral researcher will be trained in modern
cell biological methods, which will enable the person to establish and carry out
future research that is critical for the country's scientific vitality. In
addition, this person will receive training in classroom instruction, which will
enhance his or her teaching effectiveness in a future academic position. Second,
undergraduate students who are enrolled in a sophomore-level cell and molecular
biology course will benefit from this project. These students will participate
in the experiments to identify interacting proteins of ATKINUA. The anticipated
outcome of this experience will be an excitement for scientific research.
Opportunities will be provided, after the class is completed, for interested
students to continue with the research. Possibly, through this experience, one
or more students will decide to choose a career path in science.