* 0920279
* The collective dynamics of cells in tissue
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Leslie Loew, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 260,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell crawling is integral to many
important biological and biomedical processes, such as wound healing, cancer
metastasis, and organism development. A quantitatively predictive model that
describes the bulk motion of many cells will have broad impact across many areas
of biology and biophysics. This research will combine the general physical
features of single cell crawling with a physiologically realistic description of
cell-cell adhesion and cell-cell interaction in order to develop a mathematical
model for the collective movements of cells in tissue. Specifically, the model
will address a number of experimentally-measured behaviors that occur in wound
healing assays. For example, recent experiments have shown that there are
complex motions and long-range correlations of the movements of cells in
epithelial monolayers. In addition, during wound healing assays it is observed
that the wound edge undergoes a fingering-like instability, and the average
progression of the wound border expands at a supra-linear rate with respect to
time. This research will develop and test a continuum model for the collective
migration of eukaryotic cells in tissue, with an emphasis toward explaining the
dynamics of epithelial cell monolayers during wound closure. Most of the model
parameters will be set using existing experimental data; however, some
parameters are currently unknown. Therefore, comparison of the model with
existing experimental data will allow us to set ranges on these unknown
parameters and will suggest new experiments to test the predictions of the
model. Analytic and numerical methods will be used to analyze the model for free
boundary problems corresponding to two different wound closure experiments, and
the model will be used to explore three-dimensional motility in bulk
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build an organism out of a vast number of cells
requires coordination and the ability to move cells from one place to another.
Therefore, during development of an organism, it is not surprising that groups
of cells often migrate together, as a semi-cohesive unit. Similar migratory
behavior is also seen during wound healing and cancer metastasis. This project
explores the physics of this motility and the mechanism by which the physical
behavior of cells helps maintain the overall coordination of the group. A
mathematical model will be developed that takes into account the gross behavior
of motile cells, considering the forces generated by an individual cell and the
interactions between neighboring cells. This model will be used to describe the
behavior of a wounded layer of cells, and the predictions will be tested by
comparing them to data from experiments that mimic wounded tissues. The results
from this project will provide a deeper understanding of many important
biological processes, such as organism development, cancer metastasis, and even
the motions of dense communities of swimming bacteria. The strong
interdisciplinary nature of the research makes it ideal for training graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers to be able to work at the interface
between biology, mathematics, and physics.