* 0920720
* Collaborative Research Proposal:  Tipping the Scales - A selection approach to the developmental regulation of morphological scaling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* W Frankino, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2012
* USD 210,773.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scaling of body parts is the
quintessential feature of animal body form. Within species, organs need to be
correctly proportioned to the body for the organism to function; larger
individuals require larger hearts, longer limbs, etc., whereas smaller
individuals generally are composed of proportionally smaller parts. While
relative organ size is more or less constant within a species, it can vary
dramatically among species; in fact, changes in the relative size of body parts
are typically the most pronounced physical difference between species. For
example, giraffes derive their distinctive, gracile body form from exaggeration
in the size of their necks and limbs relative to their bodies, whereas walrus
gain their robust, compact appearance from reduction in the size of their limbs
relative to their massive bodies. Despite nearly a century of work describing
the body proportions of myriad species, little is known about how scaling is
maintained to preserve body form within a species or is modified to alter body
form between species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent approaches model
mathematically the expression and evolution of scaling relationships from first
principles. These models focus on the physiological processes that regulate and
integrate the growth of individual body parts and identify the specific
developmental mechanisms that underlie the control of relative body part size.
Importantly, the models can be used to identify which aspects of these
mechanisms are likely to change to create differences in body proportions among
species This research project will test the validity and predictive power of
these models using a three-step approach. First, artificial selection will be
used to independently alter the scaling relationship between the wing and body
in the fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Second, the physiological mechanisms
affecting the scaling relationship between wing and body size will be explored
using the flies created through artificial selection. Third, the specific genes
responsible for changes in relative wing size will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is the first to test
physiological and genetic-based mathematical models of the regulation and
evolution of scaling relationships. It promises to answer long-standing
questions of how scaling is maintained to preserve form within species or is
modified as body form diversifies between species. In addition, the project will
provide extensive, cross-campus training for undergraduate and graduate students
at the University of Houston and Michigan State University.&lt;br/&gt;