* 0920966
* Biochemical and Structural Analysis of RNA Methylation in RNA Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Raven Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Roy Welch
* 06/30/2013
* USD 534,999.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Ribotoxins kill cells by endonucleotically cleaving essential RNAs involved in
protein translation (rRNAs, tRNAs, and mRNAs). We have identified a novel
bacterial RNA repair system that neutralizes the effect of ribotoxins. This
unique RNA repair system appears to not only repair the damage caused by
ribotoxins, but also methylates the RNA at the cleavage site so that it cannot
be cut again by the ribotoxin. In this project, the bacterial Hen1, a member of
the protein complex that performs the repair and methylation, will be the focus
of study. In eukaryotes, Hen1 is responsible for 2'-O-methylation on the
3'-terminal nucleotide of some small non-coding RNAs involved in RNA
interference. The bacterial Hen1 was found to be one of two proteins that are
highly conserved in a sub-set of bacteria. Conserved along with Hen1 is
bacterial Pnkp, which has been shown to have kinase, phosphatase, and
adenylyltransferase activities that are a hallmark of RNA repair. However,
bacterial Pnkp alone was not able to repair damaged RNA. Therefore, the PI
hypothesizes that bacteria possessing Hen1 and Pnkp have evolved a clever
strategy using the Hen1/Pnkp complex to neutralize the lethal effect of
ribotoxins by both repairing the damaged RNA and methylating the RNA to make it
resistant to re-cleavage by the ribotoxin. The research in this project consists
of two specific objectives: First, the roles of bacterial Hen1 in RNA repair
carried out by bacterial Hen1/Pnkp complex will be defined. Both bacterial Hen1
and Pnkp were shown to be required to repair a cleaved tRNA, based on
preliminary studies. Therefore, in addition to being part of the ligase activity
required for RNA repair, the bacterial Hen1 is proposed here to also play
another important role by catalyzing incorporation of a methyl group at the site
of damaged RNA during repair. Second, structures of bacterial Hen1 will be
determined to help elucidate how Hen1 carries out 2'-O-methylation at the 3'-end
of small RNAs. With the determination of crystal structures of the
methyltransferase domain of Hen1 alone, mutational studies will be carried out
to help analyze Hen 1 function. Furthermore, the PI plans to obtain a crystal
structure of Hen1-RNA complex.

The broader impacts of this research include providing insight into biology and
biological chemistry in the area of ribotoxins and RNA repair, an emerging field
of RNA research. The research will also provide the molecular and mechanistic
basis for understanding a new type of RNA methylation by Hen1. In addition, the
studies will further our understanding of the role of Hen1 in the function of
eukaryotic RNAi due to high homology of the eukaryotic Hen1 to the bacterial
Hen1 under study here. The project provides long-term research and education
opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows at the interfaces of chemical biology, biochemistry, and structural
biology.