* 0920829
* Incentives in the Workplace: An Experimental Examination of How Wage Differences Across Time and Among Peers Affect Productivity and Self-Selection
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* David Macpherson, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 125,866.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Understanding workers' responses to incentives is critical to enhancing firm
productivity as well as the overall efficiency of an economy. The projects in
this proposal involve conducting economic experiments to provide a better
understanding of how individuals respond to life-time wage profiles as well as
how they respond to wage inequality among peers. While important, workers'
responses to these aspects of compensation have not yet been satisfactorily
quantified because of difficulties in making inference using field data.
Specifically, in field studies it is usually difficult to find circumstances in
which the same individual is offered different wage profiles for otherwise
equivalent jobs, or is subjected to differing levels of wage inequality. This
team will conduct experiments that are designed to overcome such difficulties
and identify causal relationships between different wage institutions and
workplace productivity.

The first set of projects involve determining how individuals respond to
incentives over time, which can take the form of either (1) efficiency wages
(i.e., a constant wage above the worker's outside option) or (2) deferred
compensation (i.e., a sloped wage profile involving low initial wages but high
wages later in life). They will examine how individuals'effort varies with the
nature of their compensation scheme. They will also attempt to understand the
nature of individual preferences between different compensation schemes. The
results from this line of inquiry will shed light on how best to motivate
employees to generate optimal work effort as well as how self-selection of
employees into certain types of jobs may help explain employment patterns among
different demographic groups.

The second area of study will be focused on how individuals respond to the
existence of structural inequality in the form of different groups receiving
differing returns on effort. This line of inquiry will begin by attempting to
quantify how work effort of individuals responds to the existence of inequality
and will then continue by looking into how different institutional
characteristics alter those effects. This issue of how individuals respond to
inequality is important for workplace incentives but it also has implications
for broader social issues such as class-based inequality, persistent poverty and
economic underdevelopment.