* 0920418
* Functions of Arabidopsis SAUR proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Punita Nagpal, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 235,000.00

Jason W. Reed (PI), Punita Nagpal (co-PI). Proposal number IOS-0920418:
Functions of Arabidopsis SAUR proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;The plant hormone auxin regulates plant
growth and development by largely unknown mechanisms that include induction of
gene expression and regulating cell polarity. The largest class of auxin-
inducible genes are a family of SAUR (Small Auxin Up-Regulated) genes of unknown
function. SAUR genes are present in all flowering plants and also in moss, and
therefore may carry out a function conserved in all plants. This proposal is to
determine functions of a subfamily of SAUR genes and the corresponding proteins
in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Preliminary results indicate that these
SAUR genes regulate elongation of rapidly growing tissues, possibly by affecting
auxin transport or some other cell biological function. &lt;br/&gt;Genetic and
physiological approaches will be used to determine the developmental functions
of the selected SAUR genes, their expression patterns, and whether they indeed
affect auxin transport. Microscopy experiments will reveal the intracellular
localization of SAUR proteins, and whether this is regulated by endogenous or
environmental signals. These experiments will establish when and where these
SAUR proteins are present, their effects on auxin tranport, and how they may
control growth of plant tissues. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the proposed
activity &lt;br/&gt; Understanding how growth is controlled is a necessary
prelude to developing a systems-level understanding of plant development
incorporating inputs from multiple different hormonal and environmental signals.
Knowledge from these experiments may ultimately enable practical approaches to
manipulate growth patterns in crop plants. Since SAUR genes are present even in
bryophytes, the study will be relevant to development of all plants.
&lt;br/&gt;In the course of this research one post-doc and one graduate student
as well as multiple undergraduates will be trained in research approaches and
specific techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;