* 0920491
* Characterization of Essential Fatty Acid Conservation Mechanisms in Ruminants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2013
* Benjamin Corl, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2013
* USD 394,805.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ruminants, like cows and sheep, use
specialized stomachs containing fermenting bacteria to digest plant material.
Some non-ruminant animals, such as kangaroos and langur monkeys, also have
specialized stomachs containing fermenting bacteria. Bacteria present in the
stomachs of these animals modify other nutrients from the diet including
essential fatty acids. Modification by bacteria severely reduces the amounts of
these fatty acids available for absorption. Ruminants have developed metabolic
adaptations involving fatty acid esterification to conserve essential fatty
acids, yet little is known about the mechanisms involved in the conservation of
these essential fatty acids. In addition, it is not clear whether these
conservation mechanisms extend to non-ruminant animals that ferment in the
stomach. Mechanisms used by ruminants to conserve essential fatty acids will be
revealed by identifying the tissue-specific fatty acid esterification patterns
of the cow compared to a non-ruminant, the pig. Cellular factors mediating these
esterification patterns will be examined by characterizing enzymes and cellular
organelles involved in esterification. The presence of similar conservation
mechanisms in non-ruminant animals that ferment in the stomach will be
determined by characterizing the profile of essential fatty acids in plasma
lipid classes. It is expected that conservation is mediated by recognition and
segregation of essential fatty acids within cells and that all organs of
ruminants participate in essential fatty acid conservation. Furthermore, given
the presence of stomach fermentation in other non-ruminants, it is expected that
these species also engage in conservation mechanisms analogous to those found in
ruminants. This work will increase understanding of how fatty acids are
recognized by cells and how the systemic metabolic adaptations developed as
ruminants, and stomach fermenting non-ruminants, evolved fermentative capacity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this research, a post-doctoral researcher will
work with undergraduate researchers, thus allowing the post-doctoral researcher
to further develop research skills and techniques while engaging undergraduates
in comparative nutrition and metabolism research. Topics in comparative
nutrition and digestive physiology will be introduced to high school students
participating in summer learning programs at Virginia Tech through a wet lab
experience.&lt;br/&gt;