* 0920990
* Collaborative Research: Gender and Constitutions: A Comparative Analysis of the Effect of Gender Provisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Priscilla Lambert, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 173,442.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Does the "gendering" of constitutions
promote women's equality? New democracies, and some older ones, increasingly
include gender provisions in their constitutions. This research examines the
incorporation of gender in national constitutions and the significance of this
trend for women's equality. Constitutional choices about gender rights reflect
opposing perspectives about whether and how gender differences should be
recognized in law. Gender and law scholars disagree whether women, and the
movements that represent them, should pursue a rights strategy based on their
equality with men or if they should accept and embrace their differences with
men and pursue policies that make allowances for women's differences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research evaluates these strategies comparatively,
traces the impact of different types of gender provisions on women's political
and economic status across countries, and analyses the conditions under which
constitutional provisions are likely to shape the content of laws and
regulations that in turn affect women's well-being and equality. The
investigators utilize multiple methodologies and levels of analysis. The
research methods include constitutional coding and cross-national statistical
analysis of one hundred countries, a mid-level comparative analysis of fifteen
countries based on archival research, and a comparative in-depth qualitative
analysis based on in-country interview research and legal scholarship in three
countries in southern Africa and three countries in South America. The research
contributes to theories of social policy and gender equality, constitutional
design and performance, legal mobilization, and law and social change. A cross-
national database on gender provisions, constitutional coding and coding
methods, and data from the mid-level analysis will be made available on the
world wide web. Dissemination of the results of this research has the potential
to inform and shape the strategies of women's advocacy groups, both domestic and
international.