* 0920116
* Resolving the growth-promoting and lipid catabolic actions of growth hormone
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2014
* Mark Sheridan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 713,775.00

The means by which hormones elicit multiple effects in animals remains a central
question in the field of chemical signalling. For example, growth hormone (GH)
is known to regulate several processes, including aspects of growth, metabolism,
reproduction, osmoregulation, immune function, and behaviour, yet the mechanisms
that underlie these diverse processes are not fully understood. In this project,
rainbow trout will be used as a model organism to evaluate two disparate actions
of GH: 1) growth promotion, an anabolic process, and 2) breakdown and
mobilization of stored lipid reserves (lipolysis), a catabolic process. Fish
such as trout provide an opportune system in which to examine this problem
because they grow throughout their life (indeterminate growth) and display a
diverse lipid storage strategy that results in the colocalization of important
growth-promoting [i.e., insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) synthesis and
secretion] and lipid storage/lipolysis processes within the same cell types
(e.g., liver cells, a main lipid store as well as the principal site of IGF-1
synthesis). The 4-year plan of work will integrate several approaches (e.g.,
physiological, cellular, biochemical/molecular/ genomic) and address the problem
in three phases. In the first phase, we will characterize GH receptor (GHR)
binding properties and assess its selectivity for different hormones that are
structurally similar to GH (e.g., prolactin). In phase 2, we will identify the
cell signal pathways activated by GH and how these pathways are reprogrammed by
an anabolic to catabolic shift. This will establish GHR-effector pathway
linkages. In phase 3, we will elucidate linkages between signal pathways and
specific biological responses, and specifically evaluate differential activation
of growth-promotion (e.g., IGF-1 production) and lipolysis. This project will
fundamentally advance our understanding of the coordination of growth and
metabolism by elucidating for the first time the means by which cells get
reprogrammed to repress the growth-promoting actions of GH to enable its
lipolytic actions. In addition, this project will provide novel information
about the mechanisms by which GH stimulates lipolysis (via hormone-sensitive
lipase activation and/or synthesis) and about the regulation of GHRs and GHR-
effector system linkages. While this work pertains specifically to fish, it will
have broad relevance to understanding the nature and evolution of growth-
metabolism interactions in vertebrates generally. This project will have
numerous other broad impacts. It will expand critical research infrastructure in
North Dakota, which serves to diversify the nation's scientific enterprise. It
also will afford research education and training opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented groups. The
project will specifically engage faculty and students of the state's tribal
colleges through curriculum development, workshops, and summer camps. These
activities that will lead to a collaborative student-centered research project
at a tribal college. The findings also will have application to enhancing
agricultural production of fish, poultry, and domestic livestock, as well as to
the detection and treatment of various growth/metabolic disorders in animals and
humans.