* 0920828
* Collaborative Research:Plant-herbivore interactions mediated by toxin-determined functional response
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Donald DeAngelis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 311,627.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This interdisciplinary study combines efforts from mathematicians and ecologists
to develop more suitable models and modeling approaches that address issues of
interest to both ecologists and resource managers. The specific objectives of
this project are threefold. The first objective is to extend mathematical
development of a modeling approach for assessing the impact of toxin-mediated
interactions between multiple plant species and herbivores. The second objective
is to integrate toxin-mediated browsing dynamics into the existent theory of
boreal forest community dynamics. The final objective is to explore the roles
that landscape disturbance, patterns of patchiness, and adaptive browsing play
in shaping the plant community. These models are developed to reflect the
biological complexity of plant-herbivore systems and will provide unique insight
into how herbivore factors, plant factors, and environmental factors impact the
establishment and spread of toxic plants in natural systems.

The modeling studies in this project have critical societal importance because
of the key role that moose and other herbivores play in indigenous societies in
the boreal forest. Moose, the largest herbivore in Alaska, are a major source of
protein for residents in interior Alaska. For generations, Athabascan Indians
have harvested moose, which provide a valuable nutritional and cultural
resource, so changes in moose abundance and distribution can have large impacts
on subsistence users. This is especially true in rural areas where availability
of alternative resources can be limited, and lack of job opportunities and high
poverty levels make subsistence harvest an essential component of rural
economies. Toxins in plants are known to affect intake and plant selection in
herbivores which in turn can influence ecosystem processes such as succession.
Succession in turn influences the quality of moose habitat, distribution, and
ultimately harvest. This research project will improve understanding of how
toxins influence plant selectivity by moose during succession in the boreal
forest. Models developed will explore future scenarios of vegetation,
herbivores, and their consequences for subsistence. Additionally, process-based
understanding of the impacts of recent climate warming and increases in wildfire
on moose abundance and distribution will be improved, and therefore subsistence
opportunities for indigenous residents of Alaska. Lastly, such information can
help better inform wildlife managers and allow for more proactive management
policies.