* 0920062
* The Involvement of Thiol-metabolizing Pathways in Thylakoid Biogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Patrice Hamel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2013
* USD 421,388.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-15).

Intellectual merit

The long-term goal of this activity is to define novel, critical components
required for the assembly of photosynthetic membranes. Photosynthesis is the
major mechanism of solar energy capture in the biosphere, providing organic
carbon for food, fuel and fiber. This research will pursue an important series
of experiments to address the role of two proteins potentially required for
thiol-redox chemistry in the thylakoid lumen. As thylakoids are essential to
photosynthesis, defining how they are assembled and maintained, represents
research fundamental to energy generation in the biosphere. This research is an
emerging frontier in the biology of photosynthesis, and could also have impact
on chloroplast metabolic engineering in agriculture. The proposed research will
investigate two proteins that have been identified as potentially involved in
thiol redox chemistry in the thylakoid lumen, using Chlamydomonas as a study
organism. CCS5 is a lumen-facing thioredoxin-like protein implicated in assembly
of the heme proteins cytochrome f and c6. The first aim will examine the redox
potentials of CCS5 and the target proteins, test CCS5 for disulfide reductase
activity, and determine the interaction of CCS5 and targets in vivo. The second
aim will investigate LTO1, a candidate thiol-oxidizing protein. Biochemical and
molecular genetic experiments will determine if the protein has the hypothesized
activity. The emergence of thiol-reducing and thiol-oxidizing components for the
manufacture of the thylakoid compartment is a recent and novel development in
the field of membrane biogenesis.

Broader impact:

A central aspect of this project is its impact on undergraduate and graduate
education, as well as curriculum enrichment. The proposed research employs
advanced molecular genetic and biochemical approaches that will serve as the
basis for training students in the fundamental area of organelle biology. In
outreach efforts to offer summer research experiences to undergraduates with
limited research opportunities, the PI has established a partnership with
Transylvania University in rural Kentucky. In addition, the PI is developing a
unique plan for educational outreach beyond institutional boundaries. This plan
will target migrant high school students in Ohio, a Hispanic minority,
academically neglected due to a mobile lifestyle. The PI will engage migrant
students and teachers from a rural high school in various activities with the
objective to encourage the target population to pursue post-secondary education
in the sciences.



