* 0921729
* EAGER:  Optical Catalytic Conversion of Methane to Longer Chain Hydrocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Roger Dube, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2010
* USD 79,058.00

Methane is an abundant hydrocarbon whose components could be used as 1) a source
for hydrogen needed in fuel cells, 2) as the building block for methanol (a
liquid fuel) or 3) as a building block from which longer chain hydrocarbons can
be synthesized. According to the EPA, methane gas in the atmosphere has a
lifetime anywhere from 9 to 15 years, and is 20 times more potent in trapping
heat than CO2. High gain techniques to achieve the conversion of methane to
liquid fuels could yield significant benefit by producing clean, low cost fuels
and by capturing methane before it is released into the atmosphere.
Unfortunately, it is estimated that approximately half of the proven reserve of
methane is ?stranded?, whereby access to the natural gas is effectively blocked
by issues related to terrain and the economics of converting the natural gas to
liquid for efficient transport. A compact, high gain process is needed that
would convert methane gas to a room temperature liquid (such as diesel) and
(ideally) be sufficiently portable to enable access to stranded
gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a fundamentally new method to achieve
photo-catalytic gain in chemical reaction systems. Although this proposal is
focused on methane gas (for reasons described below), there is reason to believe
that the approach, if successful, could be applied to various other chemical
reaction processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance and Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Photo-catalytic gain using an approach as described in this
proposal is a new concept that promises interesting short and long-term benefits
to both science and industry alike. Although basic research on excited states in
methane gas (the proposed test bed of choice) has been performed and reported in
the literature, no group has identified the opportunity to achieve photoassisted
gain in a chemical process as envisioned herein. This silence suggests either
that the opportunity has not been realized, or any attempts to achieve gain
using this approach has not yielded positive results. Therefore, the proposed
project is high risk. The PI?s broad experience in experimental physics, optics
and weak signal detection, combined with his extensive project management
experience, promises an efficient and timely focused study of the feasibility of
achieving catalytic gain in this fashion. A successful demonstration of the
operation of the proposed process in this one selected area would open up
research opportunities in a wide range of new applications, would offer a
compact, low cost method to convert methane gas to liquid fuels, and would offer
new ways to tackle greenhouse gas conversion and
containment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The use of catalysts
in many chemical reactions often suffers from the eventual fatigue of the
catalytic surface due to the slow deposit of impurities. In some production
environments, the replacement of the catalyst can mean long, expensive ?down
times?. Should the photo-catalytic gain proposed here prove successful in the
reaction of methane gas to form longer chain hydrocarbons, it is likely that
there will be analogous meta-stable states in the reactants of other reactions,
thereby enabling the use of photo-catalysis instead of the use of physical
catalysts. A successful demonstration of the principles cited here could trigger
a widespread search for other reactions that could benefit greatly from the use
of photons to catalyze reactions. &lt;br/&gt;