* 0921748
* Exchange Rates and Firm Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Doireann Fitzgerald, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2014
* USD 298,652.00

The narrow goal of this project is to document how exporters and potential
exporters in a small open economy respond to exchange rate changes. The project
will explore firms' responses both in terms of pricing of home sales versus
exports, and in terms of participation and sales in domestic and export markets.
The project will make use of a unique proprietary data set that merges the plant
census for Ireland (a small open economy) with the survey of prices used to
construct the producer price index. The first stage of the project involves
merging and cleaning the data. The second stage of the project investigates the
extent and nature of pricing-to-market and the significance of price stickiness
among a particular group of exporters. Preliminary results are suggestive of
slow passthrough of exchange rate changes into import prices. Given evidence of
more rapid passthrough at higher levels of aggregation, this suggests that entry
and exit of products and exporters may be crucial to understanding real exchange
rate movements. The third stage of the project investigates the response of
participation and sales in home and export markets to movements in exchange
rates.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The novelty of this project lies in the
unique features of the data set. For the purpose of identifying pricing-to-
market and pricing behavior, we know that the products we focus on are actually
traded, rather than potentially traded. We measure prices in home and export
markets from the producer&amp;#146;s perspective, and we can be certain that we
are comparing prices for products produced in the same plant. This gives us a
clean identification strategy. Relative to other work on entry, exit and
quantity responses of exporters to exchange rate changes, we have access to
panel data on sales to some export destinations for the full population of
plants rather than just a sample of larger plants.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The broader objective of the project is to understand the microeconomic
interactions that underly the behavior of real exchange rates at the macro
level. The results of the project described here will contribute to our
understanding of passthrough of exchange rate changes into import prices and the
simultaneous dynamics of import behavior, which form an important transmission
channel of monetary and exchange rate policy. The project at hand does not focus
on the US, but on the case of exporters in a small open economy (Ireland)
exporting to a bigger economy (the UK). This case is particularly relevant to
understanding why depreciation of the dollar has seemed to have little impact on
import prices and overall imports in recent times, because the competitive
position of foreign firms selling in the US market is likely to be very
comparable to that of the firms in the data