* 0921964
* NSWP:  An Analysis of Space Weather's Impact on Electricity Flows, Power Grid Operations, and Electricity Markets
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Kevin Forbes, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2013
* USD 415,938.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of this project is
to use multivariate methods to econometrically estimate the extent to which
ground-induced currents (GICs) contribute to Loop flows. Loop flows are
unscheduled electricity flows or inadvertent flows that represent the difference
between scheduled flows and actual electricity flows. These flows are ubiquitous
in alternating current transmission systems, frequently large in magnitude, and
have adverse consequences on power grid operations. Thus far they have been
difficult to predict. While many power grid system operators believe that their
systems are only rarely affected by space weather, they may be concerned on an
almost daily basis about Loop flows. Previous funded research by the PI
presented evidence that GIC levels and various measures of electricity grid
conditions are statistically related; in particular, a statistical relationship
was found between a proxy GIC index and unscheduled levels of electricity flows
between power grids. This project will investigate the hypothesis that GIC
induced transmission losses and transmission constraints contribute to Loop
flows by altering the path of least resistance. The longer range goal is to
estimate econometric equations that could forecast Loop flows based on forecasts
of space weather, terrestrial weather, and the scheduled level of grid activity.
Nonloop flow issues will also be examined econometrically. The project will lead
to better understanding of the contributions of space weather and terrestrial
weather to loop flows, enabling power operators and policy makers to more
efficiently manage power grids which may have significant economic benefits. The
project may lead to further investigations and collaborations between multi-
disciplinary teams such as space scientists, engineers, and
economists.&lt;br/&gt;