* 0921149
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   Know Then Thyself, Domestic Delegation, Information, Leadership Uncertainty and Decisions during Crisis Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* David Clark, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,524.00

Governments are complex webs of bureaucrats, officials, informal and appointed
advisers, so complicated in many cases that one can easily wonder how leaders
make informed decisions. How are a leader's decisions not tainted by the
inefficiencies and self-interest that must accompany so many individual and
institutional viewpoints? More importantly, what happens when such ponderous
government structures deal with important matters of foreign policy and
decisions to wage war?

While the scholarly literature on foreign policy and war is vast, much of it has
neglected the important question of how leaders make decisions during foreign
policy crises, when they have these complex, sometimes self-interested advisory
and bureaucratic structures helping guide policy. This project fills in this
important gap on how the discipline understands the link between domestic
politics and war. To do so, the project appeals to the literature on how and why
"principles" or leaders who have to make authoritative decisions delegate
advisory and information gathering tasks to advisors or "agents" in order to
reduce their decision-making burden. Associated with this are problems of
monitoring the agent's behavior and his/her motivation to shirk from the
assigned task and/ or provide self-interested advice. In addition, the
complexity of the delegatory structure can lend itself to the distortion and
loss of information and advice being presented to the leader. This project
examines what effect, if any, this has on the decisions that a leader makes
during crises.

Using a multi-method approach, that includes formally building the theoretical
argument and testing its implications using large-n statistical testing and a
controlled laboratory experiment, the study shows that when advisory structures
in a state allow such problems to infiltrate freely, leaders are predisposed to
making uninformed and inaccurate assessments of the costs of war. Such leaders
are therefore more likely to make foreign policy mistakes, such as fighting when
they should not, and not fighting when they should.

As such, the study seeks to provide an additional domestic-politics based
explanation of why benefit seeking, cost minimizing leaders find themselves
involved in undesirable, long and costly conflicts. More broadly, the study
advances our understanding of risky and costly decision-making under
uncertainty, a concern not only of political scientists, but also of other
academics. Additionally, the theoretical argument can be easily adapted to
explain asymmetric intra- and interstate conflicts.

The argument points towards the effectiveness of specific domestic institutions
in reducing problems associated with delegating advisory tasks to agents and
allowing leaders to make better informed decisions. This research therefore
provides valuable clues to policy makers and institutional designers as to what
institutions are better in contributing to successful foreign policies. For
leaders, the research demonstrates ways in which they can manage and organize
their existing institutions and advisers and bureaucrats, in a manner that
reduces the need for monitoring and their agents' need to willfully manipulate
advice and information and/or shirk from their tasks.