* 0921129
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Category Structure of Pitch Accent in the Mid-Western Japanese Dialects
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Kenji Yoshida, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,998.00

Pitch is the resource used to distinguish notes in music, and it is also a
ubiquitous aspect of the sound system of different languages. Languages use
pitch for numerous functions, from marking off phrases and forming questions, as
in English, to differentiating words. This study investigates pitch accent
systems in six dialects of Japanese, which are known to rely heavily on pitch
contrasts for the identification and differentiation of words. These dialects
are notable for a particularly complex use of vocal pitch, called "shiki". Shiki
have been described variously as local pitch specifications at the beginning of
a word, and as a more global movement of pitch throughout a word. Since most
current phonological representations of sounds rely on elements that represent
sound locally, the dynamic and global aspects of shiki present something of a
challenge to typical representational schemes. This research will determine the
nature of shiki contrasts in different dialects that are known to exhibit
different inventories of shiki. One other aspect of the dialects of central
Japan is that they exhibit many different shiki and accent systems, forming a
natural typological sample of the different ways in which shiki and accent types
can be differentiated to mark different words. The study begins with the
collection of recordings of different shiki-accent types in six different
varieties scattered about the inland waterways of central Japan. These
recordings are then submitted to acoustic analysis, with the construction of
dynamic models of the time-course of pitch control. These models reduce the
complex movement patterns to a set of parameters that can be examined for how
they capture the word contrasts in the different dialects. It will also include
a perceptual component in which these model parameters are used to create
synthetic speech for perceptual evaluation by speakers of these dialects in a
later field-work stage. The goal, then, is to determine those characteristics of
the fundamental frequency F0 that speakers control in speech production and pay
attention to in speech perception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will
inform the question of how linguistic systems use pitch and the typology of
pitch systems cross-linguistically. The study will also contribute to our
understanding of how speakers can maintain distinct shiki systems in different
accents, since there are so many different and complex systems distributed over
a relatively small geographic area. In addition, this research holds promise to
open up new conceptualizations of the nature of pitch control, and how it should
be represented in studies of pitch usage. This is relevant not only for studies
of word contrasts in languages such as Japanese, but also intonational studies
of languages such as English. Perhaps most importantly though, the study serves
the valuable purpose of documenting several endangered dialects of Japanese. For
example, the Ibukijima dialect, localized on a small island in the inland sea of
Japan, is the only known dialect that maintains the same type of system as
reconstructed for Old Japanese. However, the speakers of an authentic Ibukijima
dialect are few in number and over seventy years of age. This study will
document the speech of the dialect before this heritage is gone forever.