* 0921067
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Intellectual Property and the  Connection of Intangible and Tangible Commodities in Taiwan and China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Myron Cohen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 12,970.00

Columbia University doctoral student, Matthew E. West, with the guidance of Dr.
Myron L. Cohen, will undertake anthropological research on the process and
practice of innovation. The focus of the research will be an ethnography of the
production and circulation of different forms of intellectual property during
the design and manufacture of a green technology product. The research will be
carried out primarily in a single green technology company's Taiwanese design
and licensing branch, with additional research in their Chinese manufacturing
site. This research is important because it will provide a better understanding
of the everyday practice of intellectual property, a kind of property with its
associated practicies that is at the foundation of the global knowledge economy
and that facilitates a global division of labor between knowledge and
manufacturing.

The researcher will focus on the connections between intellectual property and
the designs, licenses, and other products through which people normally
encounter intellectual property. He will follow the product from the creation
and licensing of its intellectual components through to its final manufacture.
Data collection methods will include participant observation fieldwork in the
company's Taiwanese and Chinese sites; semi-structured interviews with company
employees and other industry experts; and the collection and analysis of related
documentary materials.

This project will contribute to social science theory of high technology
businesses, complementing other research on open-source software and indigenous
cultural property. It also will provide a needed micro-level perspective on the
variety of connections that tie new intangible objects of ownership to tangible
commodities, and so contribute to the ongoing challenges of creating policies
for managing intellectual property. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.