* 0921186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Public Health Movements, Local Poor Relief, and Child Mortality in the United States: 1910-1932
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Jonathan Fox, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 10,000.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement award permits the student to examine the
relationship between child and infant mortality and public health and welfare
spending in both urban and rural areas during the early 20th century. Infant
mortality and child mortality rates dropped sharply across the United States
during the early 1900s, although there was substantial variation in the degree
of decline across counties. This project uses the variation across time and
place to identify the types of public health investments that contributed to
these declines and examines the political economy of the choices made by
Federal, state and local governments in making the investments. Many public
health scholars suggest that a great deal of the decline in child and infant
mortality can be attributed to education efforts that taught families simple
things like hand washing, milk pasteurization and about better nutrition. While
the educational nature of these policies has historically made their effects
hard to measure, a rich source of information on the funding and activities of
county public health organizations has been discovered. This allows the doctoral
dissertation student to more effectively measure these efforts in every year
between 1912 and 1932 for over 700 counties in the United States. In addition,
the student plans to computerize and analyze extensive information about
spending on public health education, various forms of sanitation, and welfare
spending in municipal areas reported from 1910 through 1940 in the Census Bureau
reports on city finances. At the state level he plans to examine the role of
funding under the Sheppard-Towner Act of 1921, which distributed large amounts
of public health funding during the 1920s. In the process the student also
examines the influences of technological change, water and sewer public works
projects, changes in income and economic activity, and changes in industrial
pollution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In terms of intellectual
merit, the proposed activity contributes to the body of knowledge about the
effectiveness of investments in various types of public health policies. In
addition, data currently unavailable in electronic format is collected and
loaded into easily usable and accessible database files. This includes, but is
not limited to, detailed rural health spending statistics, city financial
statistics between 1910 and 1932, as well as statistics on city tax returns and
manufacturing statistics by city and industry during this same time period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project has a broader impact because
it informs public policy about the relative effectiveness of public health and
welfare spending. Prior to the public health campaigns in the 1910s and 1920s,
rural health conditions in the United States closely resembled current
conditions in developing countries. Infant mortality rates were extremely high,
sanitary conditions were poor and disease prevalent. Knowledge about how public
health interventions in the United States reduced the severity of, and in some
cases entirely eliminated these types of issues will educate policy makers about
which health and welfare options would be most effective in poor countries
facing similar issues today. In many cases the educational programs were more
cheaply implemented than large-scale sanitation and water-treatment works.
Examining the effectiveness of such policies allows better understanding about
how such low-cost policies might work in reducing child and infant mortality
during the current period.