* 0921746
* Arabidopsis 2010:  20th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research, June 30-July 4, 2009 in Edinburgh, Scotland
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2011
* R. Poethig, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Holly Ellis
* 05/31/2011
* USD 43,075.00

The 20th International Conference on Arabidopsis Research (ICAR) will take place
from June 30th to July 4th 2009 in Scotland at the Edinburgh International
Conference Center. The PI requests funds to support attendance of young
researchers and participants from minority-serving institutions. The annual ICAR
brings together approximately 1,000 participants. Arabidopsis serves an
outstanding model system due to the numerous and varied experimental tools in
functional genomics that are available. The transfer of knowledge from
Arabidopsis to other plant species, and beyond to other organisms including
humans, is increasing due to the efforts of the research community and the
leveraging of advances and resources. This conference provides an opportunity
for the exchange of ideas among the numerous and diverse researchers of the
international Arabidopsis community and beyond to the larger plant community.
This year's conference will include a number of speakers whose research involves
wheat, rice, maize, and barley. The conference will include a broad range of
important and current topics: Genome Organization/The RNA World, Development,
Cell Biology, Systems Biology, Signaling in Development, Bioenergy,
Environmental Responses, Plant Defense, Plant Growth Regulators, Natural
Variation, Hot Topics and Novel Tools/Resources. Important components of the
conference include the presentation of current research by approximately 90
speakers (both invited and from selected abstracts) and 600 posters as well as
several community organized workshops where smaller groups can explore more
specific topics in greater detail.

Broader Impact A particular strength of the ICAR lies in its ability to enhance
the exchange of information at the forefront of Arabidopsis research worldwide,
creating new networks and collaborations. The conference program and abstracts
will be publicly available on the conference website and permanently archived.
The ICAR also has a long and successful history of being inclusive of young
scientists as well as women and minorities. Support of this year's proposal will
provide full funding for several underrepresented US minorities and/or faculty
as well as partial funding of travel expenses for additional young domestic
faculty, postdoctoral scholars, or graduate students. A special luncheon to
acknowledge recipients of US-sponsored minority funding and to establish an
informal networking venue as well as an "Emerging Scientists Luncheon" is
planned. Many of the oral presentations at the sessions and workshops will be
given by graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and junior faculty. This
will promote the training of students and postdocs and provide important
opportunities for career development. The conference program and abstracts will
be publicly available on the conference website and permanently archived at TAIR
(http://www.arabidopsis.org/news/abstracts.jsp).