* 0921367
* LiT: Interactive effects of multiple environmental stressors on mitochondrial metabolism and bioenergetics in a model marine ectotherm, Crassostrea virginica
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Inna Sokolova, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 07/31/2011
* USD 250,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

While among the most productive areas of the ocean, estuaries and coastal zones
often suffer a high degree of environmental stress from naturally-occurring
changes in salinity, temperature, pH, oxygen content as well as manmade stresses
caused by the dumping of pollutants and nutrients, which can cause toxicity in
marine organisms and/or lead to oxygen-depleted 'dead zones'. The survival of
marine organisms depends on the flexibility of their stress tolerance
mechanisms, which adapt to handle most natural changes, but manmade changes
happen too quickly for evolutionary adaptation to occur. Energy metabolism plays
a key role in these adaptations. Currently, the interactive effects of multiple
stressors on energy metabolism of marine organisms in an environmentally-
realistic context are not well understood because most studies focus on the
effects of a single stressor. This study will help close this significant gap in
knowledge by exploring the basic physiological and molecular mechanisms of the
interactive effects of three stressors commonly found in estuaries and coastal
zones (intermittent anoxia, or lack of oxygen; a trace metal, cadmium; and
temperature stress) on the energy metabolism of a model marine mollusk, the
eastern oyster Crassostrea virginica. Oysters, which are major ecosystem
builders and play an important role in the economies of the eastern US coastal
states, can survive environmental extremes, making them excellent model
organisms for this study.

The study involves a comprehensive analysis of aerobic (mitochondrial) and
anaerobic metabolism and will significantly advance the field of metabolic
physiology by providing an integrative picture of metabolic change during
environmentally-realistic stress exposures that can be quantitatively and
qualitatively different than the effects of single stressors. Moreover, because
energy metabolism is central to the survival and stress tolerance of all
organisms and mitochondrial functions are highly conserved in evolution, the
project results can be extrapolated beyond oysters to yield important new
insights into the fundamental mechanisms of mitochondrial stress responses of
marine invertebrates in general. This project will have important educational
impacts by involving undergraduate, graduate, K-12 students and a post-doc,
including women and underrepresented minorities, into research; strengthening an
environmental focus in the interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in Biology at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte; and fostering active collaborative
programs and student exchanges between UNC Charlotte and Johnson C. Smith
University, a local minority undergraduate-level university.