* 0921702
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Capabilities and Constraints: Untangling State and Rebel Strategies of Violence during Civil Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Reed Wood, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

During the 20th century civilians constituted upwards of 80% of the casualties
in civil wars. While many of these are unintended, the brutal nature of many
conflicts illustrates that governments and insurgent groups often employ
strategies of explicit and gross violence against civilians. Rape, torture,
disappearances, and indiscriminate killings against non-combatants by both
government forces and insurgent organizations appear to be common
characteristics of many modern civil wars. Yet the scale and scope of civilian
targeting varies tremendously both across and within armed
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;Insurgents and incumbent governments depend on civilian
loyalty and support to achieve their war objectives. Yet, during civil conflicts
both sides at times engage in mass abuses against non-combatants. Targeting
civilians, however, may prove counterproductive, driving civilians into the
adversary's arms. This raises an important empirical question: what motivates
political actors to target civilians when doing so often appears to be a
suboptimal strategy? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines violence
against non-combatants during civil conflict by investigating the evolution of
strategies adopted by states, rebels, and civilians. It is argued that changes
in the frequency and severity of insurgent- and state-sponsored violence are a
function of the strategic interactions between state and rebel forces and the
balance of relative capabilities between these actors. In brief, an actor's
strategy of violence is related to its ability to entice civilian support, which
is in turn contingent upon its ability to provide benefits to these supporters.
Weak (or weakening) actors are unlikely to possess the capacity to provide
benefits sufficient to elicit support. As a result, they are more likely to
adopt violence as a means to temporarily coerce support and enforce loyalty.
This relationship, however, is conditioned by the opponent's adopted strategies.
High levels of violence employed by adversaries may reduce the level of
capabilities necessary for an actor to entice support.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project adds to recent research explaining civil war violence by
exploring both how rebel and state strategies of violence are constructed and
how these strategies evolve and change as conflict unfolds over time. It also
contributes to an understanding of the microfoundations of these strategies by
unpacking the linkages between civilian support for rebels and government, actor
capacities, and the level of violence chosen by each side. Furthermore, this
project will produce the most detailed dataset to date on civil war violence.
The dataset used herein captures the level, frequency, and type of violence
committed annually by both insurgent and state
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining what factors are responsible for
variations in violence and unpacking the manner in which the complex
interactions among actors influence strategy choice is a necessary first step to
designing policies that can mitigate civilian victimization. The theoretical and
empirical contributions of this project will assist policy makers and academics
in devising strategies that diminish the civilian cost of civil wars.
Furthermore, the dataset constructed to test the hypotheses outlined above will
be useful to both policymakers and academics who require longitudinal and cross
sectional data on violence committed by civil war actors