* 0921306
* Psychosocial Benefits of Ethnic Diversity in Urban Middle Schools
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Jaana Juvonen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 681,108.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to test
a set of interrelated hypotheses about the psychosocial benefits of
racial/ethnic diversity in urban middle schools. It is hypothesized that greater
diversity can benefit students' mental health, intergroup attitudes, and school
adaptation via three mediating mechanisms: (1) decreases in perceived
vulnerability; (2) the formation and maintenance of cross-ethnic friendships;
and (3) the development of complex social identities. These mediating mechanisms
are examined in Aims 1-3. In Aim 4, the moderating influence of school
structural characteristics, such as academic tracking, that may limit the mixing
opportunities of students are explored. The hypotheses outlined in the four aims
will be examined in a 3-year longitudinal study of approximately 3500 6th grade
students as they enter one of 14 urban middle schools in southern California.
The large sample will be ethnically diverse, comprised of Latino, African
American, Asian/Pacific Islander, White, and multi-ethnic students. The 14
middle schools that these students attend will be carefully selected to vary in
racial/ethnic composition and level of diversity. Data on students' perceived
vulnerability, cross-ethnic friendships, and social identities as well as the
outcomes of mental health, intergroup attitudes, and school adaptation will be
gathered in fall and spring of 6th grade and in spring of 7th and 8th grade, for
a total of four waves of data. Structural equation modeling and multilevel
modeling will be used to track growth and change in these interrelated variables
over time. By studying pathways to successful adaptation, the overarching goal
of the research is to examine the conditions under which greater school ethnic
diversity can buffer many of the normative challenges of early
adolescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the potential to be
significant in three ways. First, the research can offer transformative ways to
think about the meaning and measurement of racial/ethnic diversity. The emerging
view of racial/ethnic diversity as a dynamic, multi-dimensional construct can be
useful for research in other social settings -- including the neighborhood or
workplace -- where the implications of increasing ethnic diversity are a primary
concern. Second, the project has the potential to contribute new knowledge about
the psychosocial challenges of normative development during early adolescence by
focusing on the ways in which ethnically diverse school settings can buffer some
of those challenges. Unlike other programs of developmental research, this
project conceptualizes school diversity as a protective factor. Third, the
research has implications for social policies affecting youth. By making a case
for the ways in which diverse schools contribute to the academic and social
well-being of all students, the results can contribute to the discourse on legal
options for achieving greater racial/ethnic diversity in our nation's urban
public schools.