* 0921036
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Personal and Institutional  Contexts of American Gender Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Judith Farquhar, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 17,850.00

University of Chicago doctoral student, J. Ckristafer Baker, supervised by
Dr.&lt;br/&gt;Judith Farquhar, will undertake research on the relationship
between personal and institutional constructions of culturally accepted ideas of
male gender in the United States. Previous research on gender-identification
reveals a tension between personal and mainstream (institutionalized)
understandings, raising the question of where cultural norms originate. The
research is designed to contribute to answering that
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in northern
California. Research methodologies will include participation in the social and
political life of differently identified men, ethnographic interviews, archival
research into medical and legal management, and monitoring news and popular
media. The overarching goal of this project is to investigate the microprocesses
by which gender categories are constructed and maintained, and how they connect
to legal, medical, psychotherapeutic, social-service, and educational
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make important theoretical
contributions to understanding the sources of cultural norms, which has
significance for developing appropriate cultural policy and regulation, as well.
Funding this research also supports the education of a social scientist.