* 0921985
* NSWP: Automated Shock Analysis for Space Weather Predictions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Charles Smith, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 08/31/2012
* USD 113,818.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University of New Hampshire team
has recently developed a fully automated version of a popular and familiar shock
analysis code, based on the solution of the Rankine-Hugoniot relations, creating
a tool that is accessible via the internet. The code utilizes real-time data
from the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) spacecraft to provide solar wind
shock solutions within 10 minutes of a shock's passage by the ACE spacecraft,
located at the Sun-Earth Lagrange point (L1). These solutions provide
approximately one hour advance notice before such shocks impact the Earth's
magnetopause. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this effort, the Principal Investigator
(PI) and his team will upgrade the performance and utility of the web page and
associated tools, while adding features not currently available. The planned
enhancements will provide more reliable determination of shocks and their
parameters, and predict the likely characteristics of approaching ICME sheath
regions, which are known to be space weather drivers. The team will perform
statistical studies of past shocks in order to improve existing codes and allow
them to provide this new information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI notes that
automated space weather analyses running in the public domain have proved useful
during the recent solar maximum. Such analyses are expected to play an
increasing role in society's efforts to protect itself from geomagnetic storm
effects originating with solar transient events. The PI's automated code can
provide advance warning of approaching shocks so that actions can be taken to
protect biological, industrial, and technological assets that may be adversely
affected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's team will also recruit and employ
undergraduate physics majors to work in this effort. The project will provide
these students with experience in data reduction and programming techniques,
training in shock physics and space science, and practice in writing scientific
papers. The PI has a history of mentoring successful undergraduates who have
written significant research papers and presented them at international
meetings.