* 0921842
* Dynamics of Dispositional Change
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Gerard Saucier, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 880,214.00

Personality traits are associated with a range of important life outcomes
related to occupational success, close relationships, mental and physical
health, and other domains. For example, people with a moody or fearful
personality are more likely to have conflicts with partners, co-workers,
neighbors and so on, and therefore are at risk for distressed relationships.
Previously, the predominant view of personality regarded traits like "moody" as
endogenous dispositions that become stable in early adulthood and change very
little thereafter. However, a growing body of recent research has challenged
this viewpoint and documented that personality traits can and do change
throughout the lifespan, sometimes substantially. The primary goal of this
research is to better understand the dynamics underlying personality changes
during adulthood.

This research is designed to test two broad categories of explanations for
personality change. The first concerns social roles, and begins with the
observation that across the lifespan, adults move through a variety of evolving
social roles as workers, parents, and caregivers, among others. Over time,
social roles may dynamically interact with personality traits, with social roles
promoting changes in personality and one's traits providing the basis for self-
selection into, and identification with, different social roles. The second
explanation involves an individual's worldview and values, defined as broad
motivational orientations that prioritize desirable end-states across a variety
of situations. Values and worldview have the potential to shape and reorganize
personality (e.g., pursuit of communitarian values may shift an individual
toward a more generous and other-oriented disposition). To test these and
related hypotheses, two longitudinal studies will be conducted. Study 1 will
focus on young adults who are beginning to take on adult social roles and
consolidating a sense of identity and a set of personal values. Study 2 will
focus on adults from a broader range of ages. In both studies, participants will
complete an in-depth assessment of personality, social roles, values/worldview,
and relevant control variables at four points in time, each separated by one
year. This will allow the examination of whether changes in social roles or
values precipitate shifts in personality traits or vice versa.

Broadly, this research seeks a more comprehensive understanding of the dynamics
of personality traits: what makes them stable and what makes them change. While
traits are partially rooted in genetic influences, they evidently develop
through as yet poorly understood dynamic interactions between genetic and
environmental processes. New models, then, are needed that more exactly specify
how personality interacts with belief systems and with social environments,
which can then direct research that examines how lower-level processes like gene
expression and gene-environment interactions lead to important behavioral
outcomes. The dynamic processes underlying personality, once identified, will
point to transactional sources of change that can usefully inform and be
incorporated into public policy and education. Among other possibilities, this
might lead to targeted interventions to promote optimal development of key
desirable psychological attributes, including civility, altruism, integrity, and
achievement orientation.