* 0921884
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: An Experimental Study of Bribery, Nepotism, and Patronage
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2011
* Catherine Eckel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,981.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corruption is one of most cited factors
inhibiting economic development. It impedes political and economic growth,
reduces the welfare of societies, increases income inequality, and reduces trust
in political institutions. Even in the presence of anticorruption policies, the
shadow of corruption looms large. The key challenge in anticorruption policy is
to create sustainable change. In addition to the change in policy itself,
citizens must be convinced of the effectiveness of the policy intervention. This
implies altering citizens? beliefs about the level of corruption within
governments and bureaucracies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has suggested
that the success of anticorruption policy is highly dependent on underlying
culture; the same policies can succeed in one cultural environment but fail in
another. If anticorruption policy measures fail, corruption may then be viewed
as a problem that cannot be addressed. This makes the trial and error method of
anticorruption policy very risky for countries, and highlights an important
problem in fighting corruption: policies need to have a high probability of
effectiveness before countries will risk implementation, yet there is no venue
where they can be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the researchers
use laboratory experiments to 'testbed' alternative anticorruption policies.
They ask how policy interventions change individual behavior in societies where
high levels of corruption are prevalent, as compared with societies where
corruption is relatively rare. The proposed experiments investigate three
different types of corruption (bribery, nepotism, and patronage) and three
different policy interventions (sanctions, enhanced civic awareness, and
improved transparency), with subjects in two different cultures (the US, where
corruption is very low, and Pakistan, where it is widespread).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments allow us to investigate the
impact of anticorruption policies in each culture without the risks associated
with implementation on a societal scale. The goal of the research is to
demonstrate how (and when) these policies are likely to be effective in an
inexpensive and low-consequence environment. The results will provide guidance
for development agencies in formulating policies targeted towards a particular
local population.