* 0921937
* RUI: Lahu Media Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,06/30/2013
* Judith Pine, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 95,960.00

Dr. Judith M. S. Pine, of Western Washington University, will undertake research
on the use and impact of internationally available media in minority languages
to create a common identity for minority communities that reside in different
nation states and practice different religions. The research will be conducted
among people who call themselves Lahu, and who speak various dialects of this
Tibeto-Burman language. Lahu speakers live in rural agricultural villages, small
cities and metropolises throughout Southeast Asia and southwest China. But Lahu
people today also use a wide variety of shared media, including cassette tapes,
CDs and VCDs, newsletters and books, radio programs and the Internet.

The researcher will investigate whether Lahu-language media create a common
sense of Lahu-ness that cross-cuts their diverse, distinct relationships with
particular nation-states and religions. The researcher and her field team will
interview and record Lahu-speaking media producers and media consumers in both
Thailand and China. The primary methodology to be employed is a painstaking
sociolinguistic technique called frame analysis, which will be used to analyze
both the media and the researchers' field recordings of native speakers
discussing Lahu language media.

This research will enhance social scientific understanding of how minority
populations who live in different countries but speak a common language may
transcend geographic, political, and ideological boundaries through the use of
modern media. This knowledge will have practical application, especially for
those who are designing public health or public education programs targeting
stateless or indigenous populations.