* 0921187
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Identification, estimation and application of semiparametric panel data models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Jinyong Hahn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 47,240.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

That the availability of panel data, or multiple observations of the same
sampling unit (e.g., individual, firm, state etc.) over time, can help to
control for the presence of unobserved heterogeneity is both intuitive and
plausible. The inclusion of unit-specific intercepts in linear regression models
is among the most widespread methods of controlling for omitted variables in
empirical work. The appropriateness of this modeling strategy requires that any
time-invariant correlated heterogeneity enter the outcome equation additively.
Unfortunately, additivity, while statistically convenient, is difficult to
motivate economically. Economic models of optimization suggest than the input
choice of an agent should covary with its marginal return. Furthermore, non-
additive forms of unobserved heterogeneity appear to be empirically relevant
(e.g., Browning and Carro, 2007). Unfortunately, few identification and
estimation results for panel data models with such heterogeneity are available.
The increasing availability of panel data, the presumption that such data allow
for a weakening of restrictions required in the cross-section case, and a
growing appreciation by empirical researchers of the importance of nonseparable
heterogeneity, suggests that a comprehensive analysis of the identifying power
of panel data in a semiparametric context would be valuable. This project
studies the use of panel data for identifying and estimating what is perhaps the
simplest statistical model admitting nonseparable heterogeneity: the static
correlated random coefficients (CRC) model. In this model the outcome for each
individual varies linearly with a regressor or input. The coefficients
characterizing this linear response vary across individuals and over time. In
the context of such a model the proposed research characterizes (features of)
the effect on an exogenous change in the input on the probability distribution
of the outcome. This type of knowledge is important for predicting the effects
of counterfactual policies. The proposed approach is a fixed effects one, that
is the joint distribution of the regressors and any time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity (i.e., the individual-specific effects) is left unmodeled.

The potential intellectual merits of the proposed activity include increasing
our understanding of fixed effect panel data models for continuously-valued
outcomes with nonseparable heterogeneity. Panel data are widely-used in
practice, yet the menu of methods available to empirical researchers studying
continuously-valued outcomes is still heavily organized around the linear model
with constant coefficients surveyed by Chamberlain (1984) twenty-five years ago.
The proposed projects represent one approach to extending fixed effect panel
data methods to models with non-separable heterogeneity. While the main goal is
to provide usable identification and estimation results for CRC panel data
models, the work also contributes to the theoretical literature on
semiparametric estimation.

Panel data methods are employed in virtually all fields of empirical economics
and the other social sciences. They are essential to the implementation of
several leading approaches to policy evaluation and production function
estimation. A virtue of the CRC model is its simplicity and ease of
interpretability. For this reason the broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activities include the real possibility of widespread adoption of the
methods developed by empirical researchers in economics and the other social
sciences. Publicly available computer software and an integrative survey paper
oriented toward practitioners will facilitate such adoption. The proposed
methods will be used to study the elasticity of calorie demand with respect to
total household resources. This elasticity is an important parameter for food
policy analysis and plays a prominent role in theoretical models of nutritional
poverty traps.