* 0921013
* Niche Expansion and Terrestriality in an Arboreal Primate
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Karen Strier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 308,707.00

Most comparative models of primate behavioral ecology assume that the behaviors
of wild primates are adaptive, or are the products of selection pressures under
ecological conditions in the past. Yet, the fast pace at which human activities
alter the environment results in new ecological challenges and makes it
difficult to distinguish evolutionary adaptations from more rapidly acquired
behavioral responses that may or may not be adaptive over time. Understanding
this plasticity is fundamental to analyses of evolutionary mechanisms and
represents an urgent priority for assessments of the future of endangered
primates living in disturbed habitats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study builds
on a unique historical database from the long-term field study of wild northern
muriqui monkeys (Brachyteles hypoxanthus) in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern
Brazil to evaluate how ecological change drives behavioral innovations and to
identify the social pathways by which new behavior patterns spread within and
between groups. The northern muriqui is critically endangered, and with 281
individuals confined to a 957-hectare protected forest fragment, the study
population represents more than 25% of the entire species. During the past 27
years, the population has quintupled in size and the population's density is now
the highest known for the species. Previous behavioral adjustments to population
pressures have included shifts from cohesive to fluid grouping patterns. More
recently, and despite their arboreal lifestyle, the largest group in the
population has undergone a 20-fold increase in its use of the ground and all
three of the other smaller groups now engage in terrestrial feeding. The greater
risks from terrestrial predators and pathogens imply that this change in the
muriquis' habitat use is an extreme manifestation of an overall expansion of
their ecological niche necessitated by the population's growth within a confined
area. With the collection of systematic behavioral data on all four muriqui
groups in this crowded population, this study will quantify the ecological
implications of niche expansion and the social processes by which newly acquired
behavior patterns are diffused between groups by dispersing females and
subsequently spread within groups along established social networks. The
intellectual merits of the study include the new comparative perspectives it
will provide into the ecological conditions associated with ground use in other
primates, and the critical insights it will provide into the adaptive potentials
of contemporary primates and their prospects for survival in a rapidly changing
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its scientific contributions, this
study will provide essential continuity for the only long-term study on this
critically endangered species and one of the longest-running field studies of
any primate. It will contribute to the conservation and protection of one of the
last remaining strongholds for northern muriquis, and maintain the researcher's
longstanding tradition of providing training opportunities for Brazilian
students. The established record of collaborative research and conservation
activities, and success with capacity building in Brazil, extend the broader
impacts of this study to include an international conservation and educational
agenda.