* 0921634
* Infants' Developing Representation of Object Function
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Lisa Oakes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2012
* USD 189,776.00

How do infants come to learn about and understand the large numbers of objects,
events, and people they encounter? It is remarkable that by one year of age, the
typical infant in middle-class American culture knows that dogs say "woof," you
drink from cups, and there is a class of round objects called "balls." Science
has focused both on how infants come to represent the properties of particular
objects (e.g., my teddy has a red shirt) and classes of objects (e.g., cars have
wheels). The functions of objects are central to many concepts -- we learn not
only the surface features of objects (such as shape and color), but also about
how objects can be used and for what purpose they were created (e.g., to hold
liquid, to make marks on paper). Despite the large literature documenting
infants' impressive abilities to acquire knowledge about objects, and the
importance of function to how objects are represented, we know little about
infants' emerging abilities to represent function. This work will address this
gap by examining infants' emerging understanding of function from 6 to 12
months, and by determining how their developing abilities to manually explore
objects (i.e., pick them up, rotate them) is related to their understanding of
function. By measuring aspects of infants' looking behavior -- how long they
watch particular events, where they look -- we can understand how they learn
about and represent the objects and actions in these events. By observing how
they play with objects -- how easily they pick them up from the floor, how long
they inspect objects in their hands -- we can measure developmental changes in
infants' abilities to manually explore objects. In this work, both looking at
images and playing with objects will be assessed in infants to document how
developments in the two areas are related.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filling this gap
in our knowledge is important because of the significance of function for
understanding object representations in general and because understanding
typical development of object representation is critically important for a full
appreciation of atypical developmental patterns of object representation, such
as those associated with Williams Syndrome and Autism Spectrum Disorder.
Individuals with these disorders often have difficulty learning about and
representing objects and actions, particularly the actions performed by humans
on objects. Unfortunately, these disorders are often not identified until later
in childhood, and as a result we know little about the early emergence of these
atypical patterns of development. A comprehensive understanding of the typical
development of object representation in infancy may aid in early identification
and treatment of individuals with such neurodevelopmental disorders. A full
understanding of typical development of basic cognitive abilities, such as
infants' representation of objects, is also important for educating parents and
caregivers about development and appropriate expectations for infants. The
results of this work will be broadly disseminated, not only to the scientific
community through publication in scientific journals and presentation at
national and international conferences, but also to parents and childcare
professionals through lectures given to parenting groups, participation at the
Yolo County Child Development Conference, and television and radio.