* 0921141
* Student and Junior Faculty Travel Support for the first IEEE Symposium on Power Electronics and Machines in Wind Applications (PEMWA 2009). To Be Held in Nebraska, on June  24-26,
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2009,10/31/2009
* Jerry Hudgins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* George Maracas
* 10/31/2009
* USD 5,100.00

The first IEEE Symposium on Power Electronics and Machines in Wind Applications
(PEMWA 2009), that will take place in Lincoln, Nebraska on June 24-26, 2009.
This new symposium is being initiated by the IEEE Power Electronics Society,
IEEE Power and Energy Society, Nebraska Center for Energy Sciences Research
(NCESR), and Nebraska Wind Applications Center (NWAC).

Symposium themes include generator design, control of wind turbine induction and
permanent magnet generators, power electronics converter topologies for wind
turbine systems, modeling and simulation of wind power converters, residential
applications and other small wind turbine systems, low wind-speed technologies,
wind forecasting for siting and dispatching of distributed generation sources,
islanding and protection capabilities, grid connection issues, energy storage
technologies for use with wind generating sources, and rural development
associated with wind applications.

It is the objective of this award to partially support travel and registration
expenses for a selected group of students and junior faculty to attend this
symposium.

Intellectual Merit: Wind power is capable of becoming a major contributor to the
nation?s and world?s electricity supply over the next three decades. The PEMWA
symposium will provide a unique forum for exchanging knowledge and ideas and
sharing experiences on wind energy amongst experts from around the world. It
will help identify critical challenges and technology gaps and provide a
framework to guide research and technology development in order to achieve the
goal of supplying 20% of the nation?s and the world?s electrical energy by wind.

Broader Impact: This symposium is the first IEEE-sponsored technical
conference/symposium to focus on wind energy and related issues, to be achieved
on a global scale. The increased utilization of wind energy will mitigate the
problem of energy shortage, reduce carbon emissions, and promote a cleaner
environment. These are possibly the most important issues facing society today.
This symposium will provide a great opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students and junior faculty to interact with technology leaders in the area of
wind energy. Special efforts will be made to recruit students and speakers from
minorities and underrepresented groups.