* 0921353
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: From Paper Tigers to Engines of Change: The Effect of International Human Rights Tribunals on Domestic Practice and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Courtney Hillebrecht, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 8,288.00

In recent years, the growing legitimacy and popularity of international human
rights tribunals has posed a challenge to skeptics who believe that human rights
law is unenforceable and that human rights institutions are nothing but paper
tigers. With increasing frequency, states change their domestic human rights
policies and practices as a direct result of their interaction with
international human rights tribunals. This dissertation research seeks to
explain when and why human rights tribunals influence domestic human rights
practices. &lt;br/&gt;By examining why over 100 states choose to comply or not
comply with the recommendations and rulings of the UN Committee on Human Rights,
the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights and the European Court of Human Rights, this project addresses
theoretical and empirical lacunae in the international relations and
international law literatures. Using interviews with experts at the human rights
tribunals, case studies and statistical investigations, this research offers
nuanced analyses of the role that compliance with international human rights
tribunals can play in signaling a government's commitment to human rights to
domestic and international audiences, and, in turn, effecting human rights
policy change. &lt;br/&gt;Through a multi-method approach this project makes
three contributions to the wider academic and policy communities: 1) it begins
to identify the scope conditions for the integration of international law and
domestic politics in a highly legalized international environment; 2) this
project contributes to a growing academic and policy community dedicated to
understanding international adjudicative tribunals; and 3) the research project
provides important, policy-relevant analyses of the international instruments
and domestic institutions that facilitate the protection of human rights. The
doctoral research seeks to shed light on compliance with international human
rights law and to identify those institutions and strategies that most
effectively safeguard human rights.