* 0921879
* Holocene Sea-level  Change in the Caribbean: Implications for Geophysical Modeling and Ocean-Climate Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Marguerite Toscano, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 12/31/2012
* USD 283,070.00

Documenting 10,000 years of sea-level change to better understand 21st century
sea-level rise

Marguerite Toscano, Smithsonian Institution

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). To predict present and future rapid coastal evolution, we
must first reconstruct the long-term rates of local-relative sea-level rise in
response to non-anthropogenic climate change, and document the ability of coral
reef-mangrove environments to keep pace with these varying rates over time. The
geologically stable Caribbean region is the most appropriate physical setting,
containing the highest-quality mangrove peat and coral reef deposits for this
purpose. Mangrove peat is a biogenic deposit that is a reliable long-term
indicator of changing coastal environments. The shallow tropical marine coral
reef and mangrove ecosystem is sensitive to varying rates of climate and sea-
level changes. As such, the spatial extent and health of these interconnected
environments are impacted by rapid environmental change. Therefore, alterations
in these environments impact the viability of coastal populations and fisheries
that depend on them. Given the large and growing concentration of population and
economic activity in the coastal zone, as well as the importance of coastal
ecosystems, the potential impacts of sea-level rise have elicited widespread
concern for more than two decades. Accurate estimates of sea-level rise in the
pre-satellite era are needed in order to provide a context for these 21st
century estimates and calibrate climate models. During the 20th century the
global rate of sea-level rise recorded by tide gauges was 1.7 to 1.8 mm/yr.
However, the limited number, distribution and duration of tide gauges preclude
efforts to test robustly the climate-sea level hypotheses and establish the
driving mechanisms responsible for change. With recent advances in sea-level
studies, these instrumental records can be augmented with sea-level records
derived from mangrove and coral sedimentary sequences. An interdisciplinary team
of senior scientists and their students will produce a quality-controlled,
spatially and temporally comprehensive Caribbean sea-level database to
reconstruct sea-level changes recorded simultaneously by coral reefs and
intertidal mangroves. We will concentrate on collecting new sea-level index
points for the Holocene (last 10,000 years) from thick mangrove peat deposits,
with precision elevation measurements. The vertical precision of sea-level index
points will be constrained by microfossil assemblages and the index points will
be radiocarbon dated using the latest Accelerator Mass Spectrometric (AMS)
methods. These data will produce a sea-level reconstruction at cm to dm scale
vertical resolution and centennial to decadal scale temporal resolution. This
comprehensive record will allow us to decipher the influence of ocean-
temperature and salinity changes, mass changes of ice sheets and the isostatic
response of the solid earth to Holocene sea-level changes. More recent mangrove
sediments will be analyzed in greater detail using isotopic methods to bridge
the gap between instrumental and established geologic records of sea-level
change. Such data are a key variable in future modeling experiments to assess
coastal response to sea-level change, inform national and regional hazard
assessments and better understand local geomorphologic responses where sea-level
rise interacts with sediment supply and wind/wave processes.

