* 0921039
* Synchronous Activity in Networks of Electrically Coupled Cortical Interneurons
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Timothy Lewis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 09/30/2014
* USD 74,944.00

Synchronous oscillatory behavior is a hallmark of electrical activity in
cortical neuronal networks and the brain in general. There is increasing
evidence that synchronous oscillations play fundamental roles in cognition and
neural information processing, but their exact functional roles remain unclear.
To understand how the oscillations contribute to cognitive function, it is
critical to understand how the intrinsic properties of neurons and the network
connectivity shape rhythmic synchronous activity in neuronal networks.
Inhibitory interneurons, which form sub-networks via weak but extensive
electrical coupling, appear to play essential roles in producing synchronous
oscillations in the brain. We will use a combination of numerical simulations
and mathematical analysis, as well as data from in vitro experiments, to
determine conditions that promote robust synchrony and those that can disrupt
synchrony in electrically coupled networks of interneurons. Specifically, we
will use phase response properties of neurons and the theory of weakly coupled
oscillators to dissect out the influences of specific membrane conductances on
synchronization. We will also use large-scale network simulations, analytical
techniques in the weak coupling limit, and an approach involving master
stability functions to determine how network structure influences the spatial
properties of synchronization.

The brain is composed of large inter-connected networks of neurons. Synchronous
oscillatory activity in these networks of neurons is a hallmark of electrical
activity in the brain. Synchronous activity is thought to play fundamental roles
in many cognitive processes, and its disruption has been linked to complex
neurological disorders such as schizophrenia and autism. In order to understand
how the synchronous oscillations contribute to cognitive function, it is
critical to identify the cellular mechanisms underlying them. Subnetworks of
inhibitory neurons that are extensively connected via ?electrical coupling?
appear to play essential roles in producing the synchronous oscillations in the
brain. Synchrony in these inhibitory networks is determined by connectivity in
the network and intrinsic electrical properties of the cells. However, it is
still unclear how these features combine to set the level of synchrony in the
network and its spatial extent. Using a combination of mathematical modeling,
computer simulations and theoretical analysis, as well as experimental data, we
will study the mechanisms of synchrony in electrically coupled networks of
inhibitory neurons and determine conditions that promote synchrony and those
that can disrupt synchrony. We will determine the influences of specific
membrane channels that could be targets of drug therapies. We will also examine
how the structure of the network influences synchronization. This work will be
part of a large body of research that will lead to improved treatments for
complex neurological disorders such as epilepsy, schizophrenia and autism.