* 0921202
* Local Policing in the Context of Immigration: Further Explorations Using a Mixed Methods Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Paul Lewis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 08/31/2012
* USD 321,172.00

This research focuses on the response of local police departments and sheriffs
to the possibility of becoming more directly and formally involved in enforcing
federal immigration laws. The federal government has facilitated such
partnerships with legislation and administrative action providing training and
logistical support. Some local governments are urging their local police to take
advantage of these opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Municipal police,
however, must consider their own resource limitations, their legal obligation to
avoid racial profiling, and their professional commitment to community policing,
which involves building trust and confidence among all residents. Police
departments, in short, must somehow balance American ideals about trusting, open
communities with commitment to the rule of law as they confront unauthorized
immigrants. The dilemma is sharp in small cities and towns where police
policies, whether announced or not, quickly become part of common knowledge and
affect behavior accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the
issues of membership, security, and federal relations raised by local policing
of immigration at both macro and micro levels. The first phase of the research
is a survey of approximately 500 police departments in municipalities with less
than 65,000 residents and a sample of approximately 300 sheriffs. Samples will
be drawn from areas with a significant number of foreign-born residents. The
second phase of the research focuses on decision-making at the micro level
regarding immigration policing, and its consequences for residents. Four
jurisdictions will be selected for case studies, using the survey results for
guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of local/federal immigration
policing partnerships has important implications for governance in an
increasingly diverse society. Is the ideal of transparent, accountable
governance jeopardized by delegation of some law-enforcement decisions to the
local level? How responsive is the emerging multi-layered system to concerns
about racial profiling? How do police practices shape the meaning of membership
in contemporary American society?