* 0921050
* 2009 Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Lillian Govoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Hawkins
* 08/31/2013
* USD 113,200.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;28 July 2009&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0921050&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Duke University Marine Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;PI:
B. Corliss&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: J. Ustach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded
under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests numerous Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment (SSSE) items for the vessel operated by Duke University Marine
Laboratory; namely the R/V CAPE HATTERAS. The requests specifically include
items that have been recommended from past NSF inspections, or Post-Cruise
Assessments (PCA's) and have been otherwise deferred by the operators due to
cost. All of the items requested will either improve safety, enhance science
support capability, or extend vessel service life. Due to the nature and timing
of these requests, the vendor quotation standards normally required by the SSSE
Program were waived out of necessity with many of the figures provided as
estimates for budgetary purposes and based mainly on past experience of the
vessel operators for similar work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
R/V CAPE HATTERAS supports federally funded scientific research in the southeast
Atlantic in order to expand human knowledge of the ocean environment. During
operations, the vessel routinely exposes graduate and undergraduate students to
seagoing oceanography. Pubic outreach is also achieved through real-time
satellite connectivity from ship to shore, open house events, educational
cruises, and providing ship's data to local marine biology classrooms. The CAPE
HATTERAS is scheduled to complete over 115 NSF sponsored days in 2009.