* 0921193
* RUI:  The Dynamic Interaction Between Investigator and Eyewitness: Effects on Memory Reports and Interviewer Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Amy Douglass, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 128,926.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eyewitnesses are a crucial
source of information for crime scene investigators. Accurate information
facilitates crime solutions; inaccurate information leads to wasted investigator
effort or, even worse, wrongful convictions. How investigators and eyewitnesses
affect each other during this information-gathering process forms the foundation
of this research. Three experimental phases were designed to address: (a)
whether the interaction between an investigator and eyewitness can change the
accuracy of witness reports, and (b) whether changing witness behavior can
affect the questions asked by the investigator. In the Witness Phase
experiments, participant-eyewitnesses will view an event and be questioned by
trained investigators. Investigators will systematically vary the feedback
provided to witnesses during the interview. Two variables will be measured:
whether witnesses change the level of detail provided in their reports and the
level of confidence accompanying their reports as a function of investigator
feedback. In the Investigator Phase, experiments will focus on the behavior of
participant-investigators as they interview witnesses who are trained to respond
in certain ways. For example, some witnesses will produce reports that become
increasingly more detailed over the course of the interview. For all experiments
in this phase, two variables will be measured: whether (and how) investigators'
questions change and whether assessments of witness accuracy change as a
function of changing witness behavior. In the Dynamic Interview Phase, witness
reporting and investigator questioning will be assessed in the context of real
interactions. Consequently, research participants will serve as both
eyewitnesses and investigators. Over the course of the interview, changes in
witness accuracy, witness confidence and investigator questions will again be
measured. The manipulations tested in these three experimental phases are
approximations of what eyewitnesses and investigators might experience in real
crime situations. Therefore, if these experiments measure changes in report
detail or accuracy, witness confidence, or investigator questioning strategies,
there is a good possibility that similar changes may occur in real interview
situations. The goal of these experiments is to produce recommendations for
interviews that may enhance the amount of accurate information retrieved,
thereby facilitating solutions to crimes and decreasing the likelihood of
wrongful convictions.