* 0921163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Social Class and Congressional Decisionmaking
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Nicholas Carnes, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Arguments about the differences between politicians from different social class
backgrounds have been a common refrain in American politics. Scholarly research
on olitical decisionmakers, however, has largely ignored the possibility that
leaders from different social classes might bring different insights, skills, or
perspectives to the policymaking process. This study will ask how and why
elected officials' social class backgrounds influence their decisions in
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this question, this project will draw on
the limited existing data on lawmakers' social backgrounds and a large-scale
original data collection effort aimed at gathering and coding numerous markers
of social attainment for each of the 788 unique Senators and Representatives who
served during the last five Congresses (1999-2008). With the help of research
assistants, the researcher will use publicly available materials (e.g.
newspapers, biographies, financial disclosures, and legislative websites) to
collect information about each Member's parents' occupations, childhood
hometown, college experiences, military service, previous occupations, current
financial assets, and places of residence. These measures--combined with
information about lawmakers' votes and leadership activities as well as data on
other factors that are known to influence legislative behavior such as
partisanship and public opinion--will provide unprecedented opportunities to
explore how the social backgrounds of elected officials affect their policy
priorities and their views about economic and social
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to what scholars know
about congressional decisionmaking and political representation and will answer
longstanding questions about the importance of the social composition of
America's elected officeholders. This project will also have broader impacts for
both the scholarly community and the public. To date, practical challenges
related to data availability and collection have seriously hampered research on
social class and policymaking. The congressional social background dataset that
the proposed research generates will be broadly useful for scholars of
legislative decisionmaking, will facilitate studies on topics not examined in
this project, and will provide a helpful starting point for scholars interested
in collecting social class data for other time periods or political
institutions. The proposed research will also help to inform public discourse.
Political observers often look to candidates' backgrounds for insights into
their preferences and goals. By investigating the relationship between
politicians' social class backgrounds and their decisions in office, this
project will help to clarify the benefits and limitations of efforts to infer
leaders' political priorities from their social origins.