* 0921266
* Continuity Across Family and School Systems to Promote the Learning and Development of Children and Adolescents
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* James Bovaird, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2010
* USD 14,999.00

Families and schools -- uniquely and together -- represent the most critical,
important systems in the learning and development of children and adolescents.
The degree to which students experience congruent and consistent messages and
support across systems contributes to important academic and social-emotional
outcomes. Efforts to address problems separately, in the absence of continuity
between systems, reduce our capacity to intervene in ways that fully develop
children's social and behavioral competence, especially for those at greatest
risk. Collaborative partnerships between home and school systems are related to
positive growth, development, and learning throughout the formative years.
Unfortunately, families of students at risk of developing serious problems often
are poorly connected with schools, and families and school personnel often work
in isolation from one another, with only infrequent, brief, and nonconstructive
interactions. Furthermore, although a fair amount of current research has
identified what influences family-school partnerships, much less is known about
the translation of these findings into meaningful programs. This gap between
research and practice is due in part to the lack of systematic interaction among
researchers in distinct research laboratories, with some researchers doing
extensive theoretical work, some doing work with diverse families, some using
specific targeted interventions, and others approaching their work by
developmental level. This seminal conference, hosted by the Nebraska Center for
Research on Children, Youth, Families and Schools (CYFS) in the College of
Education and Human Sciences at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, will bring
together and foster linkages among researchers to create new, coordinated
understandings of methods to conceptualize and study processes and outcomes of
family-school partnerships. Specifically, the meeting will bring together
leading social and behavioral scientists in overlapping research communities
representing expertise in family-school partnerships, consultation-based service
delivery, child and adolescent development and cognition, and research
methodology. Four interrelated thematic strands will provide structure and
content to the meeting: (a) methods to foster achievement with culturally and
geographically diverse students and approaches to engage parents and schools in
methods to close the achievement gap for students at risk; (b) strengthening the
home learning environment (i.e., the "curriculum of the home"); (c) methods to
engage parents/families and schools across content areas (e.g., math, science,
and social-emotional learning); and (d) methodological
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the conference is grounded
in the formation of an interdisciplinary coalition for research on family-school
partnerships. The main objective of this coalition is to develop a national
research agenda to enhance the scientific understanding of variables and
outcomes associated with family-school engagement and partnerships, and advance
sophisticated methods to empirically test intervention programs to facilitate
family-school partnerships. The workshop will enhance mutual understanding among
participating researchers and stimulate research collaborations. It will foster
the identification of critical research needs and methods to address research
gaps and new directions. A final consensus report will be a multi-faceted
research agenda with sample research questions representing multiple
perspectives, a strategic approach, and methodological soundness. In addition, a
major outcome of the workshop will be a series of edited books, focusing on each
of the workshop's thematic areas. The series will complement existing
publications through its articulation of state of the art, methodologically
rigorous research in the area of family-school partnerships and prioritized
research needs and directions.