* 0921500
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Discourse Forms and Social Categorization in Cha'palaa
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Simeon Floyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research will produce the first extensive documentation and
description of the Cha'palaa language, spoken by the indigenous Chachi people of
the coastal lowlands of northwestern Ecuador. It will link this linguistic data
to an ethnographic account of Chachi constructions of race and ethnicity in
Latin America, examining how social categories are produced and reproduced
through social interaction. The primary research question asks how the resources
of Cha'palaa grammar are activated in Chachi people's discourse about themselves
and other social groups. Answering this question requires combining traditional
long-term ethnographic research living in Chachi communities with the
methodologies of descriptive linguistics, including new technologies such as
digital recording and archiving and computer transcription and database
programs. The primary data to be considered will be a broad, transcribed,
translated and analyzed corpus of video recordings of natural discourse in
Cha'palaa. This corpus will provide both rich data for linguistic description
and a documentation of cultural knowledge, including traditions of storytelling,
oral history, ecological knowledge, handcrafts, agriculture, political
organization, and the ritual calendar. The corpus will be archived in several
sites for safeguarding and future use by researchers and community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation will undertake an analysis of a special
subset of this corpus, focusing on interviews and everyday conversation in which
Chachi people discuss themselves relative to other social groups such as their
Afro-Ecuadorian neighbors. The analysis will produce an ethnographic account of
language situated in cultural context and a grammatical sketch of Cha'palaa that
will later form the basis of a full grammar. Much of the data entry and analysis
will be done with the help of native speaker consultants who receive support and
training for college. The dissertation research will form the basis for future
work with Ecuadorian institutions to increase educational opportunities for
indigenous students.