* 0921155
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Local Production of Global Labor
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Megan Prescott, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Arizona graduate student, Megan Prescott, supervised by Dr. Mark
A. Nichter, will undertake research on the political economy of the reproduction
of labor in globalized markets. She will focus her research on the reproduction
of Filipino nurse labor. The Republic of the Philippines is an appropriate site
for this study because it is known for overproducing and exporting nurses,
which, when the nurses remit wages home, benefits both the national economy and
the nurses' families. Prescott will investigate the processes by which Filipino
nurse labor is commodified; the role of culture in the production of nurse
labor; the international flows of nurses and remittances; and the role of the
state in promoting, sustaining, and managing the Filipino nurse commodity chain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will gather data at multiple sites and
using multiple methods. She will employ open-ended interviews, key informant
interviews with multiple stakeholders, semi-structured interviews with nursing
students and nurses in the process of migrating as well as their families,
surveys with nursing students at 12 colleges or universities, focus groups on
perceptions of migrant nurses and the effect of their migration on families, and
participant observation at public events and functions. Text data (field notes,
interview transcripts, life histories, narratives, and archival material) will
be analyzed thematically using text analysis software and narrative analysis
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research contributes to social
science theory by broadening the scope of global commodity chain analysis to
incorporate both women's skilled labor migration and the local contexts and
communities within which migration becomes normalized. By focusing on the nurse
care commodity chain, in particular, the proposed research will provide a new
perspective on the complex processes and impacts of nurse migration that is
relevant to nurses, families, and health planners and policymakers. The research
also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.