* 0921781
* Collaborative Research: Interests, Institutions, and Foreign Policy Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Michaela Mattes, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 154,565.00

There are few things more important than the ability to explain and predict
dramatic changes in foreign policy. Unfortunately, existing theories of
international relations are much better at explaining consistency in behavior
rather than predicting change. The primary reason is that scholars have tended
to focus on the international system as the main source of foreign policy. The
goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a theory of domestic political
influences on change in foreign policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foreign policy is
driven not only by international factors but also by domestic political
competition. Domestic groups have different interests, preferences, and goals,
and these differences extend to foreign policy. When leaders who depend on the
support of different groups than their predecessors assume power, the
opportunity for domestically motivated policy change arises (e.g. Fulgencia
Battista to Fidel Castro in Cuba or George H.W. Bush to Bill Clinton in the
United States). This research will collect data on leadership transitions in all
countries from 1919-2008. The goal is to differentiate domestic leadership
transitions that bring to power leaders who represent different societal groups
than their predecessors from those who rely on essentially the same groups for
support. These data will be used to examine the effect of leadership transitions
in states with varying domestic political rules (democracies versus non-
democracies and systems with many or fewer actors with influence over political
outcomes) and in areas where foreign policy commitments are highly formal and
legal (alliance commitments, peace treaties, and IMF commitments) and areas of
expressive foreign policy (UN voting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a policy
perspective, this research will have three important impacts: First, it will
help policymakers to foresee circumstances that are likely to lead to abrupt
changes in foreign policy in other countries. Second, it will further elucidate
the costs and benefits of democratization for international relations by
evaluating claims that democracies exhibit greater consistency in foreign policy
behavior and thus an enhanced ability to establish long term international
cooperation. It will also speak to the desirability of adopting regime change as
a foreign policy goal. Third, it will provide evidence regarding the efficacy of
international law.