* 0921090
* Migration and Child Well-Being: The Perspective from Sending Areas
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Yao Lu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 89,144.00

The proposed project will examine the effects of parental out-migration on child
well-being in two developing settings. Rising internal and international
migration has affected a growing number of children in developing countries.
Most of these children are left behind as one or both parents leave to seek work
elsewhere. Migration represents a distinct form of parental absence, and is
likely to affect these children in complex ways, generating sizeable social
costs as a result of parental absence, but bringing economic benefits through
remittances. Using high-quality longitudinal datasets from Mexico and Indonesia
with excellent comparability and rich micro- and macro-level information, this
project seeks to: examine both the beneficial and detrimental impacts of
migration on key aspects of well-being (education, cognitive development, and
health) of children left behind in Mexico and Indonesia; explore how various
socioeconomic, psychosocial, and behavioral factors mediate the effects of
migration on child well-being; and assess the generalizability of results across
two streams of migration (within-country and cross-country) and across the two
research settings. Longitudinal data analysis methods (fixed- and random-effect
modeling) will be used to strengthen causal claims.

This research will provide comprehensive and robust information on the effects
of out-migration on children and will have practical policy implications, not
only for the two study settings, but also for other developing countries
experiencing large-scale migration. Such information can inform the design of
intervention programs by local governments and global development organizations
such as USAID and UNICEF, to reinforce the benefits while mitigating the costs
of out-migration for children. The proposed pathway analysis has the greatest
promise of translating scientific knowledge into intervention strategies, as it
helps to uncover specific factors that could be more effectively targeted. The
cross-country comparison also will strengthen the study, helping to distinguish
common from context-specific processes, thus leading to more efficient design
and implementation of the intervention programs across different settings.