* 0921800
* Collaborative Research: The dynamics of geographic ranges: Origin and maintenance of marine diversity gradients
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* James Valentine, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 27,630.00

Collaborative Research: The dynamics of geographic ranges: Origin and
maintenance of marine diversity gradients

David I Jablonski, University of Chicago James W. Valentine, University of
California, Berkeley

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The most striking large-scale pattern in biological
diversity is the dramatic increase in the number of species and higher taxa from
the poles to the tropics. However, the dynamics that generate and maintain that
trend remain poorly understood, despite their importance not only for
evolutionary and ecological theory, but for the management and conservation of
biological resources. In developing marine bivalves as a model system for
tracking evolutionary and geographic histories of biodiversity (because bivalves
are diverse and well-sampled in most marine environments and have a rich and
well-documented fossil record), we have found that the spatial expansion of
evolutionary lineages across latitude is a crucial factor shaping the global
diversity gradient. Our proposed study will use the marine bivalves to evaluate
how these dynamics operate, by tracing present-day bivalve biodiversity back
through the past 25 million years. We will focus on three major questions: 1)
What is the process of range expansion? 2) Is range expansion selective? 3) What
inhibits range expansion? This work exemplifies the key data and analyses that
the fossil record can contribute to understanding biodiversity dynamics at
global and regional scales. We can use the geologic record to assess both the
major biological factors governing those dynamics, and the interaction of
intrinsic, biological factors with extrinsic, time-varying climatic factors in
shaping diversity in time and space. By documenting the long-term responses of
marine bivalves to climatic events of the recent geologic past, our study will
also provide a better foundation for predicting the response of the living biota
to future climate change. In addition, by incorporating biotic factors such as
body size and geographic range size in a dynamical framework, this work will
furnish a bridge between paleontological data and studies of present-day
biodiversity. And this research will support the education of a graduate student
and a postdoctoral researcher, who will be treated as full collaborators in this
work, including training in research planning, presentation of results,
publication, and career guidance. We will continue to develop on-line
educational resources derived from our research (pages on our work at the
Understanding Evolution website have received >58,000 visits).

