* 0921311
* Collaborative Research: Divorce and the Political Gender Gap
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Raj Arunachalam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 26,693.00

The past thirty years have witnessed a dramatic transformation of women's
political preferences in advanced industrialized countries. Relative to men,
women's political positions--both in their support for left parties and in their
support for welfare state policies--have moved steadily to the left, a
phenomenon widely known as the political gender gap. What accounts for the
rising political gender gap? Despite a large body of research, there is little
consensus as to the sources of this trend. One prominent recent explanation
argues that the rise of the political gender gap is driven by rising divorce
rates. Viewing voters as responding to economic self-interest, this argument
holds that as risk of divorce rises, currently married women face an
increasingly uncertain future. Since women's income tends to fall after divorce,
rising divorce risk effectively translates into falling expected lifetime
income. Therefore, the leftward drift in political preferences has as its root
the growing impoverishment of women relative to men. While several recent
studies have examined aspects of the divorce-based explanation for the rising
gender gap, the evidence remains mixed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
outlines a quasi-experimental approach to test the hypothesis that the political
gender gap is driven by rising divorce risk. The key idea is that a change in
women's status upon divorce offers us a way to isolate the divorce-based source
of the political gender gap from other possible factors. We exploit a largely
unexpected legal change in the United Kingdom, the White v. White case, which
dramatically improved divorced women's income by prescribing a new rule for
allocating assets. By studying the political preferences of married women before
and after the change, we test the claim that divorce shapes the political gender
gap through an economic mechanism. Furthermore, by isolating groups of women
most likely to be affected by the legal change, we can assess the plausibility
of our results by comparing the change their political preferences to that of
women less likely to be affected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to broader
social value, the study makes several contributions. First, policymakers and
legislators of family law will find the results useful in understanding the
potential electoral effects of changes in divorce law. Second, the research
offers opportunities to enhance graduate student training by integrating
involvement in original research into their educational program. Finally, the
study contributes to the fostering of productive dialogue between political
science and economics.