* 0921868
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Negotiating Lives in Islamic Southern Thailand: Competing Sovereignties, Contested Identities, and Mediated Agency in a Disputed Land
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Celia Lowe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 13,890.00

Doctoral student Anusorn Unno (University of Washington), under the guidance of
Dr. Celia Lowe, will undertake research on changing relationships between
citizens and governments by investigating how local citizens deal with competing
forms of sovereignty in a multi-ethnic situation of civil unrest. The research
will be carried out in a Malay Muslim village in the southernmost region of
Thailand. A predominantly Malay Muslim area within the Thai Buddhist state, the
region has witnessed multiple rounds of insurgency. The current insurgency,
which dates from 2004, has brought ordinary Malay Muslims to the forefront. They
not only account for the majority of casualties, but they also have been drawn
into new questions of identity and allegiance. This situation provides an
excellent site for investigating how citizens, in this case from a minority
population, negotiate identity and allegiance in relation to the nation.

The researcher will focus on how Malay Muslims experience and explain the
current insurgency; how questions of identity and allegiance are raised in the
contexts of everyday life, state encounters, and civic engagements; and how
Malay Muslims seek and enact agency by engaging with various forms of
sovereignty. The researcher will collect data with a variety of social science
methods, including: participant observation of daily life and livelihood under
conditions of unrest; semi-structured and informal interviews; content analyses
of school curriculum and interviews with school representatives; travel with and
observation of the routines of government representatives; and content analyses
of religious media and interviews with religious representatives.

The research is important because the situation experienced by the Malay Muslims
parallels that experienced by many minorities under conditions of changing
notions of the role of government. Thus the research will contribute to social
science theory. The research also will document the lives of an understudied
Mulsim minority population in an area of the world of increasing political
importance. Finally, this award contributes to the education of a social
scientist.

