* 0921397
* Treaties, Institutions &amp; Torture: Theoretical and Empirical Inquiry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Will Moore, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 173,130.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
&lt;br/&gt;(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarly inquiry on
government's use of torture against detainees held by the government has focused
primarily on ethical questions and medical/pyschological inquiries. Recently,
however, two datasets have been released that systematically code the extent to
which governments in different countries throughout the world use torture
against detainees in their control. This has led to scientific inquiries into
the impact of international law, political regime types, and other
characteristics of economies and societies upon government's use of
torture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, however, the questions one can
explore with these data are rather limited. This project substantially expands
the questions social scientists can explore. To expand the questions about
torture that can be studied scientifically, this project codes data on four
concepts: Incidence, Perpetrators, Motive, and Judicial Response. Amnesty
International documents are analyzed over the years 1990-2007. In addition, data
is collected on the Magnitude of victims, the Type of torture, the Perpetrator
(i.e., the responsible government bureaucracy), and whether there was a Judicial
Response to the allegation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data we propose to collect
will allow us to execute three distinct studies of the covariates of different
dimensions of alleged torture. Those studies will address three
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Are the Scope of torture victims, and Types
of torture used, influenced by the same domestic and international factors that
have been shown to influence the Magnitude of torture
victims?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. What leads states to terminate \spells" of
torture (where \spells" are defined over Magnitude, Type, and
Perpetrator)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. What increases the likelihood that the
state responds to an allegation of torture with a Judicial inquiry, and in some
of those cases, prosecution?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to producing
original scholarship the proposed research will generate a valuable new database
that we will make available for free download via the World Wide Web. The
project will thus directly inject social scientific work into the global
discussion about torture, and will also facilitate other social scientists
joining the conversation.