* 0921243
* Collaborative Research: PASI: Nano-Bio: The Intersection of bio, condensed matter and solid state physics; Palmas del Mar, Humacao, PR, May 15 - 29, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2011
* USD 29,300.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place May 15-29, 2010 at
the University of Puerto Rico-Humacao Campus, Puerto Rico. Organized by Dr. Luz
J. Martinez-Miranda of the University of Maryland-College Park, and Dr. Idalia
Ramos of the University of Puerto Rico, the PASI will discuss research at the
intersection of biophysics, and condensed matter and solid state physics, or
nano-bio in short. The activity will allow researchers to: 1) more effectively
communicate with other professionals in their field; 2) perform effective
research in the hybrid field of nano-bio; 3) explore results obtained from
unfamiliar experimental techniques; and 4) contribute to the fields of
biophysics and condensed matter/solid state physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activity will provide presentations and lectures of particular interest to the
nano-bio community. Expected outcomes from this PASI include the opportunity for
researchers to exchange views with nano-bio researchers in the US and Latin
America. For PASI student/participants, it will provide potential advisers for
either an international postdoctorate, or future research collaborations. The
results of the PASI will be disseminated through a PASI webpage, together with
lecture notes, and other materials from the lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;