* 0921374
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Gender Quotas and The Representation of Women: Empowerment, Decision-making, and Public Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mark Jones, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,995.00

This research investigates the impact of gender quotas on women's substantive
representation. Gender quotas are electoral laws that mandate a minimum
percentage of females that must occupy a position on a political party's
electoral ballot. Substantive representation refers to women's ability to
achieve significant representation of women's interests. This project
contributes to the literature on gender quotas and women's substantive
representation in three specific ways. First, it offers a critical test of
hypotheses derived from two competing theories about how the number of women in
the legislature affects women's ability to influence policy. Second, building on
existing theory, new hypotheses are developed on how the duration of time since
a legislature has adopted effective gender quotas affects the substantive
representation of women. Third, an original data set is developed to test these
hypotheses.

The effects of gender quotas on the substantive representation of women at the
subnational level in Argentina (23 provinces and a federal capital) is examined.
Argentina provides the only context in the world that offers a lengthy timeline
of gender quotas (over a 15 year time span) implemented across a variety of
electoral systems (27 legislative chambers with gender quotas) as well as the
existence of provinces where gender quotas were never implemented (or adopted
much later than in other provinces). This considerable variance in the
percentage of the legislative seats occupied by women across these systems is
necessary to address the relationship between the percentage of women in the
legislature and their effect on policy outputs. The long temporal domain is
necessary to assess the duration of time required for gender quotas to
significantly affect substantive representation. Furthermore, the subnational
setting allows one to make controlled comparisons that are not possible in
cross-national analyses.

Women are underrepresented in virtually all of the world's legislatures. In the
early nineties, there was a widespread call for national governments to take
action to correct gender disparity (and promote gender parity) at all levels of
political representation. To date, constitutional, electoral, or political party
gender quotas have been adopted in 98 countries. While quotas have been
demonstrated (under certain conditions) to increase the numerical representation
of women in parliament, and are designed to achieve equality in legislative
power and decision-making, it is unclear if electing more women to legislative
office is sufficient to influence policymaking (particularly in policy areas of
particular interest to women). The extant literature has contributed to an
understanding of how quota laws in combination with electoral laws affect the
election of women legislators. What is less understood is the substantive impact
of increased numbers of women in the legislature resulting from the use of
gender quotas. Increasing the number of women in legislatures is not sufficient;
rather, women must have equal access to decision-making and leadership
positions. This research will help us understand if properly implemented gender
quotas are reliable tools for promoting democracy and should be considered in
more institutions struggling with gender inequalities.