* 0921137
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Citizenship, Poverty, and the New Role of Tuberculosis Sanatoria in Post-Socialist Romania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Ida Susser, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 9,955.00

Doctoral student Jonathan J. Stillo (City University of New York Graduate
Center), with the guidance of Dr. Ida Susser, will undertake anthropological
research on poverty during post-Socalist transitions. He will focus on the
tuberculosis epidemic and the role of the TB sanatoria system in Romania. The
presence of TB is known to be an indicator of socio-economic stress. With an
incidence rate of 109 per 100,000, Romania is the site of one of Europe and
Central Asia's worst TB epidemics. It also is one of the last remaining
countries to use sanatoria as a major part of TB control. Patients in these
institutions tend to be very poor and their conditions complicated by such
factors as mental illness, alcohol addiction, and homelessness. Preliminary
research suggests that sanatoria may be filling roles left vacant due to
cutbacks in social welfare programs, possibly because of public demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the Romanian TB epidemic and its socioeconomic
foundationss as it is experienced by the patients and staff, the researcher will
live at a sanatorium for a portion of this year-long project. Mr. Stillo will
conduct archival research, participant observation and extensive interviews with
sanatoria doctors and patients. He also will leverage existing statistical data
with new analyses, complemented with new survey data collected in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will contribute to
our understanding of the risks of epidemic disease in resource-poor settings,
particularly where citizens make claims on the state for specific kinds of care.
It also will aid policy makers concerned with high-risk TB patients because
resistant TB stains represent one of the world's greatest health concerns. In a
time of increasing poverty and weakening social safety nets, the situation in
Romania's sanatoria also will offer valuable insights into the realities of
post-Socialism. This research will contribute to the training of a social
scientist.