* 0921318
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effects of Migration on Gender Norms and Relations: The Post-Repatriation Experience in Bor, South Sudan.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* MaryBeth Chrostowsky, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 14,918.00

University of Kentucky doctoral candidate MaryBeth Chrostowsky, under the
guidance of Dr. Monica L. Udvardy, will investigate the gender effects of asylum
and post-repatriation experiences of involuntary migrants. The research will be
carried out among Dinka migrants who originated in Bor, South Sudan, but
experienced two different asylum environments: Kakuma refugee camp in northern
Kenya and Khartoum, in the north of Sudan. This comparative framework will allow
her to determine if alterations to gender norms and relations that occurred
during asylum are the result of different asylum environments and if these
alterations remain intact after migrants are repatriated.

The researcher will undertake 12 months of field research in Bor, South Sudan.
She will conduct 56 semi-structured interviews to investigate the causes of
change to gender norms and relations during asylum and after return. The
interviews are designed to examine the gender relations and norms of male and
female Dinka and the strategies these Dinka women used to engage with gender
inequality during three phases of the forced migrant experience: 1) prior to
departure, 2) during asylum, and 3) post-repatriation. Information obtained in
the interviews will be triangulated with data on observed behavior recorded
through participant observation and a time allocation study.

Existing gaps in repatriation research and theory results in refugee policy and
humanitarian assistance that fails to meet the needs of returning forced
migrants. Missing from current repatriation policy is the recognition of the
gendered elements of repatriation. This research directly addresses this need by
examining and establishing 1) the primary causes of change to gender norms and
relations during asylum and after return, and 2) the strategies women use to
deal with gender inequality during asylum and after return. By addressing these
current gaps in repatriation literature, this research will expand the current
limitations of migration theory and improve current repatriation and post-
conflict reconstruction policy and intervention projects. The research also will
contribute to the education of a graduate student.