* 0921323
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute (PASI) on Differential Equations and Nonlinear Analysis; Mexico city-veracruz, Mexico, October 15-23, 2009
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rafael de la Llave, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 75,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) on Differential Equations
and Nonlinear Analysis is jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE). The PASI is organized by Dr. Peter Bates from Michigan State
University and it will take place October, 2009 at the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico in Mexico City. The Institute will bring together graduate
students, postdocs, junior faculty members and researchers from the Americas for
a fruitful scientific exchange in the areas of differential equations, dynamical
systems and nonlinear analysis. The program will consist of five intensive mini-
courses with discussions periods. Presentations will cover non-linear analysis
and incorporate new tools such as computations, hard and harmonic analysis and
the interaction with geometry. Lecturers will also present some reasonably
realistic and sophisticated models arising in the physical and biological
sciences. This PASI will be a continuation and an extension of the bi-annual
Americas conference and workshop series on Differential Equations and Nonlinear
Analysis which started in 1994 and has had seven meetings throughout the
Americas. The Coordinating Committee will establish a website
www.fenomec.unam.mx/c4k3/gfg/americas conference/index.html to attract a wide
net of graduate student and postdoctoral participants and publicize the PASI
results.