* 0921362
* Learning to Accommodate Variation in Speech Input
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Suzanne Curtin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2013
* USD 500,000.00

To become fluent native speakers and listeners, children ultimately must
perceive and produce speech that is consistent with the local dialect. For
example, English spoken in Calgary, Canada sounds slightly different than
English spoken in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The variation in these two English
environments is patterned and, in learning language, children must acquire these
regularities. Seemingly at odds with this, children must also maintain some
flexibility in mapping speech sounds to meaning. For example, infants sometimes
encounter talkers whose speech deviates quite drastically from their community's
dialectal norms, as when addressed in English by a non-native speaker from
Italy. Thus, while learning the normative patterns of their local dialect,
children also must maintain enough cognitive flexibility to accommodate talkers
who do not fall within these norms. How do infants and toddlers accomplish these
seemingly competing tasks in language learning? Answering this question will
reveal general characteristics of children's learning at multiple time scales:
from spontaneous interpretation of fleeting speech sounds, to short-term
adaptation to deviations from expectation, to longer-term learning of the
regularities of the local dialect. This research maps the range of acoustic
variability to which infants are exposed in their native speech environment in
different social interactions with adults. It will create a detailed acoustic
speech production corpus with which to understand the challenges confronting
infant language learners. The research will also study how infants' and
toddlers' speech perception is shaped by regularities of the local dialect,
revealing the mechanisms of long-term sensitivity to dialect norms and short-
term adaptation to deviations from dialect norms. It will also investigate how
toddlers' growing vocabularies influence adaptation to variability in spoken
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes an innovative cross-
disciplinary approach to these questions. Understanding early development of the
knowledge of the sound structure of English and its interaction with developing
vocabularies will contribute to our understanding of typical language
development. It will also further our understanding of accent development in
multilingual learning situations and early communicative deficits. An important
outcome of the project will be the dissemination of a speech corpus, providing a
rich acoustic sample of speech for other researchers to use in studying English
dialects.