* 0921123
* A Morphological Analyzer for Old Icelandic in FM/Haskell
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Timothy Tangherlini, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2013
* USD 111,990.00

The goal of this project is to develop a morphological analyzer for Old
Icelandic using an extension of the functional programming language FM/Haskell.
Old Icelandic, one of the most complex of the early Germanic languages, is
closely related to Old English. Old Icelandic is also interesting as it is the
language of the sagas, Nordic mythology and early Germanic law. One of the main
features of FM/Haskell is code that is easily interpreted, even for non-
programmers; this allows the investigators to use students as part of the
research team, and to solicit feedback from the user community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of the morphological analyzer system
is the inclusion of an English language look-up tool. Because of the highly
inflected nature of Old Icelandic, it is often difficult for students and non-
experts to find appropriate English definitions without considerable effort. The
system also incorporates a clear method for debugging and error correction. The
research team will develop simple user interfaces for adding inflectional
prototypes and sub-prototypes, and for adding and editing lexical resources.
When fully developed, the system will offer far greater accuracy than earlier
morphological analyzers for Old Icelandic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
architecture of the system, the approach can be easily extended to other
languages; this will be demonstrated by developing a proof-of-concept analyzer
for Old English. This extensibility is important for international collaborative
efforts that focus on the development of these systems. The research community
will be provided with a fast and highly accurate method for adding
morphosyntactic detail to the rapidly increasing digital corpus of Old Icelandic
documents; with this added detail, the speed and sophistication of searches on
the corpus will increase dramatically. All code and instructions will be freely
distributed, along with the library of language functions, allowing others to
build systems for other morphologically complex languages.