* 0921932
* Energy, Water, and Global Change as a Regional Agenda of the Americas, Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute; San Diego, California, February, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Asfaw Beyene, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2011
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place May 23-June 1, 2010,
in San Diego, California. Organized by Dr. Asfaw Beyene and Dr. Walter Oechel of
San Diego State University, the PASI will foster international and
interdisciplinary cooperation to address energy, water and environmental
challenges as a symbiotic regional agenda. The Institute will host fifteen
lecturers and thirty post-doctoral and advanced graduate student participants
from multiple disciplines, including energy, water, and ecosystem studies;
computer science with a particular emphasis on data integration and
visualization; and others. It will cover four overarching research themes: (i)
energy efficiency and renewable energy, (ii) water shortage and its
consequences, (iii) climate and climate feedbacks; and (iv) informatics as
related to energy, water, and global change
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes of this PASI will include: 1) a
solid research link between sustainability and strategic measures towards
addressing shortages; 2) a forum for discussion intended to stimulate
collaboration among a diverse population of researchers; and 3) education of
emerging scientists about anticipated solutions for addressing global change
through tutorials and demonstrations. Products from the PASI will include a
comprehensive website with complete reports of the proceedings, a list of
potential collaborators and their research interests, and assessment
questionnaires to evaluate the impact of the activity.