* 0921286
* Gender Differences, Stress, and Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Marta Elliott, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 105,821.00

The primary objective of this study is to explain why men and women differ in
the types of mental and physical illnesses that they tend to present. While
women have higher rates of depression and anxiety, men are more likely to drink
to excess or abuse illicit drugs. Men usually rate their overall health as
better than women?s although they usually do not live as long, tending to die at
younger ages than women from conditions such as heart disease and diabetes.
Whereas women do often live longer, they suffer higher rates of non-life
threatening but often painful chronic conditions such as migraines or asthma.

This study approaches gender differences in mental and physical health by
analyzing how men and women are exposed to differing types and amounts of
unhealthy stressors in their daily lives. For example, men report greater work
and financial stress, yet women experience more stress in their familial roles.
This study also analyzes gender differences in access to healthful resources,
such as a strong sense of mastery that is more common among men, and emotionally
supportive social relationships that are more typical for women. By focusing on
the confluence of stress exposure and resource accessibility, this study will
demonstrate how gender role expectations translate into daily life conditions
that both exacerbate and protect good health.

These research questions will be tested by analyzing National Co-morbidity
Survey data from a panel sample of 5,000 individuals age 15 to 54 in 1990-92 who
were re-interviewed between 2000 and 2001. This data analysis will employ
sophisticated measurement strategies and structural equation modeling to
estimate models of multiple mental and physical health outcomes separately for
men and for women.

This study represents a substantial step forward from existing sociological
research on gender and health by virtue of the high quality epidemiological data
it will employ and the comprehensive approach to assessing multiple mental and
physical health outcomes. Gender differences in health outcomes are substantial
and potentially preventable. By employing powerful analytic and statistical
techniques, this study will generate far-reaching conclusions about trends in
the relationship between gender and health. The results will guide efforts to
target gender-related liabilities in an effort to break the seemingly inevitable
link between gender and undesirable health outcomes for a significant subset of
our U.S. adult population.