* 0921307
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolutionary dynamics of a molecular polymorphism for diapause and life histories in Drosophila melanogaster
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Paul Schmidt, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2013
* USD 467,861.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The major goal of this research is to understand the molecular genetic basis of
adaptation to seasonality in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster.
Although this species is endemic to sub-Saharan Africa, a form of reproductive
diapause (analogous to hibernation) has evolved. This trait is an essential
fitness component, varies in natural populations, and is regulated by the gene
couch potato. The specific aims are: 1) to elucidate how couch potato governs
diapause and associated traits such as aging and stress tolerance; 2) to
identify additional genes and pathways that are involved in adaptive
evolutionary responses to climatic variation; 3) to examine the evolutionary
history of the couch potato gene region and evaluate its role in the expansion
out of ancestral tropical habitats.

Diapause in D. melanogaster is an excellent system for investigating how
organisms adapt to variable climates. Diapause has wide-ranging effects on other
traits including lifespan and aging, and this research will contribute to the
understanding of the genetic control of lifespan and senescence. Many
agricultural pests also diapause, and results from this project are directly
applicable to understanding the genetics of diapause and population control in
these taxa. In addition, these investigations have bearing on understanding
evolution in novel environments, evolutionary response to climate change, and
genetic tradeoffs in other organisms. Broader impacts also include education and
training at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels. The investigators will
continue to work with the G. W. Carver High School in Philadelphia to develop
their science curriculum, and develop outreach activities with elementary and
secondary schools throughout the Philadelphia School System. Finally, the
project will contribute to an exhibit on the genetic response to climate change
for 'Our Changing Earth' at the Franklin Science Institute.