* 0921684
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Consumer Protection and Citizenship in China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Erika Kuever, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 6,300.00

Indiana University doctoral student Erika Kuever, under the supervision of Dr.
Richard Wilk, will undertake research on the relationship between consumer
activism and citizenship in post-socialist countries. This will advance
scholarly understandings of whether and how state-sponsored institutions can be
used by citizens to challenge state power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will focus on state-sponsored consumer organizations in China, which, despite
their origins in the state itself, serve as the primary channel for citizens
seeking redress for injustices encountered in the marketplace. The researcher
will employ a mixed-methods social science approach. This will include
participant observer in a consumer association, where she will carry out
interviews with association employees and consumers, and conduct follow-up
interviews with a stratified sample of consumers who have had their complaints
successfully mediated by the association. She will also interview officials in
other agencies charged with consumer protection, survey and analyze media
accounts, hold consumer focus groups, and follow-up key national consumer
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will document
how individuals interact with state resources to protect their families from
dangerous products, while also contributing to social scientific understanding
of the interaction between local politics and global consumer safety. Funding
this research also supports the education of a social scientist.