* 0921962
* RUI:Erosion in Madagascar: Investigating background and modern rates using 10Be and stream sediment gauging data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Ronadh Cox, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2013
* USD 261,677.00

Conventional wisdom holds that sediment yields in Madagascar are uncommonly
high, and that human activities drive the erosion. The country has a "world-
record erosion rate" of 20,000-40,000 tons per square km per year according to
the World Bank, and the widespread hillslope gullies called lavaka are featured
in every guidebook as examples of the catastrophic denudation of the country's
landscape. This viewpoint is based, however, on measurements that are few and
local, and in many respects represents "received wisdom" rather than rigorously
determined interpretation. Systematic analysis is therefore necessary to measure
the erosion rate of Madagascar. Cosmogenic 10Be, a short-lived isotope created
at the Earth's surface by cosmic-ray bombardment, can determine landscape
erosion rates. Undisturbed surface materials accumulate substantial amounts of
10Be, but where erosion is high then surface materials are low in this isotope.
Preliminary 10Be analyses of sediment from Madagascar rivers indicate erosion
rates of only about 32 tons per square km per year, suggesting that the
Madagascar landscape has been quite stable on timescales of thousands to
hundreds of thousands of years. On the other hand, direct measurements of
sediment yield in rivers can provide erosion rates on shorter timescales (years
to centuries). Because humans arrived in Madagascar less than 2000 years ago,
collecting and comparing 10Be and sediment gauge data will document erosion
rates in the pre-human to modern time span. This project will sample drainage
networks from broad swaths of Madagascar, omparing 10Be data with recent
sediment data from stream-sediment gauging and reservoir sedimentation
records.in order to quantify both background and modern erosion rates. GIS
analysis will investigate the relationship between erosion rate and the
intensity of lavaka gullying in the watersheds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project contributes to ongoing efforts to quantify the effects of humans as
geomorphic agents world-wide. Madagascar's status as a biodiversity hotspot and
a threatened environment lend added significance to the work, as these questions
loom large in discussions of conservation and international aid policy. The
project will involve both Malagasy and U.S. students and personnel. The
scientific results of this project will have direct relevance for environmental
planning and erosion mitigation strategies for Madagascar. Understanding rates
of erosion, the role of lavakas in sediment generation, and the role of humans
in the process will help determine whether Madagascar is naturally characterized
by high erosion rates or whether they are of recent and anthropogenic origin.
This award is co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering.