* 0921079
* The Role of Cortical Neurotransmitter Systems in Human and Nonhuman Primate Brain Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Mary Ann Raghanti, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 289,872.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Little is currently known about how human and animal brains
differ. While the human brain is unusually large, it is also known that even
small structural changes, too small to be detected by an examination of the
brain's macrostructure, can greatly impact behavior. Neurotransmitters are
compelling candidates for shaping the evolution of the human mind because (1)
their actions within specific areas of the brain support higher cognitive
functions, including learning, memory, and language, (2) their depletion results
in decreased cognitive function, and (3) human neuropathologies with extreme
cognitive deficits such Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and schizophrenia are
associated with specific decreases in neurotransmitter densities. It is possible
that a dependence on neurotransmitters underscores human advanced intellect, but
at the same time renders us uniquely vulnerable to these devastating disease
processes. If neurotransmitters contributed to human brain evolution, this would
be demonstrated by a higher density of neurotransmitter axons in brain regions
involved in advanced cognitive functions. To test this hypothesis, dopamine,
serotonin, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine neurotransmitter densities will be
compared in human and nonhuman primate brains. Areas to be analyzed include
language and higher-order association regions critical to cognitive and
emotional processing. Primary motor cortex will serve as a control. Sections
immunostained for each neurotransmitter will be quantified using stereologic
methods. Intellectual merit of this project will include gaining valuable
insight about primate brain evolution in addition to furthering our
understanding of the neuroanatomical substrates that have emerged to support
complex thought and language in humans. This work may also elucidate human-
specific targets for neurodegenerative diseases relevant to pharmacology and
clinical practice. Broader impacts include an archive of primate brain sections,
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students and
collaboration with the McNair Scholar Program to promote the advanced education
of students from underrepresented groups in preparation for post-graduate study.
The research will provide support for one graduate and one undergraduate student
as well as employ one professional, full-time technician.