* 0921303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Market Influences on the Adoption of Green Technology.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Bryan Bollinger, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 0.00

New technologies are crucial to dealing with enviornmental problems. Even when
cleaner technologies are available, individuals, business and organizations may
be slow to adopt them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the factors
that lead small businesses to adopt a specific new kind of 'green' technology.
The study focuses on the dry cleaning industry in several U.S. states. Dry
cleaners can choose to adopt new 'green' cleaning methods. These methods require
purchasing expensive new equipment, and business owners may be uncertain whether
their customers value 'green' cleaning, or whether the results of the 'green'
process is good enough to satisfy their consumers. A formal structural
econometric model is estimated with the data to determine whether competition
between cleaners encourages firms to adopt the technology. The resulting model
of the entire cleaning industry allows us to evaluate the driving forces behind
the adoption of new green technology in this industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project allow us to predict the likely effect of government
incentives designed to encourage firms to adopt the new technology. This part of
the project is a direct broader impact that will guide policymakers and may
benefit citizens by improving the environment.