* 0921978
* Longitudinal Investigation of Maternal Influences on Infant Outcomes Mediated by Physiological Investment and Behavioral Care during Lactation in Rhesus Macaques (Macaca mulatta)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Katherine Hinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2013
* USD 399,755.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). Studies of maternal investment strategies in primates have
focused mainly on the behavior of lactating females and their infants,
documenting the frequency of suckling, proximity maintenance, and the dynamics
of weaning. To date little is known about the primary form of maternal
investment; milk synthesis. This project will address two important questions:
(1) How do maternal condition and life history tradeoffs affect lactational
investment and subsequent reproduction and (2) How do differences in lactational
investment influence infant developmental trajectories? Longitudinal comparisons
of lactation performance within and among mothers, and the consequences for
infant growth and behavioral development, will demonstrate how mothers
manipulate investment in relation to their own, and their infant's,
physiological and social condition. This research project will provide the first
systematic, longitudinal information investigating all dimensions of mammalian
lactation strategies within a single species (milk synthesis, nursing behavior,
duration of lactation until weaning, and number and sex-ratio of infants
supported during lactation). As such this study will explore fundamental aspects
of lactation that have previously not been investigated, and advance our
understanding of how selection has shaped maternal investment strategies in a
species characterized by a slow life history and complex social organization.
Moreover the broader impacts of this research are substantial. The data from
this study will directly address critical issues affecting the health of human
mothers and their infants. Breastfeeding rates in the US and throughout the
world are significantly below optimum, contributing to long-term deleterious
developmental and health consequences for infants. Advances in understanding how
constraints during lactation influence the nutritional value of the mother's
milk and the consequences for infants, under controlled research conditions,
will provide insights into similar challenges for human mothers. This research
will provide valuable resources, in the form of archived milk samples and public
databases, for other researchers studying infant development from ultimate and
proximate perspectives. Lastly, the proposed study will incorporate training
programs at UC Davis and the California National Primate Research Center. The
award will provide partial post-doctoral level support for a young female new
investigator as well as employ one full-time technician, one half-time
technician, and one undergraduate.