* 0921900
* Dissertation Research: Understanding How Farmers Make Decisions in the Lao PDR
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2011
* Robert Winzeler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 14,990.00

Doctoral student Michelle Roberts, with the guidance of Dr. Robert Winzeler
(University of Nevada, Reno, will undertake research on factors that affect
farmer decision-making in developing countries. In many countries, governments
are encouraging farmers to change from subsistence-focused shifting cultivation
to permanent cash crops. As a result, some farmers are deciding to adopt new
agricultural practices while others are not. To understand why only some farmers
are adopting new practices, farmers' decision-making processes will be studied.

The research will be carried out in farming villages in northern Laos (Lao PDR).
The research area is composed of three ethnic groups; Lao Loum, Khmu, and Hmong.
To elucidate farmer perspectives and gain a holistic understanding of decision-
making environments, the study will consider 1) social factors within groups
stratified by wealth, status, age, and gender; 2) differences and similarities
between groups in perceptions of crops and technologies; and 3) similarities and
differences of crop preference, value, and perceptions among various ethnic and
stakeholder groups. Research methods will include participant observation,
surveys, semi-structured interviews, slip-sorting, ranking, social-mapping, and
photo-voice. This research is important because it will illuminate the cultural
dimensions of agricultural preferences, values, and perceptions as they
influence agricultural decision-making. By understanding local farmers'
agricultural perspectives, agents of change can adjust the parameters of
innovations to foster a higher adoption rate, increase agricultural
productivity, and otherwise benefit target populations. The research also will
contribute to cognitive decision-making theories and more broadly to
ethnographic knowledge about one of the least studied regions in Southeast Asia.
This award also supports the education of a social scientist.