* 0921673
* Firm Heterogeneity and Firm Exporting Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Konstantinos Arkolakis, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 07/31/2012
* USD 136,389.00

The project will model and study the dynamic behavior of exporting firms in a
global economic environment. To this end, the project will make use of both
theory and empirical data. First, it will extend the workhorse theoretical trade
framework with firm heterogeneity. More precisely, it will model the demand that
firms face and add tractable firm-level dynamics into that framework. Second, it
will test the results of the theoretical model with well established facts on
the dynamics of firm sales. Third, the project will study the sales of firms
before and after trade liberalization episodes using detailed data on the sales
of Brazilian exporting firms into individual destinations. Over the past
decades, models that employ a constant elasticity "love for variety" demand have
become an extremely useful tool in the theory of international trade. However,
recent research has shown that these models cannot explain the large growth
rates of goods and firms with little, but positive, trade before liberalization.
This project will develop alternative demand formulations that have the
desirable properties of the "love for variety" demand framework and are also
able to tackle with its main quandaries. Moreover, the project will make use of
rich datasets to look at the predictions of these new
models.&lt;br/&gt;Objectives and intellectual merit: The aim of this project is
to illuminate the behavior of exporting firms over time and after trade
liberalization episodes. The grantee, together with his co-authors, aims to
develop theoretical frameworks that model the demand side of the firm in a
setting with firm-level dynamics. Previous theoretical results show the success
of the theory in closely predicting trade flows of goods for the US-Mexico trade
liberalization episode. Beyond prior theoretical work, the project has already
taken steps on building a theoretical framework that accounts for a series of
additional facts on the dynamics of sales of firms. Preliminary results
show&lt;br/&gt;that the model with domestic productivity advances can account
very well for the turnover and growth in the domestic market as well as for a
large part of the observed turnover and growth into individual destinations. By
using this modeling framework and Brazilian firm-level data on exporting sales
by destination, the project will shed light to the behavior of exporters in
trade liberalization episodes. Additionally, the project will develop a
theoretical framework where exporters learn the foreign demand in order to study
the implications of learning on dynamic exporting decisions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The vast increase of trade flows over the past decades have put the
public debate for global integration in the forefront. The findings of this
project will be relevant to the evaluation of trade liberalization episodes in
predicting which firms and sectors are mostly affected by these events. Given
that firms having small sales tend to grow fast, predictions on their sales
become critical for policy analysis.