* 0921659
* Role of Bedform Interactions and Boundary Conditions in Pattern Development
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* David Mohrig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2012
* USD 220,752.00

Fields of bedforms such as ripples and dunes under air or water form some of the
most striking patterns on Earth, Mars and other planets. How these patterns form
is largely unknown. This research seeks to understand bedform-pattern
development by testing the hypothesis that the patterns self-organize.
Specifically, the research explores the interactions of the bedforms themselves
within a set of environmental boundary conditions as the prinicpal control on
the form and evolution of the patterns. The boundary conditions, which are
different for every field of bedforms, control the frequency and style of
interactions to yield patterns that are broadly similar, but are unique in their
detail from field to field. This research will create time-series of high-
resolution, three-dimensional digital maps that allow for unprecedented
documentation of bedform topography, interactions among the bedforms, and
pattern evolution across a representative suite of environments that differ
significantly in their boundary conditions. This project uses (1) air-borne
LiDAR to explore the aeolian dune field at White Sands, New Mexico, (2) low-
altitude aerial photography to characterize the shallow North Loup River,
Nebraska, and (3) multibeam acoustic surveys to resolve the deep Mississippi
River, southern Louisiana. In addition, experimentation within the North Loup
River will include using a field flume to explore the control of channel width
upon pattern formation. Results of this study will provide the quantitative data
necessary to fully understand the unsteady, self-organizing behavior of dunes
and dune fields that arise as a consequence of the feedbacks between fluid flow,
sediment erosion/deposition, and surface topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transport of sand in dunes and rivers can modify the landscape at both large and
small scales. Data collected for this project will improve the knowledge of how
topography changes in time and space as a result of sand movement; these are the
proceses that primarily control the evolution of landforms on Earth and other
planets. Methodologies and techniques developed for this research project will
advance the real-time monitoring of Earth's surface that is necessary to
document progressive environmental change, information that is vital for the
successful management of natural resources.