* 0921656
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes on Frontiers in Imaging Science; Colombia, Summer, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Angela Guzman, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,984.00

0921656&lt;br/&gt;Guzman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place in early summer 2010 at the Universidad de los
Andes and the Universidad Nacional de Colombia in Colombia. Organized by Dr.
Angela Guzman of the Florida Atlantic University, the PASI will address
frontiers in imaging science. Lectures and presentations will relate to the
following topics of contemporary imaging research: advances in optical
microscopy, new methods for improving astronomical imaging, novel imaging
methods that operate without lenses, and new theoretical developments that
facilitate an understanding of the imaging of electromagnetic and acoustic
waves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes from the PASI include: (a)
identification and reinforcement of cross-disciplinary collaborations between
current scientists engaged in imaging research; (b) a more effective utilization
of experimental facilities and a possible redirection of imaging research
collaborations at Florida Atlantic University and the Florida Max Planck Member
Institute for Bioimaging; (c) an increase in the exchange of graduate students
between Latin American and U.S. universities doing imaging research; and (d) an
increase in the number of Hispanics enrolling in imaging science and engineering
programs in the United States. Results from the PASI will be made available
through a PASI website developed for the activity.&lt;br/&gt;