* 0921415
* Pregastrular morphogenesis in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2012
* Michael Danilchik, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie Pick
* 05/31/2012
* USD 460,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main objective of this project is
to investigate the developmental role of a newly discovered class of membranous
protrusions interconnecting blastomeres of early, cleavage-stage Xenopus laevis
embryos. Time lapse confocal microscopy of live, surgically opened embryos
expressing a membrane-tethered fluorescent protein unexpectedly reveals hundreds
of extremely long, stable filopodia traversing the entire volume of the
blastocoel, interconnecting blastomeres separated by as much as 300 microns.
Most blastomeres appear to be simultaneously interconnected and in long-term
contact with as many as half a dozen adjacent and nonadjacent cells via these
long filopodia. These processes are filled with f-actin, and small membranous
blebs translocate bidirectionally within them. Near the 512-cell stage, most of
the long filopodia settle onto nearby blastomere surfaces and vesiculate,
producing clusters of small membrane-bound, cytoplasm-bearing particles. The
time of appearance and distribution of these remarkable structures suggest a
direct role in early embryonic patterning, perhaps via the vectorial transport
of maternal components or via blastomere-blastomere communication. The aims of
this project are to explore this hypothesis by asking 1) whether the spatial
pattern of traversing filopodia is biased with respect to the primary embryonic
axes; 2) whether early perturbation of dorsal-ventral patterning alters their
deployment or function. &lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit: These activities explore
the potential of a novel physical pathway for transporting maternal morphogens
or signaling between early blastomeres, and thus represents a new facet on a
problem of long standing in developmental biology. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impact:
The PI is committed to the mentoring of projects by students, teachers, and
visiting scientists. The experiments described here will provide a useful
training ground for graduate students, undergraduates, and others interested in
early development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;