* 0921235
* Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Promissory Prestations. A Yucatec Village between Ritual Gifts and Development Cash Transfers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Jane Guyer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Johns Hopkins University doctoral student Andres Dapuez, with the guidance of
Dr. Jane I. Guyer, will conduct research on the relationship between traditional
ritual gifting for agricultural regeneration and development program direct cash
transfers intended to produce social and economic change. The researcher will
focus on PROCAMPO (Program for Direct Assistance in Agriculture), which for
fifteen years has been giving money to Mexican farmers to stabilize incomes in
the wake of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). PROCAMPO cash
transfers and calendar-based ritual offerings to fields each invoke different
but interrelated ideas about planning, the future, and profits. The researcher
will investigate how these contrasting temporalities differ qualitatively, are
intertwined, and affect the implementation of the PROCAMPO program.

The research will be conducted at the Inter-American Development Bank in
Washington, D.C., in government offices in Mexico City, and in an indigenous
village of Yucatan, Mexico. Dapuez will employ a mix of social scientific
methods, including in-depth interviews, content analysis of official documents,
and in situ observations. The overall goal is to construct an ethnographic
description and analysis of how the PROCAMPO program develops and communicates
religious and secular attitudes toward the future, and, how these concepts
interconnect with the complex calendrics of politico-spiritual life known as the
cargo system.

This research is both timely and important. It will shed light on how indigenous
agriculturalists and development functionaries prefigure the future of the rural
sector of Mexico. After more than fifteen years in operation, PROCAMPO has been
integrated into peasants' everyday life. Currently, the future of PROCAMPO,
begun as a transitional program to support the Mexican agricultural sector's
incorporation into NAFTA, is being evaluated. In addition to updating social
science theory of gift giving, the resesarch will have the practical application
of helping to understand how and why PROCAMPO has or has not been successful.
The research also will contribute to the education of a social scientist.