* 0921666
* Commodity Politics: Citizens, Consumers, and Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Patricia Strach, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 147,541.00

From "pink" cereal that supports breast cancer research to bottled water that
helps fight disease abroad, non-profits and companies are increasingly working
together to address social problems. Together these two actors create
coordinated marketing campaigns for specially made or marketed products?a
portion of the sale of these items benefits a designated cause. The intense
marketing of products tied to social causes, or "commodity politics," challenges
conventional political research that organized interests lobby the government
when they wish to address social problems. Indeed, non-profits and companies
have provided another arena in which citizens (as consumers) get involved?the
nation?s supermarkets and shopping malls. The actions of these activists open up
a number of questions that current research cannot answer: Why have non-profits
and companies turned to cause marketing for issues already addressed by the
federal government? What effect does marketing of public problems have on
citizens? perceptions of policy issues and of the government's role in
ameliorating them?

Scholars know little about how market-based activism works and the broader
effect it has on the way that we think and act on social problems. To answer the
questions above, this research project has two components. (1) To understand
when and why organizations turn to commodity politics, the study examines three
policy areas (breast cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer) and two organizations
within each area to map both population-level characteristics and individual-
level decision-making. It draws on data from non-profit databases, public
records, a survey of organizations, archival documents, and interviews. (2) To
understand the effect of market activism on citizens' perceptions of policy and
government, the study creates a new nationally representative 15-minute survey
on citizen and consumer attitudes, which includes questions about knowledge,
consumer habits, political behavior, and views on government.

Ultimately a study of commodity politics leads to us to ask under what
circumstances organizations seek remedies in the political arena rather than
assume that they always will or do. It also suggests political research that
views individuals only as citizens who participate in political action (narrowly
defined as voting or contacting a member of Congress) misses key questions about
how advocacy in one sphere influences the other. If activists choose to market
solutions to health problems already addressed by the federal government, does
this boost or weaken support for federal public policy? And, in turn, what
effect does policy have on the market for these kinds of causes? By looking more
closely at seemingly non-political action, scholars can better understand the
wide-ranging influences on and effects of public policy as well as the
government's role in addressing social problems.

