* 0921370
* Dissertation Research: Mind the Gap: The Dynamics and Work of Aging and Caring at Home
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2012
* Lauren Penney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 11,032.00

Doctoral student Lauren Penney (University of Arizona), under the supervision of
Dr. Mimi Nichter, will investigate how the processes at work in aging and home
care are affected by such factors as cultural conceptions of aging and health,
socio-economic status, and the broader political economy. Her research will
focus on home health agencies, direct care workers, and aging older adults and
their families as they negotiate the requirements of Medicare-reimbursed home
health care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in southern
Arizona. The research will employ multiple methods, including in-depth
interviews, job shadowing (of health care workers), participant observation,
focus groups, and surveys. &lt;br/&gt;She will examine the relationship between
Medicare eligibility requirements, views of users of home health care, and the
direct care workers' senses of their own professional and moral obligations. The
study will explore how older adults (and their families) manage gaps that may
emerge between (1) their experience of home as private and a site of the
provision of health care, (2) the cultural background and life experiences of
themselves and their direct care providers, (3) how older adults are represented
in relation to cultural ideals, and (4) their social and health care needs and
what is available in the long-term care system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will contribute to social science theory of the relationship between
formal institutions and the human experience of the life cycle. At this
historical juncture, as a new administration takes office during a time of
economic crisis, entitlement programs such as Medicare have been targeted for
reform. This research will provide a meticulous, in-depth analysis how how the
system works at multiple levels of scale and from the perspectives of multiple
stakeholder. This will provide policy makers a comprehensive and culturally
sensitive analysis of the workings of the current long term care system.