* 0921330
* RUI: Psychological Motives Underlying Attitudes toward Aggressive Interrogation.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Kevin Carlsmith, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 192,047.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a program of
research to explore the underlying principles that guide individual attitudes
about aggressive interrogation. Despite the national attention devoted to this
issue, very little is known about the basis for individual attitudes regarding
the use of aggressive interrogation. Based on prior empirical findings, this
work tests whether support for torture-interrogation hinges on perceptions of
the target's moral standing. That is, is torture deemed more acceptable when the
target deserves punishment for some prior bad act? According to the project's
investigator, coercive interrogation is employed as a proxy for punishment,
rather than as a tool to achieve a desired end. Indeed, it is hypothesized that
support for enhanced interrogation techniques might be based more on the
deontological goal of achieving retributive justice than on the utilitarian goal
of preventing future harm. The investigator contends that supporters of
aggressive interrogation will express utilitarian justifications for such
actions, yet reserve their support of such methods exclusively for those targets
that "deserve" to be punished based on their moral standing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes five sets of studies which when
taken together build upon the PI's initial work in this area. The experiments
conducted include representative samples of U.S. citizens that permit
examination of whether these findings extend from military settings to civilian
settings, and whether people are consciously aware of the motives that drive
their opinion. Importantly, the experiments will test whether the recommended
intensity of a given interrogation is determined by its potential utility, or
rather by the perceived moral status of the target. This proposal has direct
theoretical implications for social psychology, but also promises to provide
intellectual bridges across the disciplines of psychology, law, political
science, and public policy. The RUI component of this proposal will specifically
emphasize the training of undergraduates, particularly underrepresented groups,
for advanced study in the natural sciences. This training will include skill
acquisition, mentoring, research supervision, conference attendance, and formal
presentations of findings at both regional and national conferences.