* 0921798
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Architecture of Political Choice--Political Rhetoric, Economic Perceptions, and Risky Political Prospects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Austin Hart, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/29/2012
* USD 11,979.00

The relationship between the performance of the nation's economy and public
support for the government has been a source of scholarly debate for decades.
Little research, however, has sought to incorporate the role of political elites
as economic opinion leaders into a theory of economic voting. This is an
important omission as research in political communications and behavioral
economics demonstrates that messages from political elites have significant
impacts on public opinion. Theories linking macroeconomic performance with
electoral success often acknowledge the importance of political elites in
shaping public perceptions but fail to address systematically the impact of
elite rhetoric. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on this research by
bringing elites and elite rhetoric back into the study of the economic
foundations of government support. Specifically, the study addresses three
primary questions: What information do individuals rely on to formulate and
revise perceptions of the nation's economic performance? What are the causes of
observed variation in the nature of the economic vote across developed and
developing democracies? How, and to what extent, does the economic rhetoric of
political elites shape economic opinion and consequent support for the
government? A laboratory experiment conducted in both the United States and
Mexico will be used to test a series of hypotheses related to the project's
objectives. The results will provide insights into the real-world effect of the
economic rhetoric political elites disseminate and citizens constantly face in
contemporary democracies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of political rhetoric,
economic perceptions, and government support has never been more important than
it is today. As democratic values and institutions continue to spread across the
globe, citizens are faced with the challenge of holding elected officials
accountable for their actions. Yet, if political elites are able to shape
rhetorically economic judgments for political gain, conventional standards of
accountability are undermined. The broader implications for the level of
accountability in both developed and developing democracies are massive. As a
result, answering the question of how political elites use economic rhetoric,
rather than economic policy tools, to shape public support is more than just a
scholarly enterprise; it is an essential task for proponents of democratic
values and democratic sustainability.