* 0921333
* DDIG: The Effects of Waste Management on Perceptions of Governance and on Civic Engagement in Two West Bank Municipalities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Lila Abu-Lughod, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 12,572.00

Doctoral student Sophia Stamatopoulou-Robbins (Columbia University), supervised
by Dr. Lila Abu-Lughod, will investigate the effects of waste management schemes
at the hands of formal and informal institutions of governance on people's
senses of differentiation from, proximity to, and expectations of government.
The premise of this study is that if one indication of good governance is the
provision of basic services, insights for social science theory can be acquired
by investigating how perceptions of government, and public senses of ethics,
duties, and responsibility, are affected by waste management successes and
failures.

The research will be carried out in the West Bank. The researcher will explore a
selection of internationally-sponsored multimillion-dollar projects to develop
West Bank sanitation. At times, when this "formal" environmentalist development
is seen to fail, responsibility for sanitation is assumed by "informal" groups
such as neighborhood councils and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This
provides this opportunity for a comparative research design for analysis of how
perceptions of government and civic engagement are affected by these contending
sources and models of governance. This study will combine long-term participant
observation, interviews and archival and documentary research on sanitation and
its infrastructures.

Since the emergence of independent post-colonial states, the developing world
has seen the proliferation of contexts where some governing structures fail to
be "state-like," while other elements of society, such as NGOs, social movements
and corporations, seem to operate according to state logics. This research is
thus important because it will offer a new lens through which increasingly
representative contexts characterized as failed states or stateless societies
can be analyzed, both in the Middle East and beyond. This sort of fine-grained
approach, combining anthropological methods with insights from science and
technology studies, takes infrastructure to be a privileged discursive and
material mediator among complex institutions and the people they serve and
employ. It therefore allows us to reformulate social scientific understandings
of the relationships among state structures, governance and civic engagement.

Funding this research also supports the education of a graduate student.