* 0921027
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Technology for Real Time, Ex Ante Forecasting of Intra and International Conflict and Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,01/31/2010
* Philip Schrodt, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2010
* USD 188,333.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Conflicts continue to rage in the Levant, South Asia, and elsewhere.
Governmental, nongovernmental, and intergovernmental organizations are seeking a
technology that will help them anticipate the outbreak of violence. Some
progress has been made predicting single events and political instability two
years ahead. But we lack scientifically sound tools for gauging the statistical
uncertainty of these and other forecasts, making predictions in real-time,
analyzing the behavior of groups of belligerents, and making contingent
forecasts (forecasts conditional on possible interventions by third parties). We
develop a scientifically advanced technology that meets these desiderata: a tool
that produces on an open source website in real-time, ex ante forecasts of
intra- and international conflict and cooperation for three parts of the world.
The time series data is produced by state-of-the art TABARI automated coding
software using the CAMEO event and actor coding system; the source are news feed
aggregators such as Google News and the European Monitor accessed via real
simple syndication feeds (RSS). Bayesian multivariate time series models with
Markov-switching are fit to these data. These models then produce forecast
probability densities for systems of directed dyadic behaviors. Model
performance is based on density evaluation; model refinements are made via
developed recalibration methods. The website will report forecasts for selected
systems of belligerents in the Levant, South Asia, and East Asia; it will
disseminate the coded event data, real-time forecasts of these cases with
measures of forecast uncertainty, contingent forecasts based on possible
interventions, information on model performance.

The technology will meet most, if not all, of the desiderata for forecasting in
international relations. Three specific contributions are be made. First, the
feasibility and value of automated real-time events coding is demonstrated.
Until now, this coding has lagged real-time; and the value of the data has not
been realized. The application of current statistical work on forecasting is a
second contribution. For the first time in political science we produce and
evaluate density (not point) forecasts. And we refine our forecasting models
with newly developed recalibration techniques. Third, the well known tendency
for conflict and cooperation phase shifts are explicitly analyzed and
incorporated in our forecasts. The Markov-switching element of our model capture
these nonlinearities. Using the Teragrid we produce probability weighted
forecasts of behavioral systems occupying certain states, report transition
probabilities, and include estimates of the uncertainty of both. Thus the final
forecasting models will be original in international relations.

The forecasts we produce will be available for use by NGOs, IGOs, and any party
interested in anticipating conflict in the Levant, South Asia, and East Asia. To
help these parties use our forecasts we will make presentations at meetings held
by the A.P.S.A, I.S.A, and I.P.S.A. We also will present our work and publicize
our website in countries like Taiwan via institutions like the Academia Sinica.
Eventually, our website will report contingent forecasts based on inputs from
scholars and policy makers' forecasts of what will transpire in the short-term
if certain kinds of intervention occur. Estimates of the probability of phase
shifts and of forecast densities will accompany these contingent forecasts.