* 0921341
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Examining When Impersonal Donation Solicitations are Successful
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Adam Levine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 6,899.00

This research focuses on how and when individuals decide to donate money to
social organizations. It focuses on how impersonal solicitations affect this
decision, where "impersonal" refers to any donation request via direct mail,
e-mail, and telephone (i.e. not via personal acquaintances). Although past
research shows that people donate money to social organizations to express
support for their goals and activities, this work shows why solicitations that
mention such issues can actually decrease people?s willingness to donate money.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To show why, this research synthesizes two ideas from
psychology and behavioral economics: (1) people spend money when they are able
to justify the expenditure to themselves, and (2) relatively discretionary
purchases, such as donations, are hard to justify when people are reminded about
their personal financial struggles. Combining these two ideas leads to the
following hypothesis: mentioning issues that remind people about their personal
financial struggles--such as unemployment, inflation, and unaffordable
necessities--diminishes the effectiveness of requests for money, regardless of
the importance of such issues. On the other hand, mentioning issues that people
care about and do not remind people about their personal financial struggles
increases the effectiveness of requests for money.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work uses several laboratory experiments to test this hypothesis. In all cases
subjects are given the opportunity to donate real money to real organizations.
Together, the experiments directly test the proposed psychological mechanism.
They show that mentioning issues that people care about that remind them about
personal financial struggles decreases their willingness to donate money by
making it difficult to justify spending money on a donation. In this situation,
people instead choose to save their money in order to spend it on necessities.
Moreover, the experiments also show that mentioning issues that people care
about and do not remind them about personal financial struggles increases their
willingness to donate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating psychological
insights within a common social context, this work clarifies how people decide
to donate money and how attributes of donation solicitations affect this
decision. It provides a foundation for future research on how people decide to
donate money to any social organization. More broadly, the insights here show
how social organizations can broaden their donor base using impersonal
solicitation. To the extent that our democracy benefits from citizens who are
engaged and active in various social organizations, understanding the conditions
under which solicitations for donations are successful fulfills an essential
normative goal.