* 0921368
* Indicators as Knowledge:  Human Rights Indicators and Global Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2014
* Sally Merry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 255,105.00

Indicators are rapidly multiplying as tools for assessing and promoting a
variety of social justice and reform strategies around the world. There are
indicators for the rule of law, violence against women, human development, and
much more. Donors increasingly demand quantifiable and measurable results as a
condition for funding NGOs. Forms of statistical measurement developed to
understand economic development are now being transferred to transnational
problems such as compliance with human rights and combating sex trafficking.
This project examines this new use of indicators in global governance.
Indicators use numerical measures to make comparisons across countries and over
time. They use comparable categories to describe highly diverse social phenomena
and render them as simple numbers that enable ranking. Their goal is to produce
knowledge that is accessible to the public and policy-makers. Yet, indicators
require technical expertise that is opaque to public understanding. They depend
on data collection efforts by governments, advocacy organizations, and
international organizations that are highly specific to particular places and
problems. What gets labeled and counted is usually the product of political
battles. The information that indicators package as objective and
straightforward conceals political competition among countries, local
idiosyncratic practices of counting, and the influence of expertise. The goal of
the research project is to open up the political and technical processes through
which indicators are made. The project will examine how indicators are produced
and used though an ethnography of three indicators. The findings may help the
public and international decision-makers to develop a more cautious, nuanced
understanding of the kinds of knowledge indicators do and do not provide.