* 0921414
* Immigration, Institutions, and Inter-Group Relations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2011
* Nilda Flores-Gonzalez, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2011
* USD 420,233.00

SES-0921414&lt;br/&gt;Maria Krysan&lt;br/&gt;Nilda Flores
Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;Pamela Popielarz &lt;br/&gt;Andy Clarno&lt;br/&gt;University
of Illinois-Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
How do individuals and communities receive new immigrants, particularly Latino
immigrants? The research is situated within communities, where inter-group
relations between immigrants and non-immigrants are experienced directly. The
community focus is important because federal inaction on immigration legislation
has paved the way for political action at the state and municipal level. The
project will study the Chicago metropolitan area, where many communities are
home to an increasing number of Latino immigrants. But just as individual
people's attitudes about immigration range from antipathy to indifference to
actively valuing diversity, community reactions also differ, ranging from
enacting laws that limit immigrants' access to employment and education, to
building institutions that explicitly assist immigrants. The research seeks to
explain this variation in individual attitudes toward immigration and municipal
political reaction to immigrants. Because reactions vary across communities with
comparable immigration profiles, the research reaches beyond demographic change
alone for these explanatory factors. The investigators hypothesize that various
aspects of the local institutional context shape individual attitudes and
community political outcomes concerning immigration. Local context includes (1)
the social networks connecting individuals within the community and bridging to
others outside the community, (2) the voluntary associations active within and
relevant to the community, (3) the formal and informal political power structure
of the community, and (4) the history of local events concerning immigration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study addresses inter-group attitudes, local
institutional context, and political outcomes in four Chicago area communities
with different immigration profiles. It uses a multi-method approach to data
collection, including a telephone survey of individuals, interviews with key
community informants, public observation, and a study of archival materials such
as city council documents and local newspapers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
this engaged research study focuses on an issue that will undoubtedly be at the
top of the domestic policy agenda in the coming years, its potential broader
impacts come from its contribution to the scholarly and policy debate on how to
address issues of immigration. Plans for the dissemination of the findings
include, but are not limited to, traditional academic outlets (journal articles
and books). Specifically, in partnership with the Institute of Government and
Public Affairs and the Latin American and Latino Studies Program at UIC, the
investigators plan public events, broadly distributed and accessible research
summaries, and community meetings, where they will present and discuss research
findings. In addition, the project is linked with the Chicago Area Study, an
inter-disciplinary research methodology practicum at the University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC). Because of UIc's diverse student body, the broader impacts of
this project therefore also include training a demographically diverse group
(including many from traditionally underrepresented populations) of graduate and
undergraduate students.