* 0921023
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contextual Influences on Intimate Partner Violence Among Displaced Women in Colombia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Kathryn Yount, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,980.00

This research aims to explore how forced displacement due to political conflict
may contribute to intimate partner violence (IPV) against women. The process of
displacement may exacerbate the risks of IPV against women by affecting women's
social networks of support, men's ability to fulfill local expectations of
masculinity and manhood in intimate partnerships, and women's economic resources
relative to their intimate partner. Displaced communities are often
characterized by extreme poverty, weak local infrastructures, and weak social
networks. As is characteristic of many such populations, displaced populations
in Colombia tend to be poor and marginalized. Many of these populations are
resettled in and around large urban areas, with 70% originally from rural
agricultural settings. Resettling into a large urban area provides limited
opportunities for stable employment. These difficult living conditions may
exacerbate IPV. Qualitative in-depth interviews will be conducted with Colombian
women in a displaced community to understand their views and experiences of how
social and contextual factors associated with displacement affect their intimate
partnerships and experiences of IPV. Three main research questions guide the
study: 1) How do stresses associated with displacement contribute to women's
risk of experiencing IPV? 2) How does the experience of displacement affect
women's networks of social support, and thereby influence women's risk of
experiencing IPV? 3) How does the experience of displacement alter gendered
roles and expectations in ways that influence the risk of IPV? The study has
significant intellectual merit for several reasons. IPV is known to be a global
problem, yet theories about its causes have grown largely out of research in
stable Western contexts. This study will explore how the experience of
displacement in a non-Western context shapes how women's social networks,
resources, and constructs of masculinity affect women's risks of experiencing
IPV. Information on how the above factors affect IPV in such settings has
broader implications for the design of policies and prevention programs for
displaced populations in the U.S. and abroad. It may be possible to intervene at
the community level to alter the effect of women's risk of IPV.