* 0921963
* New Approaches to Unraveling the Climatic and Sea-Level History of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Alexander Simms, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2012
* USD 237,537.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Approaches to Unraveling the
Climatic and Sea-Level History of the Northwestern Gulf of
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alexander Simms, Anna M Cruse, Regina
Kalchgruber&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0921963&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Recent hurricanes such as
Katrina and Ike have reminded policy makers and planners of the susceptibility
of coastal communities to natural forces such as storms, climate change,
subsidence, and eustatic sea-level rise. Around 2,600 years ago, several
estuaries along the Gulf Coast underwent a period of rapid change. The continued
debate concerning the nature of sea-level change over the last 5,000 years,
coupled with the lack of century-scale records of climate change, leaves the
cause of this event unclear. This project will use two methods of sea-level and
climate reconstructions not previously used in Gulf of Mexico studies to provide
tighter constraints on the sea-level and climate history of the northwestern
Gulf of Mexico over the last 5,000. This new data will help determine if the
reorganization of the Gulf Coast estuaries was caused by a change in climate or
an increase in the rate of sea-level rise 2,600 years ago. In addition to
determining the cause of this event, these new records will provide tighter
constraints on the background rates of sea-level rise within the Gulf of Mexico,
which may provide some new insights into the amount of subsidence that is
occurring along this coastline. The new data will also provide a longer record
of century-scale drought than currently exists for the south-central USA. This
project supports one graduate and one undergraduate student who will help
conduct this research.