* 0921852
* Geomorphology and Vegetation: Interactions, Dependencies, and Feedback Loops - 40th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology  Symposium; October 2009; Blacksburg, VA
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Lynn Resler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 29,684.00

This project will support a research conference on "Geomorphology and
Vegetation: Interactions, Dependencies, and Feedback Loops" to be held in
October 2009, at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA. The goal is to advance basic and
applied thinking across the discipline of biogeomorphology. The symposium has
the following specific objectives: 1) stimulate cross-disciplinary discussion;
2) synthesize new ideas; 3) enable future interdisciplinary collaborations; and
4) foster student and young researcher participation. The organizers have
invited a range of speakers who conduct research on the interactions of
vegetation over a wide array of geomorphic settings, including arid lands,
uplands, floodplains, and along and within channel
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landform change resulting from linkages among
flowing water, sediment, and vegetation is a highly complex natural process, due
to feedbacks among the interacting components operating over a range of spatial
and temporal scales. True understanding of landscape development requires
knowledge of the particular role of vegetation in influencing physical
processes, especially in efforts to predict the effects of climate change. This
research symposium will bring together a diverse group of scientists who will
discover avenues for future collaborations across the realm of this topic.