* 0921635
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Out of Chaos?  Business Elites and the Rule of Law in Russia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Jordan Gans-Morse, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research analyzes the role of Russian business elites in
developing the legal framework for a market economy. In recent years a near
consensus has emerged among social scientists, legal scholars, and policymakers
that secure property rights are essential for economic growth. Debate continues
as to how institutions that protect property rights emerge, but many scholars
argue that the existence of powerful societal actors with a stake in an
effective legal framework is a key determinant of institutional development. Yet
if secure property rights are vital for economic prosperity, why is the demand
for the rule of law so weak in many societies? The project builds on the
argument that business elites' support for legal development depends on their
strategies for protecting and acquiring assets. Specifically, it examines the
link between these strategies and two related elements of societal demand for
institutional development: (1) The extent to which business groups lobby for
market-supporting laws, such as legislation for investor protection and
effective arbitration procedural codes; and (2) The degree to which private
sector actors rely on the legal system. To address these issues, the project
includes an original survey of Russian firm owners and managers. This survey
complements the other components of the project, including qualitative fieldwork
and formal modeling. The qualitative component consists of case studies of
Russian legal reforms, semi-structured interviews with Russian business and
political elites, and content analysis of business association and government
documents. This qualitative research informs the assumptions and structure of
the formal model, which analyzes the micro-level logic underlying firms'
decisions to support or oppose reforms. The project's findings will contribute
to social scientists' and legal scholars' understanding of the politics of
building legal institutions, offering insights into which actors are most likely
to support legal reforms and which reforms are most likely to succeed. They will
thereby contribute to policy debates about secure property rights, an issue that
is of central interest to U.S. experts promoting growth in developing countries
and to Russian policymakers seeking to diversify their economy.