* 0921565
* Approach Motivation, Anger & Positive Affects
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Eddie Harmon-Jones, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 09/30/2012
* USD 303,328.00

Several existing theories of emotion and motivation assume that positive emotion
is consistently associated with approach motivation (the urge to move toward the
environment) and that negative emotion is consistently associated with
withdrawal motivation (the urge to move away from the environment). Recent
research on the negative emotion of anger has revealed that it is associated
with approach rather than withdrawal motivation, highlighting the importance of
considering motivational direction (approach vs. withdrawal) as a separate
dimension from valence (positive vs. negative). This suggests the possibility
that anger, although negative, may have important associations with certain
types of positive emotions, because of their underlying associations with
approach motivation. The proposed research will investigate how anger and
approach-oriented positive emotion influence each other, and specifically test
the novel, counterintuitive hypothesis that positive emotion high in approach
motivation may increase anger responses. Experiments will be conducted to
examine the effect of positive emotions that differ in approach motivational
intensity on anger responses. Additional experiments will examine facial/body
expressions of approach-oriented positive emotions and how they relate to
facial/body expressions of anger. In the proposed experiments, emotions will be
evoked in the laboratory and multiple system measurements of the physiological,
behavioral, and subjective features of emotion will be taken.  The research will
extend the understanding of the structure and function of emotions, and provide
a more detailed understanding of the interplay between emotion, cognition, and
behavior. The results of the proposed research will yield a more complete
understanding of how certain positive emotions may increase anger and
aggression, whereas other positive emotions may decrease anger and aggression.
The increased understanding gained by the proposed research will assist in what
therapists, educators, and educated lay persons learn and advise or use when
applying research on positive emotions to life tasks and relationships.