* 0921096
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Underlying Mechanisms and Behavioral Consequences of Emotion-Induced Implicit Prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Nilanjana Dasgupta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 411,104.00

The goal of this collaborative research project is to examine the conditions
under which incidental emotions exacerbate intergroup prejudice, stereotyping,
and discriminatory behavior. In the intergroup context, incidental emotions
refer to affective states that individuals may be experiencing immediately
before they encounter outgroup members and whose evocation is unrelated to these
groups. As such, these states are different from integral emotions, which refer
to affective states that are directly evoked by an outgroup when people reflect
on or encounter them. The investigators propose a theoretical model that
specifies selective attention as the most likely mediator between incidental
emotion and subsequent bias in judgments and action.

The primary goal of the present proposal is to test the veracity of the proposed
model in three sets of studies. The first set of studies examines the selective
attention hypothesis. These studies examine whether incidental emotions cause
individuals to focus on members of groups stereotypically associated with the
activated emotion, and whether this attention is focused particularly on emotion
relevant features of the groups. These studies also examine whether incidental
emotion increases emotions explicitly tied to the target group (integral
emotion) and a focus on incidental emotion specific features of individuals in
the target group. The second set of studies tests the hypothesis that incidental
emotion affects perceptions of non-prototypical members of target groups more
than prototypic members. The third set of studies focus on the behavioral
consequences of incidental emotion. These studies examine the hypothesis that
the effect of incidental emotions on attention, and implicit biases can cause
discriminatory behaviors. Importantly, this project will build scientific
infrastructure by strengthening collaborations between two labs with different
expertise: the study of emotion and implicit social cognition. This project will
also provide many opportunities for members of underrepresented minorities to be
trained in scientific research.

