* 0921613
* Pan American Institute for Integration of Research on Climate Change and Hazards in the Americas; Panama City, Panama
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Patricia Solis, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2011
* USD 99,563.00

0921613&lt;br/&gt;Solis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place the summer of 2010, at the campus of the
Universidad Tecnológica de Panamá. Organized by Dr. Patricia A. Solis of the
Association of American Geographers, the PASI cwill address the Integration of
research on climate change and hazards in the Americas. The institute will 1)
identify, engage, and integrate a new generation of scholars and practitioners
with on-going activities of major organizations around the relationships between
climate change and hazards, 2) interrelate advanced knowledge domains around
links between climate change and hazards in the region using integrative
capacities of geographic technologies; and 3) elaborate a collaborative research
and educational agenda that spans across disciplines and sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will foster greater joint movement from data
to knowledge to action, by consolidating advanced research, synergizing
international geospatial collaboration around links between climate change and
hazards, and fostering a region-wide community of scholars and practitioners.
Expected outcomes in this PASI will be to transform climate change and hazards
research by engaging a new generation of scholars/practitioners with
international initiatives, and by integrating these perspectives into
educational opportunities for various sciences and engineering disciplines. The
PASI will also help the public better understand climate change and its
potential hazards through the development of a website and wiki.