* 0921197
* Collaborative Research: Development of High-Resolution Biomass Burning Records for Tropical South America from Andean Ice Cores
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Valier Galy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 77,995.00

Records of forest fire occurrence in tropical South America are sparse prior to
the advent of satellite monitoring. As a result, basic understanding of the
relationships between past fire activity, climate variability, and human
societies is limited. Amazonian forest fires can significantly affect the global
carbon cycle through redistributing large amounts of organic carbon between the
atmosphere, biosphere, and soils. Fires also impact forest health, biomass
abundance, and biodiversity. This research project will relate past forest fire
activity and its connections to climate variability and human activities by
providing the first annually resolved tropical South American paleofire records
using molecular organic carbon signatures preserved in high-altitude Andean ice
fields. A late Holocene biomass burning record spanning the last 1,000 years,
thereby including both the medieval warm period and little ice age, will be
generated using the Quelccaya (Peru) ice core, which is well situated to receive
organic carbon inputs from the Amazon Basin and Andes and affords remarkable
temporal constraints. The investigators will use newly developed analytical
techniques to identify and quantify numerous trace-level organic compounds in
small volumes of ice, providing high-resolution, multi-molecular records that
will describe fire occurrence and the type of material that burned as well as
direct emissions from fresh vegetation. The project will provide information
about high-altitude carbon cycle dynamics through analysis of vegetation-derived
organic carbon in several other ice cores along and straddling the Andean range,
which will constrain the depositional fate of aerosols generated during burning.
Organic carbon sequestration achieved through incomplete burning will be
investigated by characterizing higher plant-derived organic carbon associated
with ice core mineral dust and black carbon particles, with its persistence
determined through radiocarbon analysis. The variability observed in 20th-
century fire records previously developed using this approach is pronounced and
quasi-periodic and differs from that of Quelccaya ice core oxygen isotopic and
dust records, suggesting that ice core organic geochemical data encodes unique
climatic and anthropogenic signals. By extending these records back to roughly
1,000 AD, this project will provide valuable information about tropical South
American forest health across major climate shifts and societal developments,
providing a basis for determining the role of this important resource and
organic carbon pool in future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide valuable new information and insights regarding biomass burning
variability, tropical vegetation fire impacts on the carbon cycle, and the
relationships between fire occurrence, climate, and human activity over the last
1,000 years, during which time Amazonian populations expanded and subsequently
declined, global climate changed significantly, and industrialization occurred.
The biomass burning information generated by this project will help infer
changes in the health of Amazonian forests, which are a vital natural and
economic resource subject to change from both natural and human-related
processes. Amazon Basin vegetation represents a vast sink or source of
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Understanding how past changes in Amazon Basin
vegetation were connected to global climate variability is important in
determining the role of tropical forests in future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;