* 0921794
* Collaborative Research: School Attendance Boundary Information System (SABINS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Salvatore Saporito, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2012
* USD 810,670.00

Collaborative Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0921794&lt;br/&gt;Savatore J.
Saporito&lt;br/&gt;College of William and
Mary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0921279&lt;br/&gt;John R.
Warren&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This award is
funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009(Public Law
111-5)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although geography is an organizing feature of K
to 12 education, the U.S. lacks an integrated database that describes student
populations living in school attendance boundaries. The lack of a spatial
database of school attendance boundaries has hindered the ability of researchers
to undertake large-scale studies that explore phenomena such as the impact of
school quality on housing prices, school socioeconomic composition on
educational outcomes, or levels of racial and economic segregation in school
catchment areas. To improve the quality and accessibility of geographic and
demographic data, this project will assemble and distribute a new spatial
database called the School Attendance Boundary Information System (SABINS). The
data will consist of school attendance boundaries for 800 of the largest school
districts in the country. These school districts contain at least half of the
school-aged population in the U.S. Each school attendance boundary in the SABINS
database will be integrated with data from the 2010 decennial census, the
American Community Survey, and the U.S. Department of Education's Common Core of
Data. Linking demographic data with school catchment areas will allow users to
determine the characteristics of student-aged populations living in thousands of
school zones. SABINS data will be distributed via the National Historic GIS web
site (http://www.nhgis.org/), allowing researchers and educational
administrators to create customized datasets consisting of statistical
information of their choosing. The SABINS Data Project will benefit society by
improving scientific understanding of educational inequality and by allowing
local, state, and federal administrators to deliver educational services more
efficiently.