* 0921507
* Collaborative Research: Property, Power, and Gender-based Violenc
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2014
* Mara Goldman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2014
* USD 145,983.00

SES-0921537 Shelly Grabe University of California-Santa Cruz

SES-0921507 Mara Goldman University of Colorado-Boulder

Domestic violence is recognized internationally as a serious public health
problem with grave implications for the well-being of women. At the same time
risks associated with HIV/AIDS have increased particularly among women across
Sub-Saharan Africa. The proposed research is a theoretically focused empirical
investigation aimed at understanding the social process of violence against
women by examining whether systematic differences in land ownership between men
and women create structural inequalities that contribute to the alarmingly high
rates of domestic violence and HIV infection among women in East Africa. The
goal is to pursue interdisciplinary research on the role of land ownership in
the prevention of violence against women in an understudied region where the
problems of domestic violence and HIV risk among women are acute. In East
Africa, land ownership and control is a sign of power and dominance and,
importantly, new legislation in Tanzania challenges traditional gender ideology
by asserting women's rights to own land. Since violence represents a societal
problem, reducing violence against women requires changes in social structures
and gender ideologies that perpetuate gendered power imbalances. The study will
employ a quasi-experimental, longitudinal design with in-depth qualitative
methods to reinforce large-scale quantitative survey data in order to
investigate whether land ownership provides one potential structure by which
violence against women is supported and sustained. The theories and
methodologies put forth by U.S. social and behavioral sciences are well
positioned to permit high-quality scientific research in the exact areas of
which international bodies are calling for the elimination of discrimination
against women and a better understanding of empowerment processes. This
collaboration facilitates the integration of different, but complimentary,
conceptual and methodological perspectives to more fully understand the
sociocultural mechanisms that perpetuate a system of gender-based violence.

Broader Impacts. The proposed research has several broader impacts. First, the
grant would bring together researchers from the U.S. and Tanzania, thereby
facilitating the necessary international and interdisciplinary collaboration to
conduct a research project of this scope. Research in the social sciences within
the U.S. holds significant promise for making breakthroughs in understanding
social behaviors such as violence against women globally. Second, promotion of
international cooperation across the social sciences will foster effective
research efforts that can achieve a lasting impact in areas consistent with the
U.N. Development Millennium Goals to Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women.
Tremendous changes are occurring so rapidly in many nations that researchers
must move quickly if they are to collect information crucial for understanding
them. Third, the collaboration of junior researchers in a timely area of global
importance is aimed at securing a future generation of researchers expert in
interdisciplinary, collaborative international research.