* 0921411
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Do Courts Matter? Institutional Arrangements, Judicial Impact and the Attitude of Brazilian Federal Agencies Toward Court Decisions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Philip Williams, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,960.00

This dissertation project contributes to the understanding of the relationship
between judicial and executive branches in new democracies through the study of
compliance with court decisions by federal administrative agencies in Brazil.
Looking at the areas of health, social security, and the environment, this
project investigates why and under what conditions federal administrative
agencies in a new democratic regime comply with court decisions. Relevant
factors, it is argued, include agencies' institutional characteristics, the
nature of the policy in dispute, the characteristics of the court decision -
type of legal case and clarity of opinion - and the characteristics of the
federal system in the country.

Methodologically, the project combines quantitative analysis of legal cases,
surveys of judges and agency actors, in-depth interviews with agency personnel,
and archival work on the history of the institutions analyzed. The bulk of the
research consists of the compilation of a database of legal cases in which
agencies faced adverse court decisions and in-depth interviews with court and
agency actors to assess factors affecting agency responses.

Political scientists and legal scholars have yet to fully grapple with the
impact of courts and institutional history in Latin America and new democracies.
As such, the study of bureaucratic response to court rulings addresses a major
gap in the existing literature and - by illuminating aspects of the relationship
between judicial and executive branches in Brazil - furthers our understanding
of how new democracies function.

Responding to increasing concerns about the role of the judiciary in
consolidating democracy, this research project offers important contributions to
the debate on judicial politics and, more broadly, to that of democratization in
Latin America. Finally, the research will also contribute to the development of
a research framework with which to develop regional and cross-regional studies
of judicial impact, and ultimately further illuminate the impact of state
behavior on democracy.