* 0921696
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing Implied Meaning Through Contrastive Prosody
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Heeyeon Dennison, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,472.00

Speakers often imply more meaning than is stated directly in a sentence. What
are the exact cues that listeners employ to construct implied meanings? One
useful cue is sentence prosody, which includes the pitch pattern of the
sentence, known as the intonational contour. This dissertation investigates how
adult listeners of spoken American English interpret intonational contours that
imply contradiction. An example of this is "The cookie jar WAS full?", where a
strong, contrastive accent on 'WAS' is followed by a rise at the end of the
clause. To most listeners, this tune suggests that the cookie jar is no longer
full (as verified by preliminary research for this project). However, the
cognitive processes of interpreting such cues and meanings are underexplored.

Three sets of experiments will exploit distinct methodologies -- Sentence
Continuation, End-of-sentence Picture Naming, and Visual Search with Eye-
tracking -- to investigate a set of carefully matched intonational tunes (e.g.,
neutral, emphatic, and contrastive contours) allowing detailed comparisons of
the relationship between specific parts of the tunes and resulting meanings. The
Sentence Continuation studies will establish the extent to which each type of
contour induces contradictory interpretations, as well as the exact type of
contrast that is conveyed. The Picture Naming studies will explore the time
course of constructing mental representations for both the literal meaning (the
full cookie jar) and an implied contrast (an empty cookie jar). The Visual
Search studies will track listeners' eye-movements to allow a detailed analysis
of the time point at which the pragmatic contrasts emerge from each component of
the intonational tunes. This project will help explain the role of prosody in
higher-level meaning processing. The results should aid speech engineers working
on the improvement of automatic speech generation and recognition and second
language learners of English, among others.