* 0921337
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Engineering the Hog - Cultures of Industrialization within the American "Factory" Farm
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Joseph Masco, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 08/31/2010
* USD 10,000.00

This dissertation project funded by the Science, Technology &amp; Society
Program is a study of workplace cultures within the American "factory" farm. It
asks how 20th century factory models are being unsettled by the ongoing
experiment to translate them onto the production of an unusual object: the
genetics of the industrial hog. This project expands scholarly knowledge in
three domains: 1) the role of the applied biosciences in relation to finance
capitalism; 2) how a de-industrializing American economy entails shifts in the
logics underlying primary production; 3) the cultural processes inherent to
translating forms of social organization across domains (i.e. turning farms into
factories). The research is based on 20 months of archival work, surveys,
interviews and participant-observation across key nodes of the hog industry:
universities, industry journals, conferences, expositions, and corporate
agribusinesses in the Oklahoma Panhandle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Much work within Science and Technology Studies focuses on the relation
between the laboratory and society, or how the diffusion of academic scientific
knowledge entails new social collectivities. By contrast, this research provides
a case study of applied science. It analyzes how the genomic sciences are
opening spaces for industrial development within the United States, the stakes
and motivations behind a scientific practice designed to transform rural
society, and the emergence of mass-production operations modeled on the
speculative principles and cultural logic of venture
capitalism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results are published in peer-
reviewed journals and a book for scholarly audiences. Another book is to be
written about corporate agriculture for a broader public audience. Findings are
presented to ommunities, government agencies, and other constituencies outside
academia. The project also is one of the first studies of organization and
innovation within agribusiness. As such, the study may contain data for use in
legislation on migration, food policy, and scientific funding.