* 0921757
* Transformations in Property Rights and Poverty in Rural Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Kelly Askew, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 379,620.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kelly M. Askew and Dr. Howard
Stein (University of Michigan) will undertake research on the livelihood effects
of planned transformation of local-level economic institutions in post-socialist
contexts. The researchers will test the theory that giving title to land will
reduce poverty by turning common property resources into private resources. The
research will be carried out in Tanzania where title over all land was long
vested in the state, but where there is now a renewed emphasis on land titling
to foster the benefits of private ownership. Because the program is still in
process, the researchers can take advantage of the "natural experiment" of being
able to compare a district (Mbozi) where titling has been completed with another
district (Iringa) in which it has just begun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use a variety of research methods including field observations,
semi-structured and structured interviews, quantitative surveys, and GIS data
collection. They will gather information from farmers, pastoralists, government
officials, banking personnel, non-governmental organizations, and Tanzanian
experts. Their objectives are: (1) to examine and compare how groups and
individuals define the nature of land rights; (2) to identify the winners and
losers in the formalization of land rights; (3) to determine the impact of
titling on rural livelihoods (e.g., access to credit, land productivity, land
values, land market activity); (4) to better understand how titling affects the
land disputes and their resolution; and (5) to identify the impact of titling on
rural people's actual and perceived security of tenure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will contribute to
social science theories of "institutional hiatus," or, what happens when
existing institutions and supporting sociocultural systems are no longer capable
of coordinating economic activity due to shifts in the rules, organizations, or
erosion in capacities. The research also will help formulate policy
recommendations, guidelines, and interventions for the management of land rights
as part of planned poverty alleviation strategies throughout the world.