* 0921657
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:Locating Non-Violence: An Ethnographic Study  of  Contemporary Palestinian Political Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2011
* James Faubion, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2011
* USD 14,563.00

Doctoral student Ala Alazzeh (Rice University), with the guidance of Dr. James
Faubion, will undertake ethnographic research on contemporary Palestinian
political culture. The focus of the research will be on the discourse and
practice of non-violence in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT). The
research is important because it will contribute to the social scientific
understanding of violence, globalization, nationalism, and the Middle East.

The research will be carried out in Bethlehem and Ramallah. The researcher will
use a mix methods approach, including observations, interviews, focus groups,
and archival research. Advocates, political leaders, academics, and local and
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will be among those studied.
The researcher will focus on the local constitution of non-violence ethically,
politically, and practically; the historical development of the non-violent
movements; relationships to other movements, both within the region and beyond;
and local social, economic, and political structures that may affect the
development of non-violence.

This research on non-violence will contribute to broadening our understanding of
the cultural logic of national political violence and the role played by the
influx of ideas, values, and practices that cross national boundaries and
cultural areas. Funding this research also supports the education of a social
scientist.