* 0921093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: When Do Citizens Grasp the Purse Strings? Budget Transparency and Political Engagement in Indonesia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 17,060.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The goal of this project is to explore the link between public demand for and
elected officials? supply of efficient, responsive government. In particular, it
examines three distinct mechanisms for mobilizing grassroots pressure for good
government, and tests the explanatory power of each mechanism through a field
experiment in Indonesia. The first is a rights mechanism, which claims citizens
will hold politicians accountable when they have a clear understanding of their
entitlement to government-provided goods and services. In many new democracies,
even this basic knowledge is fragile. The second is a taxpayer mechanism, which
suggests citizens will only take action when they make fiscal contributions to
government. Since many developing country governments collect only informal
fees, taxes and bribes, the challenge is to encourage citizens to see themselves
more as creditors than debtors to government. The third mechanism centers on
capacity and highlights the importance not of strengthening the motivation but
rather the ability to scrutinize by enhancing citizens? proficiency in basic
budgeting and public finance issues.

To test which mechanism has the most explanatory power, the researcher will
partner with PATTIRO, an Indonesian advocacy organization, to conduct an
information campaign with content that distinctly reflects the rights, taxpayer
and capacity mechanisms. Individuals and villages will be selected to receive
the information randomly. Similar to a clinical drug trial, random selection
creates a 'treatment' group and a 'control' group that are identical in all key
characteristics at the outset. Any difference in outcomes across both groups
following the campaign can then solely be attributed to the impact of the
campaign itself. The impact of each mechanism on individual attitudes and
behavior toward accountability will be measured using a before and after survey
of 1600 individuals sampled from both treatment and control groups.

By identifying the individual level determinants of empowerment, this study will
locate the origins of grassroots pressure for public goods and better government
in developing countries. This project should be of interest not only to
researchers seeking to understand when citizens hold elected officials
accountable but also to the numerous development organizations interested in the
most effective strategies for empowering the marginalized and politically
disadvantaged.