* 0921531
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Who Gets Public Goods? The Politics of Public Service Provision in India
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Miriam Golden, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

How do governments apportion basic public services when budget constraints
necessitate their rationing? This project engages this critical question by
examining the provision of scarce electrical power in northern India over the
last two decades at an unprecedented level of geographic precision. More people
in India lack electricity than any other country in the world, and nowhere more
so than in the state of Uttar Pradesh where an estimated 50 million people are
unconnected to the power grid. Drawing on a novel set of satellite imagery of
nighttime lights, official government data on electricity distribution, and
harnessing geographic information systems technology and statistical methods to
identify patterns of change over time, this research analyzes variations in
electricity provision across Uttar Pradesh over the last four state election
cycles. By observing this period of dramatic social and political change, the
ability of poor citizens to garner improvements in public service delivery via
the polling booth was evaluated. Intensive fieldwork and interviews within one
state assembly constituency were designed to substantiate the results of the
statistical analysis and elucidate causal mechanisms. The results are a detailed
and precise analysis of how an integral public service is distributed in a
democratic region with one of the highest concentrations of poverty in the
world.

The project's intellectual merit lies in its theoretical investigation of how
basic public services are distributed in developing democracies. Since
electricity and other basic services are requisites for economic development,
this research has critical implications for the life prospects of the world's
poor. By testing the observable implications of a theory that links variations
in electoral competitiveness and the value placed on local public goods by
voters, the research in India is designed to explicitly connect with a broader
project that examines the provision of local public goods across the entire
developing world.

The project also has broader impacts by informing scholars and policy makers of
the ways in which political institutions mediate the delivery of public services
to the poor. The study is relevant to all developing democracies in which
governments face the challenge of allocating scarce resources among their
citizenry. In addition, by intensively validating the use of satellite imagery
as an indicator of electrification, the project also opens new opportunities for
the study of electricity provision in the rest of the world. Given that we
simply do not know who gets public services in many countries, the application
of this technology makes a significant contribution to social sciences research