* 0921688
* Participatory Interaction Modeling of Online Geographic Decision Making
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2013
* Robert Aguirre, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 02/28/2013
* USD 215,001.00

Public participation, for example participating in public decision making
contexts meant to choose among alternatives for land, transportation, water
resource improvements within a community, is an important part of exercising
democracy. Unfortunately, few people participate because of time and meeting
constraints. Online geographic information systems technologies have held great
promise for enabling larger groups of residents to engage in decision making;
however, designs for software systems have been ad hoc, thus few successes have
been demonstrated and/or reported for measuring participation to large numbers
of people.

Dr. Timothy Nyerges at the University of Washington will develop a framework for
participatory interaction modeling of online public geographic decision making
by using three objectives: (1) developing a computationally-based model of
public participation that characterizes human-computer-human interaction (HCHI)
processes, (2) refining geovisual analytic technique called a 'grapevine' for
evaluating participatory HCHI data, and (3) developing scaling metrics and
performance indicators that quantiatively characterize public participation HCHI
processes. The computational model is being developed using a database system
that stores data from two previous field experiments. A 'grapevine' prototype
visualization software is being extended to broaden and deepen representations
of HCHI process. Scaling metrics and performance indicators for public
participation are being developed that provide a quantitative assessment of the
success for online public participation.

This project benefits society by developing a framework that will help software
designers and practitioners construct cyber-enabled geographic decision support
systems that can scale potential group participation out to very large groups of
people, up to larger and more diverse parts of society over wider geographic
areas, and greater to include more robust technical competence within the
technical content of the discourse being offered. In addition to those broad-
based impacts, the project includes graduate and undergraduate student
researchers in geography seminar classes in analysis and overall evaluation
about how participatory systems can support disadvantaged and traditionally
underrepresented groups. Results of the study, in terms of data, presentations,
preliminary reports, and publications, are being disseminating via a project web
site.