* 0921486
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Remittances, Morality, and Islamic Reform in Guinea, West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Michael McGovern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 3,225.00

Yale University doctoral student Susanna Fioratta, under the supervision of Dr.
Michael McGovern, will explore the social and moral contexts in which migrant
remittances that provide people with economic security may also become a source
of moral insecurity. Increasing rumors of migrants' involvement in illegal or
immoral activities have led to escalating moral contestations between villagers
and their relatives who are suspected of sending "unclean" money home. Yet,
facing ongoing economic hardship and political uncertainty, recipients rely on
remittances now more than ever. The researcher will investigate how people
linked between generations and across continents negotiate the meanings and
morality of a remittance economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted in Guinea, taking the construction of remittance-funded village
mosques as an ethnographic lens for examining transnational monetary disputes.
This eighteen-month ethnographic study will take place in three villages in the
Fouta Djallon highlands region of Guinea, in Conakry, Guinea's capital, and
among Guinean migrants in Dakar, Senegal. Ethnographic data will be collected
through a variety of methods (semi-structured interviews, oral histories,
migration narratives, genealogical interviews, participant observation and
fieldnotes) to test three major hypotheses, concerning: (1) the uses of
remittance money, (2) moral and religious debates surrounding migrant
remittances, and (3) relations between migrants and their families, as they
affect and are affected by the sending and spending of
remittances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to social
scientific theories of informal economies, religious change, and transnational
migration. The project will also yield critical ethnographic insight into
economic processes that, though vast, remain largely informal, and thus opaque
in the quantitative analyses typically used by international development and
migration policy makers.