* 0921391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining Interethnic Aggression In Israel
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Joshua Gubler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

This project will generate preliminary answers to one of the most pressing
questions in the study of ethnic politics: What are the individual determinants
of physical interethnic aggression? It seeks to explain why one individual
reacts with physical aggression while another does not when faced with what both
perceive to be a threat from a member of the ethnic outgroup. The import of
answers to this question cannot be overstated: Low-level physical interethnic
aggression of the type I seek to explain (i.e. riots, small-group, and
individual-level interethnic aggression), plagues an ever-increasing number of
countries worldwide. This type of aggression is perhaps nowhere more present
than in Israel, the focus of this project. To improve conflict resolution
efforts and to promote more peaceful multi-ethnic communities, we must
understand what drives the individual decision to engage in physical interethnic
aggression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will analyze the interactions
between Israel's two largest ethnic groups: Jewish-Israelis and Arab-Israelis
(restricted to those 18-yrs. and older who have citizenship within the state).
After gathering both qualitative and quantitative data on the number and type of
aggressive incidents between members of these ethnic groups during the years
2000-2008, the researcher will invite a stratified sample of 600 university-aged
young adults from around Israel to participate in a survey and an experiment.
The survey will gather individual-level data that will be used to evaluate
various hypotheses that seek to explain interethnic aggression. Four weeks after
taking the survey, these same individuals will be invited to a research lab to
participate in the experiment to safely gather interethnic aggression data. The
resulting aggression data will be analyzed alongside the survey results and
qualitative data to reach final conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within Israel,
most organizational attempts at preventing interethnic aggression rest on some
variation of Allport?s "contact hypothesis," the idea that individuals will not
aggress against those with whom they have considerable contact. As such, "ethnic
encounter" contact groups of various types dot the country. However, many
activists and scholars currently doubt that these groups mitigate aggression.
This project looks beyond "contact" to identify factors that motivate
interethnic aggression in the hope that a more complete understanding of these
motivations will provide organizations with new direction as they craft policies
and programs to improve or replace these groups. Once the project is completed
in Israel, it will be run in other countries and contexts as well.&lt;br/&gt;