* 0921125
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: On Political Inequality--Measurement, Causes, Effects and Remedies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2011
* Rikhil Bhavnani, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

Although many societies have sought to attain the ideal of political equality,
all societies are politically unequal to varying degrees. Scholars have argued
that political inequality has pernicious effects on a number of socio-economic
outcomes, such as health and income, and have proposed many remedies for
political inequality. Systematic analysis of the causes and effects of, and
remedies for, political inequality is lacking, however. This is the case for at
least two reasons. First, there is no widely-agreed upon and practical way to
measure political inequality across jurisdictions. And second, studies of
political inequality have a hard time ascertaining whether political inequality
causes various socio-economic outcomes or vice-versa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will surmount the measurement problem through designing a "protocol" to
measure political inequality in any jurisdiction, and will demonstrate its use
by implementing it in India. It will address the possibility of reverse
causality by analyzing detailed socio-economic data from a number of "natural
experiments" in India. India is an appropriate context for studying political
inequality because the country has large sub-national (geographical, community
and class-based) variation in political access, and because the country has
repeatedly tried to mitigate these inequities. The natural experiments studied
will be used to examine the effects of political inequality due to
malapportionment in a context not considered by the literature (parliamentary
systems), and will analyze the efficacy of a common remedy (electoral quotas)
for political inequality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
study include the potential to catalyze a research program on political
inequality by demonstrating that political inequality is measureable and is
amenable to study. The resulting research program will be significant because
while political equality is a widely-espoused normative ideal, we have little
empirical knowledge about the phenomenon. The project will also help advance
existing research programs on political recruitment and policy making. Lastly,
this research promises to have important policy implications since it will allow
us to better understand the causes and effects of, and remedies for, political
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;