* 0921173
* The Influence of Television Content on Very Young Children's Play
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Daniel Anderson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 289,575.00

Since the early 1990s American infants and toddlers have increasingly watched
television, including "baby videos" and TV programs that have been made for
them. Little is known about the impact of watching television on infant and
toddler behavior, including their play with toys. Nearly all theories of human
development assert that toy play is important for cognitive, social, and
physical development. While it is well known that television influences play and
play themes in older children, nothing is known about its impact on toddler toy
preference and play. From one point of view it can be supposed that TV has
little effect on play because toddlers can understand little of what they see on
TV. From another point of view, television may have a substantial effect because
it may influence toy preference and it has been claimed to place the child in a
passive mode of cognition and behavior that transfers to other activities
following viewing. Toys directed at very young children, moreover, are
frequently based on or are branded with television characters. Such licensed
products are expensive, so presumably the manufacturers believe that very young
children positively respond to this branding. Nothing is known about the age at
which children begin to prefer toys based on television characters or how TV
viewing influences play at early ages. This research examines the effect of
television on toy play by 1- and 2-year-old children and consists of three types
of studies, all conducted in a laboratory playroom. The initial study determines
at what age children develop preferences for toys based on television series.
The research also determines whether toy play following TV viewing is different
from toy play following a book reading session with a parent. Specifically, the
research examines play episode length, focused attention during play, and play
maturity following TV viewing. Second, the research determines whether
television character behavior influences toy preference and the type of play in
which very young children engage. Children will be shown TV segments in which
the characters engage in prosocial behavior such as sharing, hugging, or taking
turns, or in which characters engage in aggressive and antisocial behavior. The
question is whether very young children show preferences for either prosocial or
antisocial television characters and if so, whether their play differs based on
what they have watched. Third, the research examines the role of program
comprehensibility and program type (emphasizing construction activities or
emphasizing character interactions). If very young children are affected by
content, then play should emphasize preference for construction toys after
watching the educational program that features construction activities. On the
other hand, they should prefer play with toys based on characters after watching
the entertainment story-based program. If they actually have some sequential and
linguistic understanding of the programs, their toy preference and play activity
should be much less pronounced after watching reduced-comprehensibility versions
of the TV programs (created by putting shots in random order and making dialogue
run backwards).

In 1999 the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended that children under 2
years of age not watch television. Several studies since then have reported that
TV viewing by very young children is associated with slower cognitive and
language development as well as attention deficit symptoms. It is not known,
however, what factors produce these associations, or even whether the
relationship is causal. Nevertheless, despite the warning flags raised by these
studies, recent surveys have indicated that TV viewing by American infants and
toddlers has steadily increased. The present research adds important information
about possible mechanisms of television influence where nothing is now known.
Does television influence play behavior in very young children? If so, what is
the nature of the influence? Play is thought to be developmentally important and
also constitutes a large portion of very young children's waking time. Knowing
whether and how television influences play may help provide one plausible
mechanism by which television, in a cumulative fashion, exerts an influence on
development.