* 0921856
* Quantifier Scope and Prosodic Effects in Russian
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Bailyn, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2011
* USD 11,900.00

Quantifier scope ambiguities exist in sentences such as "Some student likes
every teacher", in which "some student" could refer to a particular student, or
to a different student for each teacher. These ambiguities have traditionally
been investigated in the generative literature by relying on intuitions of
native speakers to introspect on which interpretations are and are not
available. Such studies tend to ignore extra-syntactic factors such as prosody
and information structure because such sentences are typically read silently.
There is currently a growing body of evidence, however, suggesting that extra-
syntactic information, especially sentence prosody, is relevant for determining
which scope interpretations are available. This project investigates the complex
phenomenon of quantifier scope in Russian focusing on the role of prosodic cues
in determining the interpretation(s) of potentially scopally ambiguous
sentences. The project will conduct experiments in which native speakers are
presented with such sentences under different prosodic patterns. The goal is to
determine whether the distinct intonations result in different scope
interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental results obtained in this
project will contribute to the description of the intonational of Russian and
clarify the status of quantifier scope ambiguities that have been much debated
in the recent literature on Russian syntax. The results will further the field's
understanding of quantifier scope in relation to less well understood aspects
prosody. The project's focus on the interaction of prosody, syntax, and
semantics contributes to the growing body of work investigating interface
effects in language, particularly the relationship between prosody and meaning.
It also highlights the need for experimental research methods to answer
linguistic questions.