* 0921131
* Development and Assessement of Self-Assessed Scales for Everyday Environmental Knowledge (SEEK)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,12/31/2012
* Michael Goodchild, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2012
* USD 200,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Everyday spatial behaviors in geographic space are essential activities in a
person's life. Researchers have not yet developed instruments that sufficiently
examine and evaluate these spatial behaviors, which include, among others,
wayfinding, following directions, and learning new environments. Numerous
psychometric tests exist that examine spatial abilities at the "table top"
scale, but these tests are limited and relatively unsuccessful when trying to
explain variations in everyday geographic spatial behavior. This project will
develop and evaluate a series of self-assessed Scales for Everyday Environmental
Knowledge (SEEK), which are designed to give a baseline indication of personal
confidence when undertaking person-environment interactions and which can be
used as variables in explanatory schema of human behavior in real-world
environments. I n the first phase of this project, the investigators will
examine the SEEK scales for internal consistency and reliability. They also will
correlate the scales, which consist of statements with which a person strongly
agrees or disagrees, with measures of spatial task performance. Considerable
research has found that self-report assessment scales generally are positively
correlated in particular task environments with measures of spatial knowledge
acquired from direct experience. A selection of laboratory and real-world task
scenarios will be set up as experimental tasks, and the performance on these
tasks will be evaluated using one or more of the SEEK scores. In the second
phase of the study, the investigators will use these scales in a longitudinal
analysis of a particular disabled group, those suffering from the onset of
Alzheimer's disease. Decreasing spatial abilities are an early sign of
Alzheimer's disease, and this often rapidly progressing condition presents major
declines in a person's quality of life. Despite the severity of this situation,
few research efforts have investigated how changes in spatial abilities in this
population can be assessed and monitored over time. By employing the SEEK
scales, researchers hope to develop a simple, low-cost, non-invasive instrument
that can complement sophisticated predictive testing methods for Alzheimer?s
disease.

This project will address the pressing need for assessment methods of spatial
knowledge characteristics and human spatial behavior in geographic spaces. The
project will improve the methodology available to researchers who want to gain
knowledge about people's existing environmental memory, and predict their
environmental spatial behavior in familiar and unfamiliar environments. It also
has great potential for practical applications. The SEEK scales will be
applicable in various settings where it is beneficial to add the self-assessment
of a specific spatial ability to the set of variables that explain certain types
of spatial behavior. These settings include research in spatial abilities,
aptitude assessments for jobs that require high spatial abilities, such as taxi
driver or parcel delivery, and education in the STEM disciplines where research
shows a correlation with high spatial abilities.

