* 0921718
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Decentralizing Democracy: Urban Participation in Chavez's Venezuela
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Kay Warren, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 12,570.00

Doctoral student Kendra Fehrer Ponniah (Brown University), supervised by Dr. Kay
B. Warren, will undertake ethnographic research on citizen engagement in
participatory community development programs. The researcher aims to understand
how these programs shape the way people, particularly poor people, think about
politics, citizenship, and the state.

This researcher will conduct 12 months of field research focused on a program
meant to foster grassroots participation in neighborhood development decisions
in a low-income urban neighborhood in central Venezuela. The researcher will use
the results of social history interviews, participant observation, in-depth
interviews with participants and public officials, document analysis, and
comparative case study to explore (1) how community actors frame their demands
for material and cultural resources; (2) how community actors' demands intersect
with local and national government priorities; (3) how these new venues for
participation influence community access to resources; and (4) how these
initiatives shape who gets to "count" as a citizen in Venezuela.

This research is important because it will contribute insight into the
relationship between decentralization, democratic participation, and development
by adding an ethnographic study of practices of civic participation. This
research will contribute to academic and policy discussions of civic
participation in public programs, as well as understandings of how conceptions
of citizenship are produced in different social, political, and historic
contexts. Funding this research also supports the education of a social
scientist.