* 0921617
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Agricultural Consumption Patterns and Formative Period Sociopolitical Developments at the Maya Site of San Estevan
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2009,03/31/2011
* Mary Pohl, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2011
* USD 13,390.00

Dr. Mary Pohl will supervise Daniel Seinfeld's dissertation project that
examines the relationship between food consumption patterns and the origins of
social and political complexity among the ancient Maya at the site of San
Estevan, northern Belize. The transition from the Middle (900-300 B.C.) to the
Late Formative period (300 B.C.-A.D. 300) witnessed the development of
hierarchical rulership at sites throughout Northern Belize, including San
Estevan. During this time villages developed into cities that were ruled by an
elite class who built monumental architecture and espoused an ideology claiming
privileges because of supernatural connections. Mr. Seinfeld's work will clarify
how agricultural and dietary practices may have changed with these developments
by tracking food consumption patterns during the Middle through Late Formative
periods at San Estevan. This investigation will involve paleobotanical (ancient
plant remains) and molecular analyses of materials excavated from domestic
middens dating to the Middle and Late Formative periods at the
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ an innovative combination of
paleobotanical and molecular techniques to study ancient food consumption.
Analysis will integrate data from paleobotanical macroremains with two forms of
molecular analysis (bulk stable carbon isotope analysis and compound-specific
stable carbon isotope analysis) aimed at detecting maize residues absorbed in
ceramics. These analyses work because maize has a distinct isotopic signature
from most other terrestrial plants in the area. Changes in agricultural
consumption patterns will be determined by comparing the results of
paleobotanical and molecular analyses on materials from Middle and Late
Formative period midden contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
intellectual merit is to improve understanding of how agricultural and dietary
practices relate to wider changes in a culture's ideology and sociopolitical
organization. The innovative combination of methods used to explore ancient food
consumption patterns may be used in future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will have broader impacts beyond its immediate research goals by
contributing to the wider academic community and by training graduate and
undergraduate students. The current project is part of a wider research endeavor
at San Estevan involving faculty and students from multiple universities
studying political economy and subsistence at the site. Results will be
presented in a dissertation that will be available online along with a database
of the analytical results. Data from this dissertation project will also be
disseminated to the wider academic community through publications and conference
presentations in the United States and Belize. The availability of the data will
benefit researchers conducting comparative studies of subsistence practices. To
complete this project, Mr. Seinfeld will receive training in paleobotanical
analysis and advanced molecular analysis techniques. The project will also
provide training opportunities for undergraduate volunteers to assist in sorting
paleobotanical macroremains and preparing samples for molecular analysis.