* 0921874
* Collaborative Research:   Novel Corticosteroid Actions on Neurotransmitter Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2014
* Kenneth Renner, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2014
* USD 272,456.00

When an organism is exposed to a wide range of stressors, a neuroendocrine
cascade leads to the release of stress hormones (corticosteroids) into the
bloodstream. The corticosteroids produce changes in physiology and brain
function that are crucial for dealing with emergencies, but persistent elevation
of corticosteroids produce the well known deleterious effects of stress. All
vertebrates need a rapid and robust stress response as well as an effective
means of terminating this response. The brain mechanisms that terminate this
response remain poorly understood. These studies investigate a novel mechanism
through which stress hormones could provide negative feedback to terminate the
stress response. Collaborative experiments will be conducted at Arizona State
University, University of Colorado and University of South Dakota to test the
hypothesis that corticosteroids block clearance of the neurotransmitter
serotonin in specific brain regions during a stress response leading to negative
feedback and associated changes in behavior. State-of-the-art neurochemical,
brain imaging and behavioral studies will determine whether corticosteroids
block serotonin transport via a newly described transporter in brain, leading to
enhanced serotonin signaling and suppression of the stress response. These
studies will also serve to train students (graduate, undergraduate, and high
school) and post-doctoral researchers in cutting-edge neuroscience research. The
research training provided by the principle investigators (PIs) is important for
encouraging young students to appreciate scientific reasoning and pursue careers
in science. Collectively, the PIs have sponsored over 100 undergraduate research
projects from students with diverse backgrounds, and each of the PIs also has a
long track record of dedication to graduate student education and research. With
these studies, each PI will continue to make explicit efforts to reach out to
economically disadvantaged or underrepresented groups.