* 0921276
* Distinguishing Impulse Strength from Self-control Strength as Causes of Self-control Failure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Eddie Harmon-Jones, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 08/31/2013
* USD 374,865.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Self-control is an important key to success in life insofar as individuals who
succeed at self-control enjoy more satisfying interpersonal relationships,
better physical health, and greater subjective well-being than do people who
fail at self-control. Understanding the underpinnings of self-control is
therefore crucial for understanding success in life. The purpose of this
proposal is to integrate theory and research regarding impulse strength and
self-control strength -- two major causes of self-control outcomes that have
been conflated or studied in isolation in previous research. The researchers
propose that impulse strength (i.e., the motivational force of an impulse) and
self-control strength (i.e., the person's capacity to control impulses) are
distinct but dynamically-interacting causes of self-control failure. The central
hypothesis is that exercising self-control may paradoxically lead to a temporary
increase in impulse strength, which in turn may increase the likelihood of self-
control failure. In addition to short-term changes in impulse strength, the
proposed research will also examine enduring individual differences in impulse
strength and self-control strength to differentiate their contributions to
failures of self-control. The proposed research features several different
manipulations and measures of impulse strength and self-control strength,
respectively, including perceptual acuity, attentional breadth, startle
responses, impulse control, pain tolerance, participants' self-reports, and
brain activity. The use of multiple measures also increases the validity and
generality of the research spanning multiple levels of analysis. The
intellectual significance of the research and its broader impact both derive
from the implications for understanding the causes of self-control failure. For
example, ascertaining whether failures of self-control stem mainly from overly
strong impulses or weak self-control strength will suggest the most promising
routes by which to minimize self-control failure. Self-control failure plays a
central role in several undesirable behaviors, from unhealthy eating and
profligate spending to violent behavior and drug abuse.