* 0921767
* The  Cost of Rights or the Right Cost? The Impact of Global Economic and Human Rights Policies on Child Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2012
* Elizabeth Boyle, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 158,649.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009"
(Public Law 111-5)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Are new international laws promoting the
rights of children effective? Under what conditions? Since 1989, nearly every
country in the world has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
making it the most widely ratified treaty ever. The world has thus made a formal
commitment to promote children's rights. This project assesses the impact of
this formal commitment on the lives of children and identify the range of
factors that work with international law to improve children's well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International child-rights treaties may only be window
dressing, designed to make countries look good but easily evaded. If this is
true, other factors may also be necessary to encourage nation-states to live up
to treaty obligations. Perhaps national laws promoting child rights, or the
presence of child-rights interest groups within countries, are also essential.
Where do global economic trends fit in? In the recent past, international
financial institutions promoted the privatization of social services, requiring
families to pay fees to use those services. This may have discouraged parents
from sending children to school and or getting the children medical treatments.
Global economic policies were also, until very recently, promoting the global
flow of capital unhindered by borders or regulation. This could also affect
child well-being, although more indirectly. This project will identify the many
factors that facilitate or impede the implementation of international
law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer the questions posed, the
researchers gather and code data on international and national child rights
policies and international and national economic policies and characteristics.
They also compile measures of several dimensions of child well-being over time
for most countries in the world. These dimensions include child survival (e.g.,
health and mortality); child development (e.g., educational enrollments); equal
opportunity for children regardless of race, creed, gender, etc.; and the
integration of children?s best interests into policymaking. The researchers use
these data in pooled time-series analyses to determine the circumstances under
which international law is most effective. The comprehensive dataset constructed
for this project will be made publicly available so that other researchers can
answer related questions concerning child rights.