* 0921203
* Collaborative research:  Branching in chloridoid grasses: phylogeny and inflorescence diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Amanda Ingram, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 08/31/2013
* USD 217,803.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5). The chloridoid grasses are a large, economically and
ecologically important group of approximately 1500 species in 150 genera that
have been classified using the highly variable features of the inflorescence
(how flowers are arranged). Despite their importance, relatively little is known
about the relationships among the species or the regulation of inflorescence
development, so these issues will be addressed through studies of all genera and
one-third of the species. DNA sequences will be used to reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships and create a new classification, and inflorescences
will be studied from early in development to maturity to characterize the
differences in an evolutionary context. Genes involved in inflorescence
development of other species will be examined for their role in chloridoids.
Chloridoid grasses are economically important because several species are grown
as food crops or turf grasses for humans, and many provide livestock forage.
Understanding the evolution of the group and the regulation of inflorescence
development can have important implications for crop or turf improvement as
others seek sources of desirable traits or increased grain yields. In addition
to the principal investigators, the project involves undergraduate students at a
small college, as well as graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar. The
research findings will be broadly disseminated through print and online outlets.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract Proposal:0920147 PI Name:Columbus,
J. Travis Printed