* 0921535
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Lived Experiences of Asylum Seekers in the Urban Midwest
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Janis Jenkins, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 07/31/2010
* USD 14,910.00

This project focuses on African migrants seeking political asylum in the urban
Midwest as they navigate the complex politico-legal landscape of contemporary
U.S. migration policies. Specifically, the research investigates how the process
of seeking asylum contributes to the shaping of migrants? subjectivities by
examining: a) the various discourses and resources that institutional bodies
(immigration officials or non-governmental organization workers) draw upon to
render the asylum seeker a knowable and manageable object, and b) the ways in
which asylum seekers negotiate these institutionally-produced forms of
subjectivity, at turns adopting, resisting, or transforming them. The tension
between the discourses of human rights (and, increasingly, of trauma), on the
one hand, and the discourses of national security, on the other, is especially
palpable in a post-9/11 U.S., as recent legal and political measures have made
asylum seeking an increasingly onerous process. Data collection includes semi-
structured and unstructured interviews, and participant observation, and will
occur both in institutional settings (among immigration officials, NGO workers)
and within the everyday social worlds of asylum seekers. Data collected among
institutional bodies will elicit information on how asylum seekers are
constructed as ?deserving? (or not) of legal status, and how transnational
discourses of human rights, trauma, and national security are negotiated by
those who enact migration law. Data collected among asylum seekers will provide
insight into how migrants agentively respond to the social and political
categories imposed on them via legal and institutional bodies, as well as how
asylum seekers both shape and are shaped by the legal processes in which they
are embedded. This project contends that the current historical moment provides
a unique opportunity to examine the lived consequences (both intended and
unintended) of immigration laws and practices. The study also aims to elucidate
how different actors, within the same context, make law meaningful in disparate
ways. Finally, the research seeks to address the paucity of ethnographic work
within refugee studies more broadly.