* 0921516
* Implicit Stereotyping and Prejudice:  Strategies and Processes of Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* Margo Monteith, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 08/31/2013
* USD 450,000.00

This project capitalizes upon current understanding of implicit attitudes in
social psychology. The study of implicit processes has been especially prevalent
in the area of stereotyping and prejudice where researchers have determined that
attitudes and associations activated implicitly may be consistent with or
strikingly contradictory to attitudes activated explicitly. For example, White
people's explicit attitudes may lead them to espouse egalitarian and non-
prejudiced attitudes toward African Americans. However, various cognitive,
motivational and social processes can simultaneously lead to negative implicit
attitudes and stereotypic associations in relation to African Americans. These
associations have been linked to discriminatory outcomes in many domains,
including education, psychological health, employment outcomes, medical care,
and policing. Therefore, understanding how implicit biases can be changed is
critically important not only for advances in our knowledge of attitudes, but
also for reducing the pervasive consequences of implicit prejudice.

The purpose of the research in this grant is to improve understanding of the
potential effectiveness of different strategies for changing implicit attitudes,
the time course and persistence of change brought about through these
strategies, as well as the underlying processes through which change may be
achieved. In addition, the research examines the effects of implicit bias
reduction strategies on judgmental and evaluative behavioral outcomes in short
and long term contexts, and with respect to interracial interactions. The first
set of experiments examines the effectiveness of intergroup bias reduction
strategies among Whites. The second set of experiments examines the effects of
the change strategies on judgmental and evaluative behavioral outcomes. The
final set of experiments focuses on the outcomes of implicit bias change among
members of stereotyped groups who have negative implicit biases related to their
own group. Ultimately, this research will advance current understanding of the
interplay of automatic and controlled processes by providing and testing a
framework of implicit bias change.