* 0921924
* GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION IN ENVIRONMENTS AND EXTINCTION IN THE CARIBBEAN
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Jeremy Jackson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Boush
* 08/31/2011
* USD 160,948.00

Geographic Variation in Environments and Extinction in the Caribbean Jeremy B.
Jackson University of California, San Diego, Scripts Institute of Oceanography

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Understanding the causes of major extinction events is often hampered by a lack
of rigorous environmental and biological data and limited geographic coverage,
which can help determine how closely events in one region are mirrored in
others. The PI proposes to document patterns of environmental and evolutionary
change in the Northern Caribbean (NC; Jamaica and the Dominican Republic) over
the past ten million years and compare these patterns with similar data already
obtained from the southwestern Caribbean (otherwise the SWC), including Panama
and Costa Rica. The SWC experienced a dramatic decrease in seasonal upwelling
and productivity due to the rise of the Panamanian Isthmus, and detailed
evolutionary studies of bryozoans and scallops strongly support the hypothesis
that decline in productivity was responsible for the very high extinction and
speciation in these groups. Previous taxonomic studies suggest that extinction
was comparably strong and occurred at about the same time in the NC, but the
very limited data available suggest that there may not have been an equivalent
drop in productivity. This study will provide the first detailed environmental
and biological data to document the sequence of changes in the NC. Data will be
entirely comparable with those from the SWC because they will be collected and
analyzed using the same methods and criteria. Results will provide a definitive
test of the productivity hypothesis over a broad region. If productivity did
decline in the NC there will be little need to look for alternative
explanations. But if productivity did not decline, then other factors must also
have played an important role in Caribbean extinction. Possible alternatives
include oceanographic changes due to regional cooling or increased rates of rise
and fall of sea level associated with the intensification of Northern Hemisphere
glaciation that occurred about one million years after the closure of the
Panamanian Portal. The project is highly feasible because extensive geological
and paleontological investigations over the past 25 years have provided the
necessary stratigraphic framework to begin to fit all the different pieces of
the story together.