* 0921797
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Anthropological Research on Religious Conversion, Women, and  Islam in Southern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Sandra Canas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Texas doctoral student Sandra Canas, under the supervision of Dr.
Shannon Speed, will undertake research on the growing Muslim community in
southern Mexico, where hundreds of poor indigenous people are reported to have
converted in recent years. The focus of Canas' research will be Mayan women
converts in Chiapas and the relation between their conversion and their
struggles for land entitling. The research is important because religious
conversion under conditions of socioeconomic stress is known to be a worldwide
phenomenon, but the conversion of indigenous people to Islam in Latin America is
a more recent and less well-understood development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
more than 10 years, indigenous Muslims in Chiapas, along with other indigenous
people, have struggled to regularize their use of urban lands, which they
occupied after being forced off rural agricultural land. Preliminary resarch has
found that women have actively participated in the land regularization struggle,
and some use Islam as a resource to do so. At the same time they show increasing
interest in learning about their new religion, in discussing the sacred texts,
and in attempting to selectively incorporate Islamic tradition into their daily
lives and their changing understandings of citizenship and nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will undertake 12 months of
anthropological field research in Chiapas. She will conduct household surveys,
carry out extended participant observation, do unstructured interviews, and
explore archival resources. Her overarching research goals are to: (a) explore
religious conversion, gender dynamics, and citizenship among Mayans Muslims in
Southern Mexico; and (b) analyze the relationship between conversion processes
and social mobilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethnographically grounded
research on new Muslim communities is important for deepening our understanding
of conversion processes within globalized and multiethnic environments. This is
especially the case for Latin America, where almost no research has been done on
conversion to Islam.