* 0921538
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Policy Tool Bundling: Predicting the Selection of Economic Development Policy Instruments Using a Multivariate Probit Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Richard Feiock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 10,500.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling choices of economic
development incentive tools requires integration of a complex system of
political and economic considerations and accounting for relationships among
specific instruments within a bundle of policy options. Previous studies of
policy instrument choice focus almost exclusively on individual policy tools in
isolation. This neglects the reality that multiple tools work in conjunction
with one another. Relationships among economic development incentives can result
from local officials' pursuit of efficiencies, such as scale economies, or their
pursuit of political gains, from satisfying ideological or constituency demands.
The selection of any policy alternative is not independent of the other policy
options. Just as with economic goods, policy tools can operate as complements or
substitutes.&lt;br/&gt; This dissertation develops a theory of policy tool
bundling to explain the configurations of development policies cities adopt to
promote their economic or political interests. The policy bundling approach
builds on extant research from the tools of government and policy diffusion
literatures by investigating how factors internal to local governments and
external pressures from neighboring jurisdictions influence the set of policy
instruments selected. Pooled, longitudinal data is employed to identify
codependences among incentives policies for Georgia cities. The longitudinal
nature of the study allows predictions of the influence of previous and current
economic policies choices while avoiding spurious relationships. Focusing on one
state facilitates the inclusion of diffusion variables capturing the actions of
surrounding communities. The influences of political institutions, particularly
the presence of professional managers and at-large council representation are
expected to encourage policy bundling based on efficiency concerns. The presence
of elected executives and district representation are expected to encourage
bundling based on political interests. A Bayesian multivariate probit model is
used to predict economic policy choice because it allows simultaneous estimation
of multiple policy adoptions and identification substitutive and complementary
effects. &lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this dissertation is derived from
the synthesizing of the policy tools and diffusion policy theoretical frameworks
to explain policy bundling. Systematic investigation of policy interdependencies
is absent from extant empirical research in both areas. The theory of policy
bundling developed in this research seeks to fill this lacuna and can be
extended to numerous policy areas including economic development, environmental
regulation, tax policy, and numerous other government initiatives which utilize
multiple instruments simultaneously. Thus, this research promises to benefit
both academics and practitioners and expand our understanding of how political
institutions influence policy outcomes.