* 0921573
* Geography, Diversity and the Origins of the Wealth of Nations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,06/30/2011
* Oded Galor, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2011
* USD 106,898.00

Existing theories of comparative development highlight a variety of proximate
and ultimate factors underlying some of the vast inequities in living standards
across the globe.The importance of geographical, cultural and institutional
factors, human capital formation, ethnic, linguistic, and religious
fractionalization, colonialism, and globalization has been at the center of a
debate regarding the origins of the di¤erential timing of transitions from
stagnation to growth and the remarkable transformation of the world income
distribution in the past two centuries. While theoretical and empirical research
has typically focused on the contemporaneous e¤ects of such factors in giving
rise to and sustaining the divergence in income per capita since the Industrial
Revolution, attention has recently been drawn towards "deep-rooted" factors that
have been argued to affect the course of comparative economic development from
the dawn of human civilization to the modern era. The proposed research will
advance a novel hypothesis that "deep-rooted" factors, determined tens of
thousands of years ago, had a significant effect on the course of economic
development and thus on contemporary living standards across the globe. The
research will empirically establish that migratory distance from the
geographical origin of Homo sapiens in east Africa significantly affected the
pattern of development across societies. In particular, it will demonstrates
that in the course of the exodus of humans out of Africa, variation in migratory
distance generated heterogeneity in the degree of genetic diversity across
societies,which had a long-lasting effect on comparative development across
countries. Moreover, genetic diversity will be shown to have a non-monotonic
effect on development outcomes, reflecting the economic trade-off associated
with diversity within a society. While an intermediate level of genetic
diversity will be shown to be conducive for economic development, a high or a
low degree of diversity is a detrimental force in the growth process. This
interdisciplinary research is likely to foster interaction between researchers
in the fields of economics, evolutionary biology, anthropology, and geography
and to redirect research in these disciplines into important unexplored
territories. Moreover, it will yield important, novel, policy implications by
contributing to the understanding the role of diversity, broadly defined, in
sustaining the growth process of advanced economies and in facilitating the
economic take-off of less developed economies.