* 0921670
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:How the Prospect of Judicial Review Shapes Bureaucratic Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2010
* Georg Vanberg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 07/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Many observers view the judiciary as the weakest branch of American government
due to its inability to unilaterally create policies and enforce change in
domestic politics without the action of Congress and the president. Perhaps for
this reason, existing research has often overlooked how federal agencies might
strategically anticipate the influence of courts in the policymaking process.
This project examines the extent to which the prospect of judicial review shapes
the behavior of federal agencies in the enforcement process. In particular, it
considers: (1) how bureaucrats might alter their regulatory enforcement behavior
in light of the ideological composition of relevant courts; and (2) the degree
to which Congress considers the potential for judicial influence on federal
agencies when delegating bureaucratic policy
discretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constructs original data sets
measuring regulatory enforcement behavior by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), and Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), as well as congressional delegation of policy discretion to these various
agencies. Previous studies largely rely on cross-sectional data and focus
entirely on the behavior of a single agency. Similiarly, the limited attention
to judicial influence on federal agencies does not enable previous scholars to
offer a comprehensive account of interinstitutional politics in the bureaucratic
policymaking process. This project will enhance scholarly understanding of
judicial influence in the policymaking process by examining multiple
bureaucratic agencies with sufficient data to conduct longitudinal analyses over
a greater time span. Furthermore, by evaluating the potential role that courts
play in the policymaking process, this project will contribute to the study of
how interinstitutional politics shape oversight of agency behavior and
bureaucratic decision making more generally.