* 0921896
* Marriage in Context: External Factors and Relationship Maintenance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Lisa Neff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sally Dickerson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 599,680.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to extend
current models of marital development by examining the links between external
stress and relationship behaviors through the assessment of marital quality, and
relationship skills of couples over the early years of marriage. Specifically,
the project aims to offer a new perspective on prior research arguing that
possessing good relationship skills may protect a marriage from the detrimental
effects of associated with various stressors. Rather than buffering the
marriage, relationship skills may deteriorate and thus actually represent the
mechanism through which certain factors impact marital quality. The project will
assess the resources couples have for addressing problems that arise, in order
to identify factors that may promote resilience in marital quality. The
investigator will collect data from a sample of 150 first time married, newlywed
couples at five time points over the first three years of their marriage.
Eligible couples will be scheduled for a laboratory session and mailed an
initial packet containing self-report measures to complete at home, as well as
envelopes for each spouse. Couples will be instructed to complete their
questionnaires without consulting one another, seal their forms in the
individual envelopes, and bring their envelopes to the lab session. During the
lab session, each couple will engage in videotaped problem-solving discussions
to assess conflict behaviors. After the session, couples will be asked to
complete a one-page diary questionnaire each evening for seven nights. A wide
variety of measures of marital outcomes, adaptive processes, external stressors,
coping resources, and marital experiences will be included. Thus, spouses' pro-
relationship behaviors will be assessed in multiple ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to shed light on the life events that
may inhibit successful relationship functioning. Understanding the dynamics and
contexts that account for successful marital outcomes should, in turn, have a
broader impact on society by helping to inform practices that help the marital
unit, and direct resources toward practices most likely to be effective in
strengthening families.