* 0921570
* Generating Popular Support in Non-Democratic Regimes: The Case of China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Bruce Dickson, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 390,872.00

Popular support for the incumbent regime is widely recognized to facilitate the
durability of democratic regimes, but its role in sustaining non-democratic
regimes has not received systematic empirical inquiry. Numerous studies have
found a remarkably high level of popular support for the incumbent regime in
China despite the lack of transparent institutions, effective governance, and
accountability to the people it governs. Existing academic studies on regime
support in China are not conclusive: they include little regional variation,
concentrate on a single social sector rather than the general population, or are
based on data from ten or more years ago. Moreover, studies of governance and
public goods provision in China - crucial in generating regime support - do not
link these factors to the level of regime support. This project gathers more
accurate, more generalizable, and more timely data from an original survey and
from secondary sources. These individual-level and aggregate data are used to
test hypotheses concerning the socioeconomic and contextual determinants of
regime support in China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this study
address two critical and much debated theoretical questions: (1) how do non-
democratic regimes, which lack the transparency and accountability necessary to
gather meaningful feedback, generate popular support; and (2) what factors
influence popular attitudes towards the current regime, and the potential
support for regime change? These theoretical questions are derived not only from
current debates about political developments in China, but also reflect ongoing
scholarly debates regarding the sustainability of authoritarian regimes and the
cultural, structural, and strategic variables that influence regime
survival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration
of Research and Education: The project includes the participation of graduate
research assistants to promote the integration of their education with original
research. The resulting products are also be appropriate as college
texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Scholarly Cooperation: this project
benefits scholarly cooperation between American and Chinese scholars. It
includes a collaboration between the PI and the Research Center for Contemporary
China of Peking University. Collaboration between American and Chinese scholars
remains limited, and this project contributes to improving that relationship,
lay the foundation for increased cooperation in the future, and thereby lead to
more fruitful academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy Impact: The
findings from this project will have immediate implications for American foreign
policy. Many policy makers assume that promoting the economic development of
China will hasten its democratization. However, the Chinese government expects
that economic growth will bolster its popular support, not present a threat to
its authority. Thus, a better understanding of the goals and preferences of
China's population, as well as its leaders, and the level of popular support for
the current regime is necessary to evaluate the prospects for political change
and to devise proper policies to promote it.