* 0921071
* Integrated Studies of Auxin, Light, and Seedling Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Wyatt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 600,000.00

Edgar P. Spalding&lt;br/&gt;IOS-0921071&lt;br/&gt;Integrated Studies of Auxin,
Light, and Seedling Morphogenesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical phase in the
life cycle of a plant is the few days during which the embryo within a seed
transforms (develops) into a seedling capable of fending for itself. In
agricultural settings, much of crop success depends on seedling establishment
progressing robustly. The current project continues a line of research aimed at
understanding how growth and development in the Arabidopsis thaliana plant is
responsive to the environmental conditions pertaining as the seedling emerges
through the soil. The cryptochrome photoreceptor protein is known to be
responsible for detecting the light environment into which the seedling is
emerging, and the plant growth hormone auxin is known to play a role as a key
internal regulator of the processes that light triggers through cryptochrome.
The project will focus on the molecular mechanisms that link the cryptochrome
functions to the auxin functions. What is learned will deepen our understanding
of how seedlings become productive plants and increase our understanding of the
basic biology underpinning the processes by which humans obtain food, fiber and,
increasingly, fuels. Also, because the molecules to be studied in the project
all have human counterparts, what is learned could impact cancer and immunology
research. For example, the auxin-transporting multidrug resistance molecule to
be studied here is the plant equivalent of the MDR1 protein that causes cancer
tumors to become resistant to chemotherapy. Plant MDR1 binds to the
immunophilin-like molecule TWD1 to perform its function. In humans,
immunophilins are the target of transplant rejection drugs. The chance for
human-health related discoveries is significant. The computational tools
developed to make the measurements of growth and development will be adapted to
create dynamic, engaging devices to teach students at all levels about seedling
developmental responses to the environment. A postdoctoral scientist and a
graduate student will be trained in a unique combination of biological and
computational techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;