* 0921265
* Biochemistry and Genetics of Anaerobic Alkane Metabolism:  Interrogation of Sulfate-Reducing Isolates and Enrichments Using Genome-Enabled and Proteomic Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2009,09/30/2013
* Amy Callaghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2013
* USD 725,195.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the mechanisms and genetics of
aerobic hydrocarbon biodegradation have been explored for decades, very little
is known about the comparable activities of these environmentally important
processes in anaerobic bacteria, which are difficult to isolate and
characterize. Alkanes are the least reactive class of hydrocarbons due to their
apolar sigma bonds. In the absence of high temperatures, high pressures, metal
catalysts or UV light, biotransformation plays the dominant role in
environmental alkane transformation. These reactions are responsible for a
significant component of the carbon cycle with practical implications for energy
production and environmental biotechnology. To date, there are two known
pathways of anaerobic alkane biotransformation: addition to fumarate and a
putative carboxylation pathway. Sulfate-reducing strains Desulfatibacillum
alkenivorans AK-01 and Desulfococcus oleovorans Hxd3 serve as model organisms
for these two mechanisms, respectively, and the genome sequences of both strains
were recently completed. Three major research areas are under investigation: 1)
AK-01 activates alkanes via addition of the sub-terminal carbon of the alkane
across the double bond of fumarate. This finding is analogous to a mechanism for
the anaerobic activation of toluene by the glycyl radical enzyme,
benzylsuccinate synthase (Bss). Recent work by the PIs demonstrated that strain
AK-01 contains a gene (assA1) that encodes the catalytic subunit of a glycyl
radical enzyme (alkylsuccinate synthase) and that expression of this gene
correlates with growth on hexadecane. The genetics and regulation of the
putative assA1 operon in strain AK-01 will be investigated; 2) Unlike AK-01,
Hxd3 activates alkanes at the C3 carbon via addition of inorganic carbon. To
date, this pathway has not been fully elucidated, and the requisite genes and
enzymes have not been identified. Genome-enabled proteomic analysis will be used
to identify proteins for which expression correlates with growth on alkanes in
order to further elucidate this pathway; and 3) The biochemistry and genetics of
anaerobic paraffin degradation are unknown. It is hypothesized that these
compounds are activated by similar mechanisms that are involved in the
degradation of short- and medium-chain alkanes. Therefore, the biochemistry and
genetics of anaerobic paraffin degradation will be investigated via metabolite
profiling and metagenomic characterization of an anaerobic, paraffin-degrading
enrichment culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The availability of
the complete genome sequences for the model organisms Hxd3 and AK-01, coupled
with the unique expertise of the involved research team and recent advances in
technology, have created an opportunity to provide significant insight to the
physiology, ecology, and functional genomics of anaerobic alkane degraders.
Overall, the project will significantly improve our understanding of the biology
of anaerobic environments. It will also provide a solid foundation for
understanding the novel biochemical processes involved in anaerobic alkane
metabolism and will be the first investigation of anaerobic alkane degradation
that examines genome-level data. As part of this project, a broader effort to
integrate the research into the education of high-school, undergraduate, and
graduate students will be made by providing research opportunities and
mentoring. Students will be trained in molecular biology, functional genomics,
proteomics and metabolite profiling. Educational outreach to the community will
be achieved through the K-20 Center for Education and Community Renewal at the
University of Oklahoma by: 1) providing training opportunities for one high
school student each summer to participate in a research program through the
center's GEAR UP program, 2) participating in the Teacher Learning program,
which aims to disseminate science teaching tools to K-12 teachers in Oklahoma,
and 3) participation in the annual Student Research and Performance Day which
aims to provide community K-12 students opportunities to be exposed to
university research, interact with scientists, and learn about career options.