* 0921505
*  Collaborative Research:  Small Bandwidth Asymptotic Theory for Kernel-Based Semiparametric Estimators
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Matias Cattaneo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2012
* USD 104,395.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical models in social and
natural sciences typically include a parameter of interest as well as other
parameters that need to be estimated (nuisance parameters) using the data
available to the researcher. Among these models, the so-called semiparametric
models are of particular importance because they are flexible and less sensitive
to biases generated by model misspecification. Because the nuisance parameters
in these models are unknown functions, researchers use nonparametric techniques
in their estimation and usually rely on asymptotic theory (approximations that
assume a large amount of data) to conduct statistical inference. Although
classical asymptotic theory for semiparametric estimators is well developed,
these results are in general not robust to departures from the underlying
assumptions imposed. Moreover, the applicability of semiparametric estimators is
often limited by the sensitivity of their performance to seemingly ad hoc
choices of smoothing and tuning parameters involved in the estimation procedure.
This lack of robustness usually translates in incorrect statistical inference
that may lead researchers and policy-makers to draw flawed conclusions from
empirical work that employs these semiparametric
estimators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a consequence, it is crucial to investigate
whether it is possible to conduct statistical inference using semiparametric
estimators that is robust to changes in the tuning and smoothing parameters
choices underlying the nonparametric estimator, and to departures from the
unobservable assumptions underlying the semiparametric model. This project seeks
to provide non-standard asymptotic theory for a class of semiparametric
estimators that allows for robust statistical inference. The main focus of this
project is on a particular, yet important, semiparametric estimator called the
density-weighted average derivative estimator. Preliminary findings obtained for
this estimator, show that our proposed non-standard asymptotic theory provides
the basis for the construction of statistical procedures that exhibit certain
forms of robustness that may be appealing from both theoretical and empirical
perspectives. This proposal also discusses how this theory affects the validity
of commonly used resampling procedures, how tuning parameters may be selected in
applications (while being consistent with our non-standard asymptotics), and
whether this idea may be applied more broadly to other semiparametric
estimators. The results of this research are expected to benefit several fields
of study, ranging from Economics or Political Science to Biostatistics or Public
Health, allowing researchers to conduct robust inference in semiparametric
models, and making semiparametric inference more attractive to researchers and
policy-makers.