* 0921009
* Blue Highways:  Evaluating Middle Stone Age Riverine-Based Foraging, Mobility, and Technology along the Trunk Tributaries of the Blue Nile
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2013
* John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 346,071.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. John Kappelman and Lawrence Todd
and a team of US and Ethiopian scientists and students will conduct three years
of archaeological, paleontological, and geological research in northwestern
Ethiopia. Through a series of controlled excavations, the project evaluates
evidence that Middle Stone Age (MSA) humans living along the upper reaches of
the Blue Nile River's tributaries on the lowland slope of Ethiopia's
northwestern plateau were adapted to a riverine-based foraging lifestyle focused
on the exploitation of highly predictable and abundant fish, mollusks, and
mammals that were seasonally concentrated around waterholes during the dry
season. Once local foods were depleted, longer distance foraging forays along
the channel to new waterholes functioned as a dry season "pump" to siphon MSA
populations out along the rivers. Not only would these "blue highways" have
provided predictable foods and fresh water, but movements from one waterhole to
another would have effected population movements northward along the Nile
corridor. Investigating archaeological sites in this never before studied region
will add to the growing body of knowledge about MSA behaviors. Because the
research area is located in the Horn of Africa, a region hypothesized to be one
of the places where modern humans possibly originated, and within the Nile
corridor, a potential migratory route, these new data will further test and
refine models of modern human origins and migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of these focused excavations derives from their relevance to
specific questions about human origins integrated within a larger study of the
sedimentology, geochronology, and paleoenvironments. Taken together these data
provide information of significance both to this research program, and to
broader issues of African paleoecology. Absolute dating of the sedimentary
sequences will provide a chronology for these sites so that the lithic
assemblages and paleohabitat reconstructions can be compared with those from
other MSA sites. The primary objective is to frame the paleoecological and
paleoclimatic context of these MSA populations for a better understanding of
their behavioral repertoire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the study
will be realized on several fronts. First, the project brings together a team of
scientists and students from the US and Ethiopia in a research partnership that
integrates a diverse set of disciplines including archaeology, physical
anthropology, paleontology, paleobotany, isotope geochemistry, sedimentology,
geochronology, and community-based involvement in cultural heritage management
and preservation. Second, the project emphasizes international student education
to develop expertise in transdisciplinary studies. It will conduct a field
school with a curriculum that includes training in GIS and GPS, faunal
identification, use-wear, and mapping and excavation techniques, and emphasize
student research. Third, the project includes educational outreach with the
local and regional communities to develop stakeholder engagement in long term
cultural and natural heritage management and preservation. And fourth, the
project partners with governmental and private development groups working in the
area in order to ensure that the cultural heritage is respected, managed, and
preserved. The project will help train a new generation of Ethiopian heritage
management specialists.