* 0921820
* Pan-American Advanced Studies Institute on Dynamics and Control of Manned and Unmanned Marine Vehicles, Barranquilla &amp; Cartagena, Colombia, June 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Marco Sanjuan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 82,000.00

0921820&lt;br/&gt;McCue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place June 2010 at the Universidad del Norte and the
Colombian Naval Academy in Colombia. Organized by Dr. Leigh S. McCue of the
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, the PASI will address the
dynamics and control of manned and unmanned marine vehicles. The institute will
bring together leading researchers in the areas of controlling, modeling and
predicting the motions of marine vehicles in a setting that will encourage
knowledge exchange among participants, researchers and academics in the
Americas. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PASI will: 1) expose
participants to the modern challenges and solutions to maritime dynamics and
controls issues; and 2) bring together researchers from different sectors of the
marine field, including underwater exploration, offshore energy, ship design,
and unmanned or autonomous vehicle design. By encouraging discussion, education,
and collaboration through this institute, participants are expected to form a
stronger collective understanding of the dynamic behavior of vessels in marine
environments and control system solutions. The results of the PASI will be
disseminated through a publicly accessible online web
forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;