* 0921958
* Collaborative Research:  High-Quality Genome Sequences of Two Divergent Woolly Mammoths
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2010,02/28/2013
* Webb Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 02/28/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Collaborative Research: High-Quality Genome Sequences of Two Divergent Woolly
Mammoths Stephan Shuster and Webb Miller, Penn State University

ABSTRACT

The woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenius) is ideal for making direct
observations of the evolution of a mammalian genome and its genes as a species
struggles to adapt to environmental changes, ending with extinction of the
lineage. Because of the many well preserved specimens, their wide distribution
in time and space, and the extensive literature on the species and its habitat,
mammoths are the best model system for studying DNA from extinct species. Over
the last four years, the field of ancient DNA has been revolutionized by novel
sample-preparation methods and next-generation DNA sequencing, resulting in
genome-scale projects, as well as population genetic studies based on complete
mitochondrial sequences for the woolly mammoth. A recent analysis of these
mitochondrial DNA sequences detected a deep split in the woolly mammoth
population that has not been observed in the fossil record. Still more recently,
a preliminary survey of the mammoths full DNA complement suggested that the
split can be observed in two particular specimens, called M4 and M25 for
historical reasons. These observations, though quite limited and preliminary,
lead to the hypotheses that the woolly mammoth clades exemplified by M4 and M25
were genetically quite distinct, separating over a million years ago, and that
M25s clade became extinct well before coming into contact with humans. The
methods employed in this project will refine genomic sequencing and ultimately
lead to a greater understanding of wooly mammoth genomic evolution over the last
100,000 years. The PIs have published initial results in the November, 2008
issue of Nature. The publication brought broad press coverage and has since been
incorporated into secondary school teaching. This research has proven to be
transformative not only in its scientific results but its stimulation of the
scientific and lay public communities.