* 0921847
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Translating Twins: Twin Research and Genetic Knowledge Production in the Swedish Welfare State
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Rayna Rapp, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 8,330.00

Doctoral student Alison Cool (New York University), supervised by Dr. Rayna
Rapp, will conduct research on how communication and consensus are achieved in
multi-disciplinary scientific research settings. She will focus her
investigation on scientists in Sweden who are engaged in research on twins.
Sweden is home to the world's largest register of twins for scientific research.
While twin studies are one of the oldest methodologies used by behavioral
geneticists, researchers in Scandinavia are now combining longitudinal twin data
with recent developments in molecular biology, which brings researchers together
who may not have had joint enterprises previously.

The researcher will focus on Swedish scientists from three disciplines:
behavioral genetics, psychology, and economics. She will use archival and
ethnographic research methods to investigate how they instrumentalize concepts
of genes and environments at each stage of their research, from initial
hypotheses, designs of experiments, analysis of results, and communication to
wider scientific audiences through publication in disciplinary journals.
Research goals of this project are: (1) to track the categorical work of
translating and communicating categories of genes and environments across
disciplinary boundaries; (2) to understand what conditions are necessary to
establish multidisciplinary consensus and produce knowledge of human social and
economic behaviors; and (3) to document and describe the processes by which
scientific research comes to transcend its regional and national origins in data
based on a Swedish population and investigated by Swedish scientists to become
knowledge about universal forms of behavior in humans.

The research is important because its focus on the specificity of contemporary
Swedish scientific practices will expand theoretical models that treat
innovation in Western science more generally. The research will contribute to
understanding the social and policy implications of behavioral genetics. Funding
this research also supports the education of a social scientist.