* 0921255
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant in Cultural Anthropology: Raiding and Sovereignty in Borderlands
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Louisa Lombard, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 8,360.00

Duke University doctoral student Louisa Lombard, under the supervision of
Professor Charles Piot, will undertake ethnographic research on the role of
raiding in relation to state formation and governance, in areas where political
sovereignty is not clearly held by any one political entity. Both social science
theory and international aid agencies tend to sideline the political role of
raiding. This researcher will investigate two overarching questions: (1) What
forms of sovereignty and governance operate in borderland areas shaped by a
history of raiding? (2) How do newly-arrived international forms of governance
insert themselves into and affect local sovereignties where persistent raiding
exists?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in the
northeastern borderlands of the Central African Republic (CAR) where a variety
of overlapping forces, institutions, and interests patrol and regulate the area.
The researcher will explore the dynamics of raiding in two sites in particular:
one, a northeastern town, where conservation militias combat poachers; the
other, a nearby refugee camp overseen by the United Nations. The researcher will
employ a mix of social science methods including participant observation,
mapping, interviews, and archival analysis. These data will allow her to track
the multiple forms of governance that operate in borderlands area and their
implications for conceptions of sovereignty, the state, and international law.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important because it will illuminate
complicated processes of governance, conflict, and peace-building in disputed
territories. The research will contribute to social science theory of governance
and to post-conflict policy creation. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.