* 0921598
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Using empirical and modeling approaches to quantify the importance of nutrient spiraling in rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Robert Hall, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 176,967.00

Inland river networks regulate the export of nutrients from the terrestrial
landscape, making them critical for mitigating eutrophication of downstream
ecosystems. Yet the ability of rivers to process and retain nutrients has been
understudied as previous research has focused mainly on small headwater streams.
It is critical to understand how entire river ecosystems, not just sections of
streams, influence regional and continental patterns of nutrient export to
protect water resources. This research will use a novel field approach to gather
empirical measurements of nutrient uptake in multiple rivers across the west and
midwest and integrate the data into a dynamic network scale model to evaluate
controls on nutrient uptake, thereby integrating aquatic ecosystem ecology and
hydrological modeling. This approach will generate critical predictive
relationships regarding the capacity of rivers spanning a range of nutrient and
sediment conditions to mitigate downstream nutrient export, which is an
essential step towards effective water quality management at the river network
scale. The intellectual merit of the research includes the transformation of
ecological theory regarding nutrient cycling in rivers and improved
understanding of the ecosystem services that rivers provide. In turn, the
broader impacts of the work will result in unparalleled educational
opportunities for graduate students to collaborate on cutting edge river
research, watershed modeling tools immediately useful to water resource
managers, and data to improve emerging technologies for real-time nutrient
monitoring to be used by national observatory programs.