* 0921122
* 2009 CSHL Conference on Neurobiology of Drosophila, September 29 - October 3, 2009 at Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* James Deshler
* 07/31/2010
* USD 15,000.00

This project will provide partial support for the 13th biennial international
meeting in the Neurobiology of Drosophila Meeting series to be held September 29
- October 3, 2009 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. The
meeting brings together a group of junior and senior scientists to discuss the
latest advances in the neurobiology research being made in the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster. The conference has an excellent track record for
highlighting the work of younger investigators and women. To ensure a high level
of diversity for such a small meeting graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
junior faculty and underrepresented minorities at all levels are invited to
attend. To encourage participation by junior investigations a special lecture
will be presented by a graduate student who has written the best Ph.D. thesis
since the previous meeting. The 2009 meeting focuses on advances made using the
combined power of genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology,
electrophysiology, imaging, and behavioral analysis to address fundamental
issues in neurobiology. The topics covered will range from (i) sensory systems
coding and topographic mapping of inputs for odor, taste, vision and
mechanosensation (ii) behavioral analyses of reproduction, locomotion, feeding,
and social interactions; (iii) higher brain functions such as memory, learning,
sleep, choice and attention; (iv) developmental and functional analysis of brain
circuits; (v) synapse development and plasticity; (vi) embryonic and metamorphic
development of the brain; and a newly-devised session on (vii) the impact of
comparative genome analyses on neural evolution. As a result of feedback from
previous participants this meeting will remain of moderate size (430
participants) and will have no parallel sessions so as to facilitate discussion,
exchange of ideas and techniques, and to promote new collaborations in this
rapidly-evolving field. All applicants will be encouraged to submit an abstract
and the majority of participants will present a talk or poster. Speakers will be
chosen by session leaders and meeting organizers from the most timely and
interesting abstracts submitted a few months in advance of the conference: this
will ensure that late-breaking science is covered in all of the talks. It is
expected that the findings and approaches presented at this meeting, as it is
true for those held over the last 25 years, will result in novel and significant
advances in our understanding of basic neurobiology in other organisms.