* 0921208
* Empirical Approaches using Correlated Random Effects Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Jason Abrevaya, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 157,320.00

Panel-data (or longitudinal-data) methods have been central to empirical
research in economics, as well as other fields in the social sciences and
natural sciences. Utilizing a correlated-random effects framework for modeling
panel data, the proposed research will provide several new approaches for the
analysis of such data. This proposal considers new methods for estimation and
inference in panel-data models, both linear and non-linear, with slope
heterogeneity (in addition to the intercept heterogeneity allowed by the
classical panel-data model used in economics). While fixed-effects approaches to
the linear model with slope heterogeneity do exist, this research will extend
the correlated random effects framework to this model, examine the equivalence
of the two approaches, and discuss the usefulness of the new framework for
specification testing. Far less attention has been paid to non-linear models
with slope heterogeneity, despite the large literature dealing with intercept
heterogeneity for these models. The proposed research will provide several new
estimators for both fixed-effects and correlated-random-effects for such non-
linear models. In addition to consideration of slope-heterogeneity models, the
proposed research will also provide empirical approaches for two data
limitations (dependent-variable misclassification and dependent-variable
absence) that arise in panel-data models with intercept
heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity: The proposed research should have both a theoretical and practical
impact upon economics and other fields that utilize panel-data methods. During
the course of the proposed research, the PI develops computer routines for use
in statistical software. Many of the proposed empirical approaches are
implemented in Stata, the most widely used statistical software by applied
researchers in economics. All relevant computer routines will be made publicly
available in a timely manner so that empirical researchers can utilize these
approaches for their work. The proposed research is also disseminated via
seminar/conference presentations and doctoral student instruction.&lt;br/&gt;