* 0921487
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Role of Marginalized Groups in Post-Conflict Reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Joshua Walker, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Chicago graduate student, Joshua Walker, under the direction of
Dr. Jean Comaroff, will undertake doctoral research on how social order may be
maintained through new socio-cultural forms that arise as a result of sustained
crisis. The research will focus on marginalized youth and their role in the
rebuilding of social order in Mbujimayi, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).
Life in the DRC has been dramatically transformed by the post-1970s economic and
conflicts that have engulfed the country to differing degrees over the past 13
years. Street children and diamond miners in Mbujimayi are emblematic of a
multifaceted crisis, which has weakened the patterns of trust and forms of
interdependence that Mbujimayi residents call "solidarity." Yet as marginalized
youth, they paradoxically appear to be a source of societal renewal. Preliminary
research indicates that street children and artisanal miners create
relationships which appear to be characterized by the kind of solidarity that
seems increasingly rare in other segments of Congolese
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will conduct extensive ethnographic
research on the kinds of social and cultural organization street children and
artisanal miners create among one another and their implications for the
remaking of social order. Structured and semi-structured interviews, the
collection of life histories, and sustained observation of practices will be
undertaken with groups of miners and street children. To gather data on
perceptions of these two groups of marginalized youth, the researcher will also
interview other city residents and monitor and analyze portrayals of these young
people in local media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to
post-conflict policy making by investigating systematically the ways in which
the rebuilding of the socio-cultural fabric is ongoing outside and in dialogue
with formal reconstruction efforts. It also will address broader theories of the
creation of social order during and after periods of sustained civil crisis.
This project also contributes to the education of a social scientist.