* 0921734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Information and Context: The Electoral Intersection
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* Herbert Weisberg, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,105.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

How do individuals' knowledge of politics and exposure to campaigns interact to
affect voting behavior? Campaigns provide new information to particular segments
of the population. In addition, individuals bring their prior knowledge of
politics to weigh on new information. Thus the information brought to bear on
political behavior can be quite different from one individual to the next and
from one environment to the next. This research seeks to paint a fuller picture
of how campaigns are interpreted and utilized by a heterogeneous electorate.

The challenge of understanding how individuals process and react to campaign
information suggests a methodologically inclusive approach. This project
utilizes both observational and experimental data to investigate the impact of
campaigns on specific dimensions of political information. Differences in
information and exposure are also exploited to test for combined and distinct
causal influences on political attitudes and behavior. Contrary to previous
research designs, which have been largely static, the focus is on how the
relationships between information and exposure interact throughout the course of
the campaign.

The broader impacts of this project include the introduction of new measures to
illuminate the underlying dimensions of political information. The collection
and eventual dissemination of original experimental data on campaign exposure
and political information provide opportunities to study these measures in a
controlled environment. Such measures and methods along with a comprehensive
theory seek to unify a host of recent yet contrary findings in the literature.
Also of broader value, the training of undergraduate students in experimental
and survey research and the providing of hands-on experience in these areas
provide positive byproducts to the community. In addition, because information
shortages are often prevalent among minorities, the less educated, and the poor,
misrepresentation may be compounded among the neediest members of society.
Insight into the ramifications and causes of the misbalance in political
information may be particularly beneficial for increasing political
representation.