* 0921161
* Collaborative Research:  The Impact of Cuing and Comfort Drawing on the Eyewitness Testimony of Behaviorally Inhibited and Uninhibited Children
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2012
* Jason Dickinson, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 07/31/2012
* USD 76,677.00

This award is funded under the Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law
111-5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protocols for conducting forensic
interviews of children should be informed by research, but interviewers who
obtain evidence from alleged victims of abuse frequently use unresearched
techniques. This project examines two popular procedures: cuing event reports
with body outlines and comfort drawing, which is the practice of encouraging
children to draw as a calming activity. Both techniques are intended to take
pressure off anxious children, but explicit cuing and play could reduce the
accuracy of reports. An important feature of this project is the inclusion of
parent and observational measures of behavioral inhibition, a temperamental
trait associated with little spontaneous speech. If body outlines or drawing
activities encourage more detailed and accurate testimony, the benefits should
be especially evident among behaviorally inhibited children.
&lt;br/&gt;Participating children (ages 4- to 9-years) completed a study that
evaluated how two interviewing protocols impact eyewitness accuracy. The
children were exposed to target events, repeatedly told about nonexperienced
events, and randomly assigned to interviewing protocols. One protocol included
free-recall, specific, and source-monitoring questions, whereas the second
included cued-recall, free-recall, and source-monitoring questions.
&lt;br/&gt;Study 1 adds measures of behavioral inhibition to the existing data
set, thereby permitting analyses of accuracy as a function of temperament. Study
2 exposes children to a new event and conducts final interviews in comfort
drawing and no comfort drawing conditions. This study therefore evaluates the
long-term impact of memory cuing and determines how a distracting activity
influences the eyewitness accuracy of behaviorally inhibited and uninhibited
children. Results from these studies will advance forensic interviewing practice
by determining the impact of cuing and comfort drawing on children's testimonial
and source monitoring accuracy. The project will also guide future research by
revealing whether temperamental measures help evaluate tradeoffs between the
emotional and cognitive consequences of interviewing techniques.