* 0921133
* A Late Formative Temple Precinct at San Martin Tilcajete, Oaxaca
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2014
* Elsa Redmond, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 58,255.00

Abstract of 0921133 (Redmond PI; Spencer Co-PI)

What role did religion play in the origin and development of the earliest states
(societies governed by bureaucracies)? Did religion become "bureaucratized" as
part of the state formation process? Questions such as these will guide the
excavations that will be carried out in the temple precinct of the
archaeological site of El Palenque, near San Martín Tilcajete in the Oaxaca
Valley of Mexico. Previous investigations at El Palenque recovered evidence of
early state institutions dating to 300-100 BC, including a large royal palace
and a pair of specialized, multiroom temples. These discoveries have made El
Palenque a key site for investigating the evolution of early state organization
in ancient Mexico, which is one of the handful of places on the planet where
early states evolved in a pristine fashion -- the others include Egypt,
Mesopotamia, the Indus River Valley, China and Peru. Since all these
developments took place before detailed written records were kept, they are most
effectively studied through archaeology.

Two seasons of excavation in El Palenque's temple precinct are designed to test
the hypothesis that a specialized priesthood made up of a hierarchy of priests
and other religious specialists developed along with other state institutions
between 300-100 BC. The available historical accounts of Aztec and Zapotec
temple precincts indicate that a full-time priesthood might be manifested
archaeologically by the existence of priestly residences adjacent to the
temples. Also potentially detectable through archaeology is the range of
activities that the historical accounts report were performed regularly by the
priests and other religious specialists in the temple precinct. The proposed
excavations in El Palenque's temple precinct will focus on the areas adjacent to
and behind the two multiroom temples discovered previously. An international
team of archaeologists from the United States and Mexico led by Drs. Elsa
Redmond and Charles Spencer will conduct the excavation. The data collected on
the structures, activity areas, features, artifacts and ecofacts adjacent to the
two morphologically distinct temples have the potential to shed significant
light on the timing and development of religious institutions--multiroom temples
staffed by a hierarchy of priests and other religious specialists-- in the
process of early state development.

The project's broader impacts include the training of two female Mexican
students, who will participate in the excavations and in the preliminary
laboratory work. Two Spanish-speaking students from the New York area will
assist in data processing at the American Museum of Natural History. The project
will cultivate close collaborations with local colleagues and townspeople in
Oaxaca.

