* 0921481
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   Ethnicity and Retrospection: Explaining Voting Behavior in Uganda
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Elizabeth Carlson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

According to the conventional wisdom, African voters split along ethnic lines at
election time, with each group voting for its own. In Uganda, however, President
Museveni's ethnic group, the Banyankole, comprise only nine percent of the
population while Museveni is supported by a majority of the public. Clearly,
large numbers of Ugandans must be voting for candidates outside of their ethnic
group. Nevertheless, the Banyankole do seem to vote ethnically, supporting
Museveni in numbers much higher than does the population as a whole. What
explains this pattern of voting? Do Banyankole and non-Banyankole voters support
Museveni for the same reasons? The project hypothesizes that non-Banyankole
voters, lacking ethnic cues, vote based on their assessments of Museveni's past
performance in office. To explain the voting behavior of the Banyankole, the
project examines five hypotheses from the literature. In two hypotheses, the
Banyankole, like the non-Banyankole, vote purely based on assessments of
Museveni's performance. Museveni's advantage among the Banyankole comes from the
fact that his co-ethnics assess his performance more favorably, either because
he has provided them with more goods or because they believe he has. In the
second set of hypotheses, non-Banyankole still vote based on performance, while
the Banyankole support Museveni specifically because he is of their ethnic
group. Banyankole may vote for Museveni out of ethnic pride, because they
believe a co-ethnic represents their best chance of future goods, or because
they face social pressure to vote with their ethnic bloc.

The core of the study is a voting simulation experiment in which 750 respondents
were asked to choose between candidates whose ethnicity, performance record and
other characteristics have been randomly assigned. This test allows the
researcher to determine if voters, whether Banyankole or not, rely on
performance or ethnicity (or something else) as the basis of their vote. The
voting simulation is also be used to test the social voting hypothesis: if
social pressure determines voting, voters should be more likely to select co-
ethnic candidates when asked to vote aloud among a group of co-ethnics than when
marking a secret ballot. In the second part of the study, respondents rate their
confidence that a hypothetical co-ethnic or non-co-ethnic candidate, if elected,
would provide them with goods such as employment. This experiment determines
whether, all things equal, voters expect more future goods from a co-ethnic
candidate. Finally, the researcher creates inventories of household wealth and
public service quality in 35 villages throughout Uganda. These data enable the
researcher to determine whether the Banyankole have gained significantly more
than other under Museveni's leadership and/or whether they overestimate what
they receive. The data, compared to assessments of, predictions about, and votes
for Museveni, indicate the importance of candidate performance, relative to
ethnicity, in predicting vote share in the specific context of Ugandan politics.

The experimental nature of the study improves upon existing research on African
voting by isolating and controlling the candidate characteristics and electoral
conditions to which voters are exposed. In addition, the project will produce a
unique new dataset that contains both objective and subjective indicators of
public goods, in a way that allows real changes in these indicators to be linked
to actual individual voting behavior. The findings, which will provide objective
information about how Museveni distributes goods and how voters make their
decisions, will be shared with multiple Ugandan research organizations
conducting work on goods provision, and disseminated both through the public
media and in direct mailings to leaders of areas in which the survey was
conducted.