* 0921585
* Dissertation Research: Poverty, Adolescents' Future Orientation, and Resilience among Chilean and Mapuche Small Scale Farmers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Craig Hadley, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 12,954.00

Doctoral student Sebastián Dueñas (Emory University), supervised by Dr. Craig A.
Hadley, will investigate how experiencing poverty in childhood affects young
people's aspirations for the future. Other research using life history theory
has found that childhood experiences of adversity and uncertainty impact
developmental trajectories and aspirations, which in turn affect educational
attainment. This study will contribute to and extend these findings by looking
at the proximate pathways through which adversity impacts human capital
aspirations.

The study will be carried out in Chile where the researcher will compare two
rural peasant populations of low socio-economic status: an ethnically Mapuche
(Chile's largest indigenous minority group) community and a non-Mapuche
community. The comparative research design will allow him to assess how ethnic
and cultural differences affect the relationship between adversity and human
capital aspirations, as well as variability in coping strategies employed to
mitigate adversity. He will collect a mix of qualitative and quantitative data
to test hypothesized relationships, focusing much of the investigation on a
random sample of early-adolescents.

This project contributes to social scientific research that has highlighted the
role of social class, minority status, and youth culture in shaping adolescents'
future outlook and aspirations. This study explores these issues in rural
communities in a developing country, whereas most previous work on the effect of
childhood uncertainty on development has been carried out in urban settings in
developed nations. In addition, by focusing on coping strategies employed by the
young people themselves, the project will spotlight young people as potentially
active agents in mitigating uncertainty and limiting the negative impact of
adversity on life course outcomes.

Funding this research also supports the education of a social scientist.