* 0921786
* US-Costa Rica PASI:  Expanding the frontier in tropical ecology through embedded sensors; Costa Rica 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Philip Rundel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place at the Selva
Biological Station in Costa Rica. Organized by Dr. Elizabeth Losos of Duke
University, the PASI will address the topic of expanding the frontier in
tropical ecology through embedded sensors. The Institute will consist of a two-
week session, where experienced researchers, graduate students, post-doctoral
fellows and young faculty explore the merging of ecological research with
engineering and information technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lectures will be
divided into three modules, the first a review of how the field of ecology has
advanced through the application of sensor technologies; a second module will
focus on the technological component, introducing and reviewing all aspects of a
sensor network, from the individual elements to the data that they generate. A
final module will review case studies in which sensors have been successfully
incorporated to answer ecological questions, and will include more practical
tutorial and hands-on exercises to cross-train the participants in the actual
generation of hypothesis and deployment and operation of short- and long-term
sensor setups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will broaden the horizons of
tropical ecologists by transforming their methods for conducting research and
gathering data. Outcomes of this PASI will include the opportunity to expand the
geographical scope of extant networks and maximizing the potential of data
sharing and comparative ecology. Lectures and materials developed for the PASI
will be disseminated through a public website and an online portal will further
foster interactions among participants. &lt;br/&gt;