* 0921580
* Selenium biogeochemistry as a deep-time redox proxy and biosignature
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2014
* Roger Buick, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2014
* USD 300,041.00

The history of Earth's environmental oxygenation of the lithosphere, hydrosphere
and atmosphere is known in general terms: essentially anoxic in the Archean,
passing through two rises during the Proterozoic and maintaining modern highly
oxic conditions through the Phanerozoic. This trend of rising oxygenation has
influenced the co-evolution of the biosphere by allowing organisms with
increasingly high oxygen demands to evolve progressively. However, what is not
well known about this history is how high environmental oxygen levels were
between the essentially anoxic ancient stage and the highly oxic modern stage,
if perturbations in oxygen levels were sudden or gradual, monotonic or step-
wise, foreshadowed or uniform, or whether changes in atmospheric oxygen levels
were directly reflected in marine oxygenation and by biological metabolism. This
proposal seeks to develop a new set of environmental oxygenation tracers to
improve our understanding of this history, in the form of selenium isotopic
fractionations, selenium abundances relative to sulfur, and selenium redox
speciation in marine sedimentary rocks from throughout the geological record. In
addition, mass-dependent selenium isotopic fractionations should prove to be a
useful new biosignature for investigating the evolution of life during early
Earth history. It is also possible that mass-independent fractionations of
selenium, analogous to those of sulfur, will be discovered, with the potential
to provide novel insights into selenium gas cycling and atmospheric oxygen
levels over time.

The objective of the project is to refine our knowledge of environmental
oxygenation through time and its constraints on selenium biogeochemical cycling
through biological metabolic pathways. In order to do this, a recently-devised
set of experimental methods will be employed, involving thiol-cotton fiber to
quantitatively extract selenium from acid-digested rock samples, continuous-flow
hydride generation to selectively volatilize selenium in low concentrations and
multi-collector inductively-coupled-plasma mass-spectrometry to simultaneously
measure multiple isotopes of selenium with high sensitivity. To provide a
theoretical background for interpreting the new isotopic results, investigators
will also develop a 4-box model of the selenium biogeochemical cycle and a 1-D
photochemical model of selenium gas behavior at different oxygen levels.

The broader impacts of the proposed study lie in the advancement of discovery
and understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning by involving a
graduate student in most of the research activities. It will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups, in this case women in earth science,
by the active participation of a female graduate student in the research. It
will enhance the infrastructure for research and education, as funding is
requested for salary support for a research technician to maintain equipment in
ISOLAB, a stable isotope laboratory shared between 3 departments, 2 programs and
4 principal scientists and open to all of the U.W. community and to external
users. Funds are also requested so that results can be communicated broadly at
interdisciplinary conferences to enhance scientific understanding. The research
plan is inherently interdisciplinary, involving scientists affiliated with 3
departments: Earth & Space Sciences, Atmospheric Sciences and Oceanography, thus
providing the framework for an environmentally comprehensive investigation of
the selenium biogeochemical cycle.