* 0921360
* EAGER: Mechatronics Based Braille Writing Device for the Blind
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2010,02/28/2013
* Rifat Sipahi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 02/28/2013
* USD 101,318.00

0921360 Sipahi

Objectives There are about 180 million blind and partially sighted people in the
world and 10 million of these people live in North America. The ultimate
education instrument for the blind people is the Braille alphabet. The ability
of reading and writing this alphabet is the key to spread literacy among the
blind and for the blind to integrate into the workforce of the United States.
Among many devices that support the literacy of blind, reading devices are
extremely high-tech, but advanced writing devices do not exist. The main
objective of this exploratory research is at this critical observation: Design
and create a portable, low cost and effective mechatronics based device for
writing Braille letters on a standard paper. The device will be developed in
consultancy with the National Federation of the Blind (NFB, Baltimore) and with
the help of National Braille Press (NBP, Boston) and Visually Impaired and Blind
User Group (VIBUG, Boston). The methods to create the writing device is directly
within the expertise of the PI, which is mechanical engineering design and
mechatronics. With the support of NFB (see the support letter attached) and
VIBUG, the device will develop with those who know the needs of the blind people
community. The work undertaken here is a perfect fit for EAGER (Early-concept
Grants for Exploratory Research) as the project is multi-disciplinary and
explatory in nature, and it is at high-risk/high-payoff scale targeted to
surface the transformative research components in addressing a major problem of
the blind.

Intellectual Merit 1. The new writing device is a synergy of ergonomy,
portability and low costs. The device will be shaped under these constraints. 2.
The robust mechatronics based features of the device will accommodate easy
writing experience for the blind. 3. The feasibility of the writing device will
be thoroughly assessed by the help of subjects who will test the device. These
feedback will not only improve the new device, but they will also advance the
science in human factors and disability research in revealing the mechanisms as
to how blind people read, write and sense the Braille.

Broader Impacts 1. Dissemination of the device in the United States will be
explored via numerous companies that offer products to the blind people. The
prototyping stage of the device will be supported in parallel by capstone
projects at Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department, Northeastern
University. These activities will have impacts on both mechanical and industrial
engineering graduating class. 2. The availability of the new writing device will
be extremely helpful for the blind people to become more successful at all
levels of education and workforce. The device will accommodate rapid note taking
in class rooms, and it will inspire poetry and literature among the blind
people. 3. To inspire writing, PI's team will take part in organizing poetry and
literature activities with the help of VIBUG. 4. PIs outreach activities
including underrepresented middle and high school students will be strengthened
via the research progress attained within this project.