* 0921898
* The Role of Vegetation, Aerosols and Surface Fluxes for Land-Atmosphere Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2008,06/30/2011
* Robert Dickinson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2011
* USD 533,447.00

Three different interactions within the climate system will be investigated in
this project, involving at one end clouds and precipitation, and at the other
end: 1) vegetation; 2) terrestrial aerosols (dust and biogenic volatile organic
compounds); 3) land surface energy and water fluxes. The study of vegetation
impact on the atmospheric branch of the hydrologic cycle follows two paths;
observational analysis (relying heavily on remote sensing data) and climate
modeling sensitivity studies. The aerosol-based component of the research
contains direct analysis of each of the two types of aerosols followed by
modeling studies, this time using a regional atmospheric model with much higer
spatial resolution than the global climate model. These studies are targeted to
improve the representation of these interactions in climate models. The
investigators link assessments for vegetation and the aerosols they produce. The
surface energy and water balance research is aimed primarily at model
improvements for the land component of the climate model, using data from a
network of in situ flux measurement sites to develop better parameterizations of
surface processes. Three graduate students will be supported. The PI has
maintained strong working and training relationships with the Chinese scientific
community, and that effort continues in this project.