* 0921780
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Do Irrelevant Payoffs Affect Behavior When a Dominant Strategy is Available: Experimental Evidence from Second-Price Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2011
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/2011
* USD 7,500.00

In a second-price auction (SPA) with private values, the bidder who submits the
highest bid wins the auction and pays the second highest bid. In a SPA, bidders
simultaneously submit one bid each. According to theory, the bidder's best
strategy is to bid exactly what the item is worth to her. In game theory
parlance this optimal bid is known as a "dominant strategy," that is, it is
optimal for each bidder regardless of what others are bidding. Dominant
strategies have robust properties but are extremely rare in auction
environments. Past evidence from laboratory experiments has shown that bidders
almost always bid above the amount corresponding to the dominant strategy in an
SPA, i.e. they behave irrationally according to the theory. This project
examines the conjecture that, while bidding behavior is not rational, it does
respond in a sensible and predictable way to incentives. A laboratory experiment
will test whether bids above the dominant strategy increase when such
overbidding is less costly, and decrease when it is more costly, even though the
experiment is constructed so that these incentives do not affect the value of
the dominant strategy bid itself.

Should the conjecture prove correct, the results will inform designers of
selling mechanisms. Although game theory makes very clear predictions, bidders
do not often behave exactly as predicted. Results from investigations that
examine systematic deviations from the theory can be incorporated by auction
designers who wish to maximize revenue or efficiency. Given that such auctions
have been used by both government and the private sector to sell a variety of
securities and physical assets, the practical applications of such research are
widespread.