* 0921942
* A Database for the Sequencing of Environmental Movements
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Erik Johnson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2013
* USD 149,847.00

SES-0921942 Erik Johnson Washington State University

This project will create a series of over time databases on national
environmental organizations in Britain, Ireland, Canada, and Australia. Each
national database will contain information on individual environmental
organizations' (1) demographics (e.g. founding date, membership, staffing
levels), (2) membership structure, (3) activities, and (4) specific issues of
environmental concern. Data collection is designed to ensure the assembly of
reliable data in the most flexible manner possible, in order to facilitate
future work by a wide variety of potential end-users including scholars,
students, and those interested or working in for-profit, non-profit and public
policy realms related to environmental and energy sustainability, natural
resources, health, environmental justice, or wildlife.

The intellectual merit of database construction centers on developing a test of
alternative social movement/interest group sequencing models. It is generally
taken-for-granted that social movements/interest groups first develop locally
and then nationally before transnational organizational infrastructures emerge.
In contrast, scholars interested in globalization processes suggest a top-down
model, where global culture has strong implications for a variety of processes
within nations, including the development of domestic interest groups and
national public policies.

The creation of a series of national databases on environmental organizations
has broader impacts by contributing to infrastructures for research and
education. Data assembled here will, for example, facilitate cross-national
examination of environmental movements themselves and these movements' effects
on national public policy. Research is tightly integrated with an upper-level
research "capstone" course taught by the PI and organized around data assembly.
Teaching, training and learning are advanced through participation of a large
number of undergraduate research assistants in data collection.