* 0921952
* Linking Local Knowledge and Local Institutions for the Study of Adaptive Capacity to Climate Change: Participatory GIS in Northern Tanzania
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2009,03/31/2015
* Pantaleo Munishi, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 03/31/2015
* USD 571,859.00

Across Africa, Asia, and Latin America, researchers have identified a multitude
of environmental, social, and economic strategies based on local knowledge that
enable rural people to practice their livelihoods. Most critically, these
strategies allow them to buffer themselves from extreme events such as droughts
and floods. In East Africa, global climate change will alter the climate-
sensitive livelihood systems of highland and savanna areas. It thus poses a
fundamental challenge to both short-term coping methods and long-term adaptive
capacity of the rural livelihood systems. Much research on climate change
adaptation has so far focused on regional and national level adaptation policies
and programs, while micro-scale adaptation, and the local knowledge on which it
is based, represent an understudied dimension. This project will assess the
contribution of local knowledge to adaptive capacity through a multifaceted
participatory methodology that captures key elements of changing human-
environment systems in Northern Tanzania. In so doing, the project will
contribute to refining the conventional means of measuring and analyzing
adaptive capacity at household, community, and regional scales. A second primary
contribution of the project is to address the gap in knowledge concerning the
interaction of between local knowledge systems and local institutions in the
context of external sources of socioeconomic, environmental, and technical
knowledge. The project investigates the myriad ways in which human, social, and
institutional capital enable households and communities to draw on knowledge to
moderate the negative effects of greater climatic instability on rural
livelihoods. Finally, the project tests the notion that climate change opens up
new livelihood options and may lead to increasing cooperation and inter-group
contact between socioeconomic and cultural groups across environmental and
institutional contexts. The methodology includes a range of field methods,
including a household survey, cognitive mapping, participatory community forums,
and institutional stakeholder workshops. A participatory geographic information
system (PGIS) will be developed to integrate and analyze information from field
research, statistics and spatial data, and climate modeling results. The PGIS
also serves as a tool for participatory learning activities conducted throughout
the duration of the project.

Unprecedented challenges are posed to rural livelihoods and to state policy by
climate change. This fact gives additional saliency to the project's focus on
the interactions between local knowledge, local institutions, and adaptation.
The scientific, policy, and educational contributions of this research are
interwoven and synergistic because of the multi-stakeholder, participatory
approach. The project will make a contribution to the design of effective
climate change adaptation programs and in particular will contribute to the
incorporation of local-level processes into national adaptation policies. At the
international level, the results and the framework developed will enrich
scientific work elsewhere at a time when the transition to a new international
climate change adaptation policy will be coming into force. In Tanzania, the
PGIS will be refined for use as a web-based simulation tool for the research
team's interactions with policy makers and civil society. Project activities
will also result in educational benefits at multiple levels. The project's
research findings and the development of the PGIS and other methods will enhance
the teaching of human-environment geography, environmental science, geographic
techniques, and linguistics at U.S. and Tanzanian universities.