* 0921541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  The Escalation of Mass Violence Against Civilians
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,10/31/2010
* Elisabeth Wood, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2010
* USD 11,300.00

The escalation of mass violence against civilians has remained a neglected topic
in the study of political violence. This project examines the dynamics of mass
violence in civil war, and in particular by examining how and under what
conditions violence escalates, de-escalates, or fails to escalate. To answer
these questions, fieldwork is conducted in Burundi, a little-known neighbor of
Rwanda and the Congo that has experienced over four decades of violence at
varying levels. This variation in violence against civilians allows one to
investigate the processes of escalation in different areas and at different
times, while holding many other factors constant. This research will help
identify the reasons for a lack of violence in some places, the de-escalation of
violence in others, and the escalation of violence in yet others. These reasons
can, in turn, inform policy decisions about how to avoid the escalation of
violence and how to effectively reduce violence once it has
begun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research consisting of in-country elite
interviews and the analysis of unpublished documents and data helped to
indentify four categories of causes that lead to the observed variation in mass
violence against civilians: pre-conflict structural variables, self-reinforcing
processes leading to path dependency, the endogenous dynamics of the conflict
(how violence affects violence), and one-time events or critical junctures (such
as assassinations). The questions in this project about mechanisms and dynamics
are best analyzed by qualitative methods which can address the complexity of the
conflict situation. As such, these causes are investigated primarily through
ethnography at the subnational level, by gathering information through in-depth
and repeat interviews with witnesses, victims, and ex-combatants in ten
districts in Burundi. This information is used in two ways. First, the processes
of escalation at a very disaggregated level, are examined in order to understand
which events followed other events, and whether a causal relationship appears to
exist. Second, a framework in which time-space units are compared allows one to
test whether hypothesized causes are present to similar units where they are
missing, which allows me to rule out potential causes, as well as to identify
which causes seem to have an important effect. For example, violence against
civilians was intense in 1972 in the district of Rumonge, but then almost no
violence occurred in 1993 in the same district, when most of the country was
experiencing severe violence. Preliminary research suggests that the unity of
local leaders and their relationships with the civilians was an essential
difference between the two periods. Other time-space comparisons will allow one
to study other potential causes, such as the extent to which past violence
increases or decreases the likelihood of future
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political science has often focused on the static
causes of political violence, which cannot explain change over time and space.
This project makes important contributions to the understanding of the dynamics
of political violence. It also has the potential to affect policy in ways that
will protect civilians in regions of mass violence. An understanding of the
processes of escalation will allow for informed decisions about how to create
conditions of non-escalation and de-escalation and how to avoid creating
conditions of escalation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;When armies, militias, rebels,
or guerrillas fight for political control, civilians bear the brunt of the
costs. This project seeks to provide knowledge to combat the escalation of mass
violence against civilians, as well as to create new ways of thinking and
understanding political violence.