* 0921695
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Understanding the Consequences of Women's Migration for Family Health and Wellbeing in Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Linda Garro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 12,771.00

University of California, Los Angeles, doctoral student, Kristin E. Yarris, with
the guidance of Dr. Linda C. Garro, will undertake ethnographic field research
in Nicaragua to examine the impact of women's migration on families left behind.
Women comprise an increasing proportion of Latin American migrants, leaving
their home communities in search of economic and social opportunities elsewhere.
This dissertation research project will assess how mother migration results in
reconfigurations in household responsibilities, caregiving practices, and family
relationships, and how these changes in turn nfluence family health and well-
being outcomes. Given gendered expectations and cultural norms for women's roles
in Latin American families, it is hypothesized that the migration of mothers and
fathers will have differential effects on migrant-sending families.

Using a naturally occurring case-comparison group design, the researcher will
explore these gendered differences by studying households with migrant mothers
and households with migrant fathers, as compared to households without migrant
parents. The research involves multiple methods of data collection, including:
household surveys, direct observations of everyday family life, in-depth
ethnographic interviews with household heads, grandmothers, and children, and
administration of standardized instruments for assessing physical and
psychological health.

These multiple sources of data will allow for a grounded ethnographic
understanding of the lived experience and consequences of transnational
migration from the perspective of families in Latin American sending
communities, a population often overlooked in social science research on
migration. This is singificant because only by understanding the gendered and
generational dimensions of migration, particularly in relation to the impacts of
migration on family health and wellbeing, can policy makers fully understanding
why migrants may come to the United States and the consequences of their
migration for those left behind. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.