* 0921550
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Ending Conflict Early
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2010
* Janet Lewis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 11,890.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Why do internal armed conflicts spark, and what causes them to endure, dragging
countries into years of disorder and anguish? These questions have animated
extensive research in the past two decades, significantly advancing knowledge on
this topic. However, this existing research has focused overwhelmingly on the
world?s most protracted and destructive conflicts. Yet a thorough understanding
of civil war and how it might be prevented must be informed by analyses not only
of rebel groups that achieved an ability to incur large-scale violence,
resisting government counterinsurgency efforts for long periods, but also those
that were defeated before they achieved this capacity for violence.

This project fills that gap by studying the early stages of 18 insurgencies and
their counterinsurgency responses in Uganda from 1986 to 2006. Some of these
conflicts ended quickly, while others raged on for decades. This study will
include conduct extensive interviews of former rebel leaders, military leaders,
and community leaders in Uganda. These interviews will provide critical
information about the events of conflict that are omitted from the historical
record, as well as the beliefs and strategies of key actors in these conflicts
that simply could not otherwise be captured. The method of studying the
microfoundations of multiple conflicts in a single country over a brief period
offers a rare opportunity for controlled comparisons.

One broader impact of this research will be to develop theory and offer new
evidence about early-stage conflict onset and prevention, potentially suggesting
avenues for forestalling conflict in these critical, nascent stages.
Additionally, this research offers an opportunity to learn about the strategy
and behavior of "weak" states that wage counterinsurgencies, a topic that is
arguably understudied today. A better understanding of the logic of conflict in
weakly-governed territories promises to deepen our conceptualization of state
capacity and internal security.