* 0921369
* A Temporal and Spatial Analysis of Gender, Race, and Ethnic Disparities in the Probability of Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,06/30/2012
* Eric Baumer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 93,862.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accumulated social science evidence
suggests that black and Hispanic convicted defendants tend to be significantly
more likely than white defendants to receive a sentence of imprisonment, and
that convicted females are significantly less likely to be sentenced to prison
than males. This project focuses on whether these demographic disparities in the
probability of incarceration have changed during the past two decades in
American urban areas and whether any observed changes are associated with other
social, economic, and political shifts that have occurred during the same
period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines three specific research
questions: (1) Have racial, ethnic, and gender differences in the probability of
incarceration among convicted persons changed during the past two decades?; (2)
Have racial, ethnic, and gender differences in the probability of incarceration
during the past two decades varied across urban counties and states?; and (3)
What social, economic, and policy conditions have been most influential in
shaping trends in racial, ethnic, and gender differences in the probability of
incarceration within and across jurisdictions in the U.S. over this period?
These questions are addressed with a multilevel analysis of more than 90,000
criminal convictions in urban American courts between 1990 and 2008. The project
focuses on absolute and relative trends in the probability of incarceration for
Latinos, non-Latino blacks, non-Latino whites, males, and females, as well as
gender-specific racial and ethnic sub-groups. Particular attention is devoted to
assessing whether shifts in sentencing policies, changes in racial and gender
attitudes, and reductions in objective group differences in social and economic
conditions have yielded changes in demographic disparities in the probability of
incarceration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will illuminate the social
conditions and public policies that characterize places in which racial, ethnic,
and gender disparities are smaller and where they have declined most
significantly during the past two decades.