* 0921354
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Function and Regulation of the Cytoskeleton; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Summer 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2009,09/30/2010
* Margaret Titus, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2010
* USD 92,670.00

This Pan-American Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by
the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in spring/ early
summer of 2010, at the Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, in
Brazil. Organized by Dr. Margaret A. Titus of the University of Minnesota, the
PASI will address the function and regulation of the cytoskeleton. The
cytoskeleton refers to protein fiber arrays within a cell that serve such
functions as establishing cell shape, providing mechanical strength and
locomotion, and other cellular functions. The emphasis of the proposed institute
will be on bridging the various disciplines within the cytoskeleton field such
as biochemistry, cell biology, mathematical modeling and genomics. Students will
rotate through laboratory modules designed to give hands-on training in: enzyme
kinetics, functional cell assays, advanced imaging techniques, bioinformatics,
and computational methods in cell biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity
will promote interdisciplinary discussions and collaborations in the field of
cell biology between new and established investigators in the Americas. Expected
outcomes in this PASI will include the opportunity for students and faculty to
share and apply the lessons learned with their mentors and colleagues in their
home institution. Lectures and other materials from this PASI will be
disseminated through the creation of a course website and student projects will
be made publicly accessible through online video forums. &lt;br/&gt;