* 0921216
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Youth Identity and Internet Technologies: The Case of China
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Tamar Gordon, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2010
* USD 5,455.00

Doctoral student Marcella Szablewicz (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute), with
the guidance of Dr. Tamar Gordon, will investigate the societal dimensions of
internet technology use in the context of government and mass media disapproval.
The research will be carried out in urban China, where the researcher will
examine the role of technology in changing conceptions of modern youth identity
and community.

The researcher will employ a mixed-methods research strategy. She will do
archival research to document how internet use has been portrayed over time and
how the government has responded. She will interview patrons at "internet cafes"
about their use of the new media and map the social relations they establish
both on-line and in the physical spaces where they obtain access. She will
interview programmers about the cultural as well as technical processes involved
in game design, and game users about how they negotiate games in practice.

As in many developing countries where not all households can afford home
computers, Chinese "internet cafés" initially became popular because of economic
necessity. Over time, however, researchers have found that young Chinese have
reappropriated these spaces for social purposes. Simultaneously, the government
and media increasingly has depicted cafés as encouraging anti-social behavior
such as addictive internet habits; careless attitudes toward school, work and
family; and violence. But internet cafés persist as important social sites for
increasing numbers of urban youth. This research project will investigate the
sources and effects of these conflicting portrayals, and thereby contribute to
better understanding of one of the most pervasive tehcnological developments in
the contemporary world. Funding this research also supports the education of a
social scientist.