* 0921435
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Distinguishing Religious and Ethnic Politics in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* John McCauley, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,820.00

The question that this project addresses is how religious preferences differ
from other forms of political preferences, notably ethno-linguistic or tribal
ones, in Africa. To use a metaphor, when one takes off her tribal hat and puts
on a religious hat, do her political preferences change? In addressing this
question, the research also explores how the sociopolitical environment matters.
Do political preferences differ in Muslim- and Christian-dominated regions? In
stable versus tense national political environments? Among members of majority
and minority religious or tribal groups?

The importance of the research comes in its treatment of religion as a unique
catalyst for political preferences. In many contemporary political studies in
Africa, all forms of ascriptive identity groups -language, ethno-linguistic,
racial, and religious- are treated under the umbrella of "ethnic politics." As a
result, religious politics is an under-theorized area within the study of
Africa. Advancing our theoretical understanding of religious political
preferences, however, is becoming increasingly important in the region. Muslim-
Christian tensions have spread to some sub-Saharan African countries, and
African political leaders sometimes make explicit religious appeals followed by
policy changes that evoke religious tenets. The best way for observers and
decision makers to forecast these changes is to understand how political
preferences in the name of religion differ from those in the name of tribe or
other identities.

To address the question, the research will focuses on two countries, Ghana and
Côte d'Ivoire. With support from the Ghana Center for Democratic Development and
the Multitudes Center at the University of Abidjan in Côte d'Ivoire, the
researcher will conduct a field experiment that artificially evokes either the
religious or the ethno-linguistic identity among a sample of individuals in both
Muslim and Christian areas. Randomly selected individuals will be exposed to one
of two professional yet concocted radio reports commenting on relations between
groups in the country. The reports are perfectly identical, only with changes in
the names of groups. One report refers to religious groups and the other to
ethno-linguistic groups. Subjects will then be questioned to ascertain their
preferences regarding preferred types of policies, inter-group relations, and
willingness to use violence. The field experiment will be complemented by a
qualitative analysis of specific religious and tribal groups.

The broader social value of the project comes in its focus on underrepresented
groups and in its effort to build stronger cross-national and cross-religious
networks. The project will provide opportunities for participation by graduate
students in Ghana and Côte d'Ivoire and will include the perspective of the Al-
Sunnah wal Jama-ah sub-group, who have publicly complained of
underrepresentation. Furthermore, the project will enhance networks and
relationships, between American and African researchers and between
collaborators of different religious faiths. In using these networks to overcome
mischaracterizations of religious politics, the project will make tangible
differences in the study environment.