* 0921445
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   Unpacking the Miracle of Private Investment:   The Micro-foundations of Chinese Property Rights
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Melanie Manion, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

How has the private sector flourished and become the main engine of economic
growth in transitional China, where state protection of private property rights
is weak and the democratic system is absent? Departing from the existing state-
centric approaches and treating Chinese property rights not uniformly insecure
throughout China, the project theorizes that the success of the private economy
in China can be traced in part to the actions of private entrepreneurs in
promoting private property rights to secure their investments. This theory is
tested empirically through an examination of social networks, chambers of
commerce, and business political participation, using both qualitative evidence
(from semi-structured interviews) and statistical analysis of an original
survey. A survey of about 800 private entrepreneurs in eight counties in four
provinces (two counties in each province) is conducted, and the survey data is
analyzed to draw broadly generalizable inferences about how and how much social
networks, chambers of commerce and business political participation promote
Chinese property rights and contribute to the growth of China's private economy.

This project is an interdisciplinary study that bridges political science,
sociology, and economics, and it uses both qualitative and quantitative methods.
In particular, this project contributes to three strands of literature. In the
realm of Chinese politics studies, it adds to our knowledge of chambers of
commerce and business political participation, thus advancing our understanding
of how Chinese capitalists promote their interests and influence policymaking.
It also generates insights that extend well beyond China by specifying that
private property rights are not at a uniform level of security within states but
circumstance-specific, a situation that may be applicable to other developing
and transitional states. At the most general level, it contributes to the study
of informal institutions as well as the relationship between formal and informal
institutions by identifying the informal contract enforcement mechanisms under
weak state protection of property rights.

Beyond its intellectual merit, this dissertation has broader impacts. The survey
datasets are expected to be useful for China specialists as well as scholars
interested in comparing property rights cross-nationally in transitional states.
It will also contribute to inform Chinese scholars of the interdisciplinary
approach with rigorous methods in empirical studies of political science.
Finally, findings from this project will likely indicate that China's private
economic miracle cannot be explained by government action and its formal
regulations alone, but requires us also to examine actions of private
entrepreneurs. Understanding the basis of the Chinese economic miracle is
important not only for China to develop policies that would allow its economic
growth to continue, but also important for the U.S. to project what the Chinese
economy will look like in the future, which will have implications for U.S.
policy vis-Ã -vis China. Even more importantly, understanding China can help us
develop better development policies for other developing countries.