* 0921761
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Using Mugshots to Improve Eyewitness Identification Accuracy
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2009,05/31/2010
* Charles Goodsell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 05/31/2010
* USD 6,055.00

Recent advances in DNA testing have uncovered an alarming observation: innocent
people are in prison and the guilty people that committed those crimes are at
large. In the majority of the false conviction cases, faulty eyewitness
identification is to blame. One standard police practice, showing witnesses
mugshots of potential offenders (or people who may resemble them), accounts for
some of these errors. This research identifies cases where the ability of an
eyewitness to identify a perpetrator might be harmed or enhanced by the process
of searching though a series of mugshots following the crime. Research has shown
that witnesses who view mugshots may be less able to correctly identify the
perpetrator of the crime. Moreover, witnesses can mistake individuals they view
in a mugshot search for the perpetrator, even when subsequently presented with
the actual perpetrator. From a memory and decision-making perspective,
techniques are needed that avoid biasing a witness? memory, while at the same
time aiding the police search for the culprit of the crime. This research
includes an empirical exploration of the factors that produce lineup
identification errors due to a prior exposure to a mugshot search and develops a
formally-specified theoretical explanation for how these effects operate. In
addition, new techniques designed to avoid these errors will be tested. This
will allow us to develop better police practices for aiding a culprit search
without harming the ability of the eyewitness to make an identification.