* 0921472
* Conference: 2009 CSHL Conference on Yeast Cell Biology, August 11-15, 2009 in Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2009,06/30/2010
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2010
* USD 29,845.00

This award is to support the Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Yeast Cell
Biology, which will be held on August 11-15, 2009, at Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Research in the past decade has spurred tremendous progress in our understanding
of molecular mechanisms that underlie cell function. Advances have come from
multiple cell types and organisms, and yeast systems have often been at the
forefront in the discovery of new proteins, pathways, structures, and in
mechanistic insights. Despite its existence as a unicellular organism, yeast has
also revealed unexpected insights into the physiology of multicellular organisms
and the functions of specialized tissues. Yeast cell biology continues to be a
vibrant field of research, and yeast systems are critically important to the
larger research community by serving as the test bed for new concepts and
technologies. The intellectual merit of the meeting series on Yeast Cell Biology
is that it will create a premier forum for the discussion and exchange of
cutting-edge discoveries about the internal functions of eukaryotic cells. The
program will include eight sessions covering a wide range of topics in cell
biology including membrane trafficking, cytoskeleton, the cell cycle, polarity,
chromosomes, nuclear organization, and signaling, with a focus on higher order
regulation that integrates these diverse events. Each session will be led by two
outstanding and well-known investigators in the relevant area. With the
exception of short talks presented by the session chairs, all of the talks and
posters to be presented will be selected from submitted abstracts, and most of
the talks will be given by students, postdoctoral fellows and other junior
investigators. It is expected that more than 275 scientists will attend. Of
these, over half are likely to be graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.
The meeting will provide a stimulating environment for the free flowing
discussion of some of the most exciting data and concepts at the frontiers of
knowledge in cell biology. Given the rapid pace of developments in the field,
this meeting presents an exciting opportunity for participants to learn about
recent breakthroughs that will be relevant to their own research both in yeast
and in other systems.

The broader impacts of the conference include the scientific implications for
other fields beyond yeast cell biology, as discoveries in this field will
continue to foster a rapid pace of fundamental discoveries and insights that
impact the physiologies of all life forms. In addition, they include elements of
education, training, resource sharing, and opportunities for interaction and
collaboration. In particular, the meeting will provide: (i) training
opportunities for junior scientists that will promote the development of
presentation skills as well as overall scientific quality and analytical rigor,
(ii) an intimate setting that will foster meaningful scientific interactions
among scientists at all career levels, (iii) the dissemination of knowledge
among multiple strata of research and educational institutions, (iv) sharing of
resources, both material and informational, and (v) opportunities for the
initiation of collaborations, which can benefit scientists from smaller labs
and/or from primarily undergraduate (teaching) institutions who may have fewer
resources and more limited access to cutting-edge technologies than do
scientists from major research institutions.