* 0921204
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Causal Effects of Leaders' Selection Rules on Participation and Rent-Seeking Behavior in Ugandan Farmer Associations
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 11,800.00

State withdrawal and the (relative) democratization of many developing countries
have encouraged the proliferation of voluntary, self-help organizations, such as
micro-finance and farmer associations. Unfortunately, only very little is known
about the factors influencing those groups' ability to provide services to their
members. The central question motivating this study is whether observed
variation in voluntary associations' provision of services is a function of the
rules governing their leaders' selection.

More specifically, studying the performance of farmer associations that were
created as part of Uganda's largest development program, the research examines
the causal effect of different rules for selecting leaders on members' behavior
(e.g. participation-level) and leaders' behavior in office (e.g. effort-level
and rent-seeking). In self-help associations, rules for selecting senior
executives are usually clustered around two opposing types. One selection rule
is Direct Vote, i.e. all association members vote directly for their preferred
candidate. Alternatively, members elect representatives who are imbued with the
powers to select the association's senior executives. Proponents of direct vote
argue that this rule increases grassroots participation and the legitimacy of
leaders. It has also been argued that direct vote reduces the likelihood that
the management be captured by narrow self-interests. By contrast, proponents of
representatives' vote argue that representatives are better positioned to elect
able and honest candidates. This, they argue, is because ordinary members tend
to be myopic, under-appreciate the qualifications needed to perform complex
managerial tasks, and lack information on candidates.

Obviously, resolving this debate has important theoretical and practical
implications. Alas, testing the relative effectiveness of leaders' selection
rules is empirically challenging, since in almost all naturally occurring
settings, electoral rules are chosen endogenously through a complex political
process.

To overcome the selection-bias problem, the proposed study relies on a unique
situation in which leaders' selection rules were externally assignment to newly-
formed farmer associations by project facilitators. Conditional upon identifying
well-matched control groups, this external assignment, allows the estimation of
the causal effects of selection rules on the behavior of both members and
leaders, and ultimately on the provision of services to group members.

The study makes several contributions. First, by using micro-level and by
examining dynamics within small groups in which members' interests are closely
aligned, this study is well positioned to test some core political science
hypotheses regarding the relation between voting rules, voters' information and
participation and leaders' accountability and responsiveness. In addition, due
to its powerful identification strategy, this study contributes to theory-
building in topics such as social choice, participatory democracy, elite
capture, rent-seeking and political selection. Third, this study makes several
methodological contributions, for example the integration of measures of
managerial abilities from organizational psychology and economics into political
economy models, and the use of IV at the cluster level to measure outcome
variations at the individual level.