* 0921058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Rethinking the Institutional Basis of Urban Development - Hurricane Katrina and Neighborhood Recovery Efforts in New Orleans
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* John Oliver, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2011
* USD 12,000.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the urban development literature
social capital is considered essential to community development, and yet
empirical evidence that supports this claim has been mixed. In light of the gap
between theoretical justifications and empirical findings, this project will
examine the following questions: Are poor neighborhoods any different from their
richer counterparts in terms of their organizational pattern and density, and
how is it associated with community development? To what extent is social
capital effective in promoting urban development, and which aspect of social
capital is associated with the processes of urban development? Ultimately, what
are the political and social forces that shape the topography of social capital
in urban areas? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will answer these
questions by looking at the effects of New Orleans's preexisting neighborhood
institutions on the pace and scope of recovery after Hurricane Katrina. Using
GIS, the investigator reconstructs the topography of local institutions that
existed before Hurricane Katrina and statistically analyzes whether there is an
association among poverty, local institutional arrangements and post-Katrina
resettlement. Also, interviews with public housing residents and authorities
will shed light on the extent to which political forces shape the
characteristics of social capital at the local
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically, this project can refine the running
conceptualization of social capital by juxtaposing formal and institutional
dimensions of social relations with informal, horizontal networks. Furthermore,
the results will help us better understand empirically the mechanisms through
which social capital is formed and contributes to the development of urban
areas. This, in turn, will encourage the design and implementation of urban
policies that correctly reflect the needs and interests of residents and
allocate resources accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project
will be disseminated to the residents of New Orleans via newsletter and media
coverage. The investigator also plans to discuss the results of the proposed
study to a group of urban planners, community leaders, and government officials
who are engaged in the reconstruction of New Orleans as well as other disaster-
stricken areas in the United States. The complete dataset of New Orleans?s pre-
Katrina organizations will be shared with the scholars of urban studies who are
interested in empirically understanding the sources of development in American
cities. This will potentially promote research activities that utilize the model
of the proposed study in those cities that are experiencing decline and need
strategies for redevelopment.