* 0921207
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Risk, Time Preference, and Poverty on the Impacts of Forest Property Rights Reform
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Karen Sullivan, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

This dissertation research examines how individual preferences over time
(present vs. future) and risk can affect people's forest management responses to
strengthened forest property rights. In an effort to stem on-going degradation
of the world's forests, many developing countries have implemented property
right reforms that transfer responsibility for these resources from the state to
communities and individuals, who can then make their own decisions in managing
and harvesting the forests. The goal of such reforms is to encourage sustainable
resource use; however, too often reform efforts have failed to achieve this
goal. Contrary to the goal of the reform, individuals with a strong preference
for immediate benefits or who are unwilling to take future risks (both of which
are common among the poor) may use the forest resources faster even when given
stronger property rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines these
issues in the context of rural China, where a large-scale reform of forest
property rights has been implemented in areas where the poverty rate is still
high. This research uses field experiments that involve real monetary rewards to
capture individual time and risk preferences of forestholders and then
integrates the field experiment data with household-level survey data in a
framework to identify how changes in household's forest investment (e.g.,
afforestation, labor, etc.) in response to stronger property rights depends on
their preferences over time and risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
add to the existing literature on the effectiveness of property rights to
encourage sustainable natural resource management by examining the heterogeneity
in how people respond to property rights reform depending on individual
preferences. Also, this research will link preferences elicited in experiments
to behavioral responses to institutional reforms as few previous studies have
done. The outcome of this research is important to policymakers in China and
elsewhere because it will identify circumstances in which property rights reform
may not work as intended.