* 0921833
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Subjective Expectations, Information and Competitiveness in East African Agricultural Output Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Christopher Barrett, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 08/31/2011
* USD 42,150.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses critical
questions about the operation of agricultural markets in East Africa, focusing
specifically on cotton markets in Tanzania. Over the last two decades Tanzania
has made significant steps toward price liberalization and integration with
world commodity markets. While the potential benefits of market liberalization
are well understood, it is not entirely clear that the current structure and
operation of agricultural output markets benefit the rural poor, who are the
primary focus of development policy in this region. Simply put, although
development strategies increasingly rely on markets to guide resource
allocation, researchers know remarkably little about market functioning and the
resulting price patterns in rural African markets. The PI's ask three important
questions about Tanzanian cotton markets: First, what is the relationship
between the subjective price and yield expectations held by farmers and their
production and marketing choices? Second, noting that there exists considerable
temporal and spatial dispersion of producer prices, what are the farmer, trader
and local market characteristics that determine the actual price received by a
particular producer? Third, are the price spreads earned as profits by cotton
traders more consistent with full competition or with non-competitive, collusive
behavior? The PI's address these questions by gathering two unique data sets. To
address the first question, they will supply farmers with cell phones and
collect their immediate, subjective expectations regarding harvest time prices
and yields at bimonthly intervals throughout the course of an entire planting,
cultivation, harvest and marketing year. To assess the second two questions,
they will conduct a two-year panel survey of agricultural traders, with traders
matched to farmers who are part of a three-year panel being gathered by the
World Bank and Tanzanian National Bureau of Statistics. The results of the
project will shed new light on price discovery and formation processes, and on
the relation between market functioning and supply response in low-income rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;By emphasizing the role that expectations at the individual
level play in determining agricultural production and marketing decisions, the
research joins a recent, fast-growing literature incorporating insights about
the importance of expectations into the analysis of economic outcomes. The
question of trader competitiveness is an open one that has been addressed in
recent papers, but without the benefit of a matched farmer-trader panel like the
one they propose to gather. The two data sets they aim to gather are both highly
innovative. There are no available matched trader-farmer surveys, and no
attempts have been made to use cell phones to capture subjective expectations at
regular intervals over an extended period. Thus in addition to addressing
important questions on the frontier of agricultural and development economics,
the research will pioneer new data collection methods that could prove useful
for gathering high frequency subjective data in other
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Recent volatility in
world agricultural markets, and the expected ongoing volatility from increased
use of organic fuels, speculation in commodity markets and climate change, make
the questions the PI's address important not only for the design of policy in
rural east Africa and the advancement of knowledge in the field, but also for
broader understanding of the workings of globalized commodity markets and their
connection to rural poverty reduction in low-income, agrarian nations. If price
changes in global commodity markets do not transmit cleanly to farmers, or if
farmers do not adjust their expectations and behavior in response to market
developments, then policymakers must take this into account in the design and
implementation of market-based solutions to global poverty. The findings from
this study should be of broad interest to non-governmental organizations,
government ministries, international donor organizations, the private sector
agribusiness community and national and regional media