* 0921142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Nonresponse and Measurement Error in Mobile Phone Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Courtney Kennedy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Landline telephone surveys have been used for several decades to generate
critical knowledge about consumer confidence, health conditions, political
attitudes, and other characteristics of the American public. The coverage
provided by this methodology is rapidly declining due to widespread adoption
and, in many cases, substitution of mobile (cell) phones over landlines. In
order to address this problem, survey researchers have begun supplementing
landline surveys with samples of mobile phone numbers. The error properties of
mobile phone surveys, particularly with respect to nonresponse and measurement,
are largely unknown. Researchers have limited knowledge as to why some people
answer surveys on their mobile phone but others do not. It is also an open
question as to whether people respond less accurately on a mobile phone as
compared to a landline. The potential to reach people outside the home or
engaged in an activity that distracts from the task of responding could result
in respondents taking more cognitive shortcuts and providing less accurate data
relative to a landline interview. These dynamics could also reduce the
reliability of survey estimates and, for some measures, even change the mean of
the response distribution. This proposal details an innovative study that will
address these gaps in the literature. A repeated-measures design will be used to
gain insights into individual-level mechanisms of nonresponse to alert
researches to statistics at greatest risk of nonresponse bias. Randomization of
subjects to phone type (mobile/landline) will facilitate testing for
differential use of cognitive shortcuts in mobile phone versus landline
interviews. The randomization step used in this experiment overcomes a critical
confound that limits previous studies. This research will generate much-needed
knowledge about the quality of data from mobile phone surveys. This knowledge
will inform data collection decisions made by researchers who produce statistics
about the American public.&lt;br/&gt;