* 0921230
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Interplay of Culture and Subjectivity in Shaping Responses to Mental Illness
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2009,01/31/2011
* Steven Parish, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2011
* USD 14,999.00

University of California, San Diego, Doctoral student Charlotte van den Hout,
with the guidance of Dr. Steven M. Parish, will investigate the impact of the
socio-cultural environment on personal experiences of mental illness. The
research will explore how culture and society shape conceptions of illness; how
illness, treatment, and their cultural meanings impact the sufferer's sense of
self and relationship to the social environment; and how cultural conceptions of
illness are employed by the sufferer when coping with distress and seeking
catharsis. This research on the socio-cultural dimensions of psychological
distress will contribute to improved understanding of human cognitive universals
and culturally specific variations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
carried out among Muslim women in Morocco using a comparative research design.
Van den Hout will collect data on women's interaction with two different sources
of treatment for psychological distress: a psychiatric hospital that identifies
and treats mental disorders according to the bio-medical, DSM-IV manual of
diagnostic criteria, and a center for spiritual healing that takes part in a
heterodox Islamic cult of spirit possession and saint worship. The researcher
will observe treatment sessions and will interview psychiatrists and healers.
She also will carry out intensive life-history interviews with patients at both
sites. Finally, the researcher will conduct a brief diagnostic interview with
each patient, in order to enable comparison of patient experiences at the two
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to better insight into
the cultural dimension of illness experience and treatment-seeking behavior.
Findings will inform cross-cultural social science illness theory as well as
policy makers and professionals in the field of global healthcare. Funding this
research also supports the education of a social scientist.