* 0921271
* Peer Stress in Preadolescence: Psychophysiological and Coping Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,07/31/2013
* Mona El-Sheikh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 07/31/2013
* USD 376,104.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition to middle school is
associated with declines in psychological well-being and academic engagement for
many preadolescents. The challenge of this developmental period may be that
normative biological changes and school transitions are coupled with escalating
stress in peer relationships. Peers can provide crucial companionship and
support during preadolescence; at the same time, they can become sources of
considerable distress. Indeed, feelings of social anxiety and experiences of
peer rebuff typically peak around middle school, and nearly half of middle
school students report that they are bullied at least occasionally. Relatively
little is currently known, however, about responses to common peer stressors in
preadolescence that may prevent or exacerbate subsequent problems. In this
research project, preadolescents' real-time physiological and coping responses
to common peer stressors (social evaluation and peer rebuff) will be assessed in
a laboratory simulation prior to middle school, and examined as predictors of
social, emotional, and academic outcomes one year later. Participants will be
ethnically and socioeconomically diverse, allowing the investigators to extend
the research to understudied populations. The specific objectives of the
proposed research are to: (1) characterize prosocial and defensive coping
responses to peer stress; (2) examine theoretically-based associations among
coping responses and physiological responses (i.e., sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system responses); (3) investigate how pre-transition
physiological and coping responses predict important outcomes across the
transition to middle school, including social and school adjustment as well as
emotional and physical health, assessed via multiple informants (e.g.,
preadolescents, parents, teachers); and (4) examine whether stress responses
differentially predict middle school outcomes depending on gender, ethnicity,
temperament, or earlier peer experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will test an integrative conceptual model which proposes that prosocial and
defensive responses to peer stress are interconnected at physiological and
behavioral levels and related to subsequent social experiences and psychosocial
adjustment. Results of the research will improve understanding of coping
responses that may protect preadolescents against excessive feelings of fear and
humiliation that can disrupt progress toward critical social and educational
accomplishments. New discoveries about the physiology of stress experiences and
coping responses are also anticipated, informing efforts to tailor interventions
to the behavioral and physiological profiles of preadolescents with peer
problems. In addition, the project will provide advanced training in
interdisciplinary research for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students.