* 0921849
* Compulsory Licensing - Evidence from the 'Trading with the Enemy Act'
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Petra Moser, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 304,154.00

Compulsory licensing has been advanced as a policy tool to deliver life-saving
drugs to millions of patients in developing countries and in the United States.
Under this policy, which is permissible under the Trade Related Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement, governments grant domestic firms the right to
produce inventions that are patented by foreign nationals, without the consent
of patent owners. Compulsory licensing offers obvious short-term benefits as it
grants quick access to medicines and other essential innovations. The policy?s
long run effects, however, are unclear. On the one hand, compulsory licensing
may reduce incentives to invest in R&amp;D as it weakens the property rights of
original inventors. On the other hand, compulsory licensing may promote
invention as it enables a new set of firms to gain experience with production,
which in turn creates opportunities for learning by doing and strengthens
incentives to invest in scientific training and other skills that are necessary
for invention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses an exogenous event of
compulsory licensing after World War I to measure the long-run effects of
compulsory licensing on domestic invention in the licensing country.
Specifically, we compare changes in patents by domestic inventors across U.S.
chemical inventions that were differentially affected by compulsory licensing
under the Trading with the Enemy Act (TWEA) of World War I. Preliminary tests on
a subset of chemical patents suggest that compulsory licensing has a large
positive effect on domestic invention. Preliminary tests also suggest that the
full effects of compulsory licensing set in only after about 10 years, even
though some effects appear after about 5 years. Thus, due to their long-run
nature, the full effects of compulsory licensing may be missed in analysis of
contemporary data.