* 0921838
* Collaborative Research: Linking loess landforms and eolian processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2009,12/31/2011
* Paul Hanson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 12/31/2011
* USD 45,730.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project will investigate the origin of large, striking landforms that occur
in areas of thick loess (sediment formed by deposition of wind-blown dust), in
North America, northern China, and central Europe. These landforms may extend
for tens of kilometers and are aligned with prevailing winds, and they are
especially well-developed in Nebraska, USA, where the research will be
conducted. Two hypotheses on loess landform development will be tested, each of
which makes distinctly different assumptions about the stability of dust after
its initial deposition. One hypothesis assumes that settled dust will not be
remobilized unless it is disturbed by wind-blown sand moving by saltation (short
hops near the ground surface). The other hypothesis assumes that the coarse-
grained dust forming most thick loess deposits is readily remobilized by the
wind, and many loess landforms are formed by erosion after initial accumulation.
The potential for loess deposits to be set in motion by the wind, with or
without saltating sand, will be investigated using the recently developed
Portable In Situ Wind Erosion Laboratory (PI-SWERL). In addition, the two
hypotheses lead to different predictions about the spatial patterns of loess
grain size and deposition rate, and how these properties would have changed over
time. These predictions will be refined through quantitative modeling of dust
transportation by wind, and will then be tested using grain size analysis and
optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating of loess sections, which directly
determines the time since the loess was originally deposited.

This project will provide new insight on where and how loess deposits can become
sources of dust in response to climatic or land-use change. If the second
hypothesis is valid, for example, past wind erosion of loess was sufficient to
carve out large landforms, potentially producing enormous quantities of dust.
Dust is a common environmental hazard today in some areas of thick loess such as
northern China, and was a hazard in the Great Plains in the 1930s and 1950s, but
historical observations probably do not represent the full range of potential
wind erosion and dust production. Thick loess deposits are also an important
source of information on past climate change, over thousands to millions of
years. The results of this project should allow a better assessment of climate
factors, by documenting the complex processes that influence the deposition and
long-term stability of loess.