* 0921429
* Dissertation Research:  The Determinants and Outcomes of Male Social Status in a Rapidly Acculturating Amazonian Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/28/2011
* Michael Gurven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 11,750.00

University of California, Santa Barbara graduate student, Christopher von
Rueden, with the guidance of Dr. Michael Gurven, will undertake research on male
social hierarchy in a small-scale Amazonian society. While social status
differentials are common to all human societies, the origin of human status
differentials remains unclear. What traits enable individuals to achieve higher
status in a given culture, and what potential benefits motivate their status-
seeking? Existing ethnographies of male status tend to explore the link between
only one particular trait and social status, or lack a longitudinal design to
properly assess causal relationships. Filling this knowledge gap in fast-
disappearing small-scale societies is critical, in part because these societies
provide unique insight into the ancestral socio-ecologies in which human status-
seeking behavior originated.

The researcher will conduct 12 months of fieldwork among the Tsimane forager-
horticulturalists of the Bolivian Amazon. Photo-ranking, interviews, medical
exams, and collective action experiments will be used to compare several
measures of social status (e.g. small-group leadership and community-wide
influence), several determinants of status (e.g. age, hunting skill,
personality, income, and number of close kin), and several outcomes of status
acquisition (e.g. fertility and health). Data gathered in previous field seasons
will be used to evaluate how investments in particular traits may or may not
have led to subsequent status acquisition. Research will extend across four
Tsimane villages, which differ in size and level of acculturation, such as
access to education and material wealth.

This study represents one of the only quantitative analyses of social status to
consider different determinants of status simultaneously and will be among the
first to evaluate the health outcomes of social status in a non-industrial,
small-scale society. The cross-village research design will provide a unique
opportunity to investigate how socio-economic changes within a society shape the
determinants and outcomes of social hierarchies. Funding this research also
supports the education of a social scientist.