* 0921403
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute on Quantum Gravity, Mexico City, Mexico; June 23rd-July 3rd, 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2010
* Donald Marolf, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2010
* USD 91,272.00

0921403&lt;br/&gt;Marolf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award on quantum gravity, jointly supported by the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics, will take
place June 23rd through July 3rd, 2010 at the National Autonomous University of
Mexico in Morelia, Mexico. Organized by Dr. Donald Marolf of the University of
California Santa Barbara (UCSB), the PASI will address active approaches to
developing theories of quantum gravity, including String Theory, Loop Quantum
Gravity, and the relatively new Causal Dynamical Triangulations. The PASI will
feature interactions with 12 distinguished leaders in the field and 40 junior
researchers and advanced graduate students from the United States and Latin
America. In addition, the activity is scheduled just prior to the 19th
International Conference on General Relativity and Gravitation (GR19), to be
held July 5-9th, 2010, in Mexico City. Participants to the PASI will be
encouraged to attend the GR19 conference, a leading international conference on
gravitational physics, where they can build on their PASI experience as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes of this PASI include the opportunity to
establish and solidify Pan-American ties in the field of quantum gravity.
Furthermore, the PASI also aims to develop human resources and build
international/intercultural connections between participants and lecturers. The
results of the PASI will be disseminated through an electronic medium, a PASI
website to be constructed at the UCSB to serve as the permanent repository of
sound and video recordings of the lectures. The lectures will also be placed in
searchable video archives and made available through the internet in visual and
audio format. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;