* 0921614
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:   The Development of The Rule of Law in China
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mary Gallagher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carol A. Mershon
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

Unpredictability is an effective means of autocratic rule. Seminal works on
property rights claim that democracies are characterized by the rule of law and
protection of property rights (North and Thomas 1973; North 1990). However,
empirical studies on the correlation between democracy and the rule of law are
inconclusive. While some scholars have indeed found that democracies are more
likely to protect property rights (Leblang 1996; Rigobon and Rodrik 2004),
others find no relationship. Barro (2000) argues that the rule of law and
protection of property rights occur in both democracies and dictatorships. This
project is motivated by one puzzle: Why are dictators, with the means of
repression in their hands, induced to make their own behavior predictable by
building the rule of law?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explains this
puzzle in the context of sub-national China. The research consists of three
parts: case studies, data collection, and survey research. Three cases are
examined. These consist of three Chinese counties.The major goal of case studies
was to refine the theory and measurements. We expect to spend 8 months in these
counties. After the first stage of case studies, we extend the study to a
large-N analysis. Cases of the large-N analysis include the 100 counties that
were sampled in the survey "Institutionalization of Legal Reform in China" which
was implemented in 2004 by Peking University's Research Center for Contemporary
China. The a survey is used to obtain some subjective measures of the rule of
law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has important theoretical and practical
implications. Existing measurement of rule of law is often subjective and cross-
national, for example, World Banks Transparency International and UNDP's Global
Integrity. One important contribution this study will make is to create a data
set of measures of the rule of law at the sub-national level within a nation.
There is also a recent resurgence of social science interest in Chinese law,
especially people's legal behavior and legal attitudes (e.g. Diamant, Lubman and
O?Brien 2005; Gallagher 2006; Michelson 2007). Legal scholars have been focused
on China's legal institutions (Lubman 1999; Peerenboom 2002), their analyses are
good at descriptions but often fall short of causal analysis. This research
fills this gap by bridging institutional analysis and behavioral studies and
offers a micro-foundation for the development of rule of law in China. The study
also has policy implications. China is entering several important international
protocols, including the WTO, Kyoto Protocol, et cetera. After the national
government signs agreements with the international community, previous failures
of compliance call into question local governments' incentive to enforce these
laws and regulations (Mertha 2005). This research provides a theoretical
foundation for policy makers both in China and abroad to enhance means to
guarantee enforcement.