* 0921168
* Evaluating a Fronto-Basal-Ganglia White-Matter Network for Behavioral Stopping in Lesion Patients
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2012
* Adam Aron, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 377,336.00

How are we able to prevent ourselves from being distracted? How can we overcome
our compulsions, tics and inappropriate urges? These are questions about
cognitive control. A good understanding of the psychological and neural
mechanisms underlying such control is of paramount importance for many aspects
of everyday life as well as for basic science. A fruitful way to study cognitive
control is to examine how people stop already initiated responses. Stopping an
already initiated response could be an experimental model for the way in which
we stop all kinds of urges in everyday life. Recent research suggests that
stopping is achieved by several key "nodes" in the brain. It is likely that
communication between the nodes occurs via long-range connections (white matter
tracts). With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Adam Aron and
his research team will test this idea of a network of long-range connections
underlying stopping behavior. The approach is twofold: first, to use a form of
neuroimaging to measure the strength of the connections in a sample of healthy
young adults, and to examine how variations in the strength of the connections
relates to individual differences in the behavioral ability to stop; second, to
image the connections in patients with specific brain injuries. If particular
connections are key for stopping, then damage to these connections will produce
problems with stopping even when the key brain "nodes" themselves are intact.
Overall, these studies will harness recently-developed methods for the analysis
of brain connections to reveal novel information about how the network of
connections between key brain regions underlies human control. They are in
keeping with recent developments in cognitive neuroscience which emphasize the
importance of connections rather than just brain regions themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded work will complement activities in Dr. Aron's
laboratory which already have an impact on science education at multiple stages,
including outreach activities in San Diego area schools, hosting of minority
students in the lab and undergraduate and graduate teaching. The work adds
unique educational value by introducing new scientific components into Dr.
Aron's lab and department: these include the study of patients with brain
lesions and methods for analyzing brain connections. Overall, the planned
experiments could yield information about the neural architecture of stopping
that has implications for diverse domains such as human development,
jurisprudence and neuropsychiatry. Alterations in brain connections, perhaps
related to developmental delays, disease, or injury, could lead to deficits in
inhibiting inappropriate actions. Various neuropsychiatric disorders, such as
attention deficits, tic disorders, over-eating and substance abuse may relate to
alterations in the brain connections underlying stopping.