* 0921689
* Disability Risk, Disability Insurance and Life-Cycle Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Luigi Pistaferri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 74,382.00

The goal of this proposal is to provide a framework for understanding how
disability risk and the features of the Social Security Disability Insurance
(DI) program in the US affect consumption and labor supply behavior in an
explicit life-cycle setting. Analyses of the DI program are a growing topic of
research, but they are still relatively underfunded and understudied. For
example, Unemployment Insurance (UI) is a much more studied program than DI,
especially by macro and labor economists. This is despite the fact that in 2007
DI paid cash benefits totaling $99.1 billions, three times more than UI. The DI
program is also growing very fast. For example, between 1985 and 2007 the
proportion of people on DI doubled, from 2.4 of the covered population to 4.7
percent. Most researchers now agree that the DI program is growing at
unsustainable rates. The financial sustainability of the whole U.S. social
insurance system may be affected. The recent growth in the size of the DI
program has renewed the calls for a redesign of the program aimed at reducing
benefits generosity, increasing strictness in the definition of a qualifying
disability, and in general reducing the extent of what is known as the moral
hazard problem of DI, i.e., non-disabled individuals applying for benefits and
being admitted into the program. The existing empirical literature has indeed
found convincing evidence for the existence of moral hazard effects, mostly
based on reduced form analyses. For example, there is a large literature
documenting a positive effect of DI benefits on DI application and a strong
correlation between fall in participation and rise in generosity of disability
insurance. On the other hand, due to the unobservability of the true disability
status, any restriction in the access to the program would necessarily deny
insurance to some deserving individuals. Some of the existing structural studies
have tried to measure the welfare value of having the DI program in place. A lot
has been learned from these earlier papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
would develop a life-cycle theoretical framework that is rich, realistic, and
relaxes most of the simplifying assumptions made in the earlier literature. It
would estimate the parameters of the model and then use this theoretical
framework to evaluate alternative policies weighting the inefficiency of the
program against the insurance it provides. In particular, it would evaluate the
importance of the disincentives to work and save generated by the program. It
would also plans use this framework to analyze behavior in alternative economic
environments, specifically, how individual behavior responds to changes to the
features of the DI program (such as making the program less generous) or to the
introduction of new ones (such as policies aimed at moving some DI beneficiaries
back to work).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed model tries to strike a balance
between realism and feasibility. It allows for life cycle saving and complex
wage dynamics, on the ground that, given the opportunity cost of applying for DI
benefits and the fact that health also affects individual productivity, moral
hazard considerations should be more relevant when wage shocks are permanent
than if they are temporary. The proposed preference specification allows for
non-separability between consumption, leisure and health status (this means that
a fall of consumption on disability does not necessarily indicate a welfare
loss, but a way to smooth consumption across states). Finally, the model allows
for interactions between the DI program and other social insurance programs, as
well as labor market frictions. Structural parameters of the model will be
identified using Indirect Inference and longitudinal data from SIPP and PSID.
The model is used to evaluate the welfare effect of various program changes: (a)
Increasing the strictness of the disability test; (b) Changing the probability
of re-assessment for DI; (c) Changing the progressivity of DI payments, and (d)
Reducing the costs of work or increasing job opportunities for people with
disabilities, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The ability to evaluate
the welfare effect of the changes above in a coherent unified framework has
important policy implications. Some of these changes have been explicitly
considered as possible solutions to the moral hazard problem underlying the
expansion of DI rolls of the last two decades. This expansion represents a
direct cost for the program because fewer individuals contribute to its
financing. Given that the DI program is part of the Social Security system, its
forecast expansion has important implications for long-term sustainability of
the Social Security system as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;