* 0921859
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reindigenization and in situ Conservation of Crop Diversity in the Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2009,01/31/2012
* Virginia Nazarea, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2012
* USD 17,575.00

University of Georgia doctoral student, Kristine Skarbo, with guidance from Dr.
Virginia Nazarea, will undertake research on how sociocultural factors affect
the way farmers maintain crop diversity. Her research will focus on the
Ecuadorian Andes. The Andean region long has been a center of origin of
agriculture, where farmers have domesticated and developed a wealth of varieties
with distinct properties and genetic make-ups within a number of crop species.
Over recent decades, this diversity has declined, in part because indigenous
practices have been devalued and people have turned away from traditional foods.
However, recently there have been radical shifts in political as well as social
landscapes across the Andean region, sometimes referred to as
"reindigenization." By recasting indigeneity in a more positive light, these
developments provide a natural laboratory in which to better understand the
relationship between social, cultural, and political processes and the
maintenance of crop diversity.

The researcher will employ a mixture of social science research methods,
including participant observation, archival research, focus group discussions,
life history interviews, ethnobotanical collection, a seasonal interview survey,
and comparison with a crop diversity data set collected in the study area six
years earlier. These qualitative and quantitative data will allow her to assess
whether the reindigenization process can be linked to changes over time in the
symbolic values of food, food consumption patterns, and crop diversity.

This research is important because it will produce a detailed measurement of the
region's crop diversity and how it has changed over the past six years. By also
connecting this changing inventory to cultural and political changes, the
research will advance social scientific understanding of the connections between
the larger society, farmer management, and plant genetic resources. Thus the
research will contribute to both local and global conservation and development
efforts, as well as to the education of a graduate student.