* 0921441
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Significance, Exchange and Access: Mandinka Seed Systems and Concepts of Intellectual Property
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2011
* Virginia Nazarea, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2011
* USD 15,000.00

University of Georgia graduate student Susannah Chapman, with the guidance of
Dr. Virginia Nazarea, will undertake research on how traditional subsistence
farmers conceive of property in seeds and plants. Over the past two decades, the
privatization of crop varieties through intellectual property rights law under
the World Trade Organization has sparked a number of debates concerning Farmers'
Rights, access to plant resources, benefit sharing, and cross-cultural concepts
of property in plants and associated knowledge. To investigate how farmers
conceptualize property rights in plants, Chapman will undertake research in the
Lower River Division of The Gambia, where farmers cultivate rice and millet for
household subsistence and commercial sale.

The study draws on a wide range of historic and ethnographic methods including
archival research, semi-structured and life history interviews, seed network
analysis, and focus groups to determine how farmers conceive of property in
seeds and how farmers access different crop varieties. In particular, this
research explores the concepts of value, exchange and access as they relate to
farmers' management of crop resources in The Gambia. These three concepts are
central to studies in property theory and common resource management research.
Understanding how these concepts relate to seed systems will enable a more
nuanced investigation of ideas such as private ownership, public goods, and open
access concerning seeds and associated knowledge.

This study will contribute to social science theory on traditional legal
processes that are not articulated through conflict resolution. In this sense,
the project enables greater understanding of the relationships between customary
and codified legal systems common in many parts of the world today. A better
understanding of farmers' own systems for owning, accessing, valuing and
exchanging crop varieties will also contribute to improving state and
international law for intellectual property rights. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.