* 0921313
* Defining Critical Roles of Siderophore Structures in Environmental Trace Metal Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Andrzej Jarzecki, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2013
* USD 297,256.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The perceived environmental roles of siderophores, biogenic chelating agents
exuded by organisms to increase the bioavailability of iron by complexation,
have traditionally excluded the involvement of other important trace metals and
focused largely on biologically facilitated iron solubilization and transport.
Recent work has suggested that siderophores likely are involved in the
biological solubilization and uptake of other environmentally important trace
metals, including Cr, Mn, and Co. That siderophores may play important, possibly
specific, roles with these other metals is suggested by the fact that
siderophore complexes of these metals may have stability constants that equal or
exceed those for ferric iron. The palette of siderophore-metal binding strengths
that occurs across the periodic table, combined with the tendency for some
cations to shuttle between oxidation states, suggests a rich but largely
unexplored environmental chemistry. In spite of the imputed importance of these
complexes in trace metal cycling and hence the primary productivity of soils and
natural waters, significant gaps exist in our knowledge of their formation
mechanisms, the structural factors that govern stability in solution and at
mineral-water interfaces, and their environmental reactivity. A deeper
understanding of these interactions is required to accurately describe the
complicated role of siderophores in metal biogeochemistry.

Seminal questions include: How effective are siderophores and siderophore-
containing multi-ligand mixtures at solubilizing trace metals from minerals?;
How stable are trace metal-siderophore complexes at surfaces and under
environmentally relevant aqueous conditions?; How does the reactivity of metal-
siderophore complexes couple to the biogeochemical cycling of other
environmentally relevant species?; And, how do the structures of metal-
siderophore complexes control their metal selectivity? This research project
will utilize a complex formation-to-degradation approach to elucidate metal-
siderophore complex behavior: formation of complexes by siderophore-promoted
dissolution of metal (hydr)oxides; characterization of the stability and
structure of aqueous and adsorbed metal-siderophore complexes; and quantitation
of the reactivity of complexes with metal oxide surfaces, and the molecular-
scale structures that give rise to this chemistry.

It is now becoming apparent that siderophores engage in a diverse environmental
chemistry, and that more complex paradigms are required to describe their
effects on the biogeochemical cycling of trace metals beyond iron. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work stems from the development of a new
conceptual model to describe the multifaceted roles played by siderophores in
the environment. A quantitative molecular-scale understanding of these processes
will elucidate fundamental mechanisms by which siderophores affect the cycling
of trace metals and forge linkages between these metals and other elements
through biogeochemistry and geobiology.

The broader impacts of the proposed work reach beyond basic discovery in the
earth sciences to education, broad interdisciplinary scientific realms, and
environmental management. The project will provide experience to an early-career
scientist as well as a broad, multidisciplinary education to an NCSU graduate
student and a team of Brooklyn College undergraduates. Duckworth helps to
spearhead a series of visiting seminars at area colleges to recruit graduate
students, especially from underrepresented groups. Brooklyn College has a strong
track record of training diverse students in both academics and research. In
addition, NCSU will offer a two-day workshop for area high-school teachers. This
summer outreach activity will be conducted in conjunction with the Science
House, an organization whose mission is to work in partnership with K-12
teachers to increase the use and impact of hands-on learning technologies in the
fields of math and science.

