* 0921515
* Social Evaluation in Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2009,09/30/2012
* Paul Bloom, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Namy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 205,000.00

Social evaluation is a human universal. Even young babies prefer some people
over others; they are drawn to familiar individuals over strangers, attractive
individuals over unattractive ones, and those who are similar to them (such as
speakers of the same language) over those who are dissimilar. Recent
experimental studies have found that infants are also sensitive to an
individual's social actions; they prefer to interact with someone who has helped
another, and avoid one who has harmed another. Recent research has also shown
that infants and toddlers discriminate among different individuals for purposes
of learning -- they will selectively learn from individuals seen as 'competent'
or 'knowledgeable' and will refrain from learning from those seen as giving
unreliable information. But no research to date has examined whether infants'
social preferences influence their learning. This project investigates the role
that infant's social preferences play in how they learn from other people. These
studies focus on learning in several ecologically relevant and theoretically
important areas (e.g., determining what foods to eat, learning the meanings of
words, etc.). In these studies, infants and toddlers will be given the
opportunity to learn from prosocial individuals (who have been seen to be
helpful to a third party), as well as from antisocial individuals (seen to have
acted harmfully toward a third party). The questions of interest focus on
whether, and when, infants' social evaluations of the characters influence their
decisions regarding from whom to learn. In particular, these studies ask, across
distinct domains of knowledge, whether young humans learn differentially from
prosocial and from antisocial individuals: Do young learners model themselves
more strongly after "good" than "bad" characters? And if so, do they simply fail
to learn from the latter (i.e., neither adopting nor avoiding their choices), or
do they actively model themselves opposite to "bad" individuals (i.e., actively
avoid the choices made by antisocial individuals). More generally, these studies
investigate the conditions that elicit differential learning from prosocial and
antisocial individuals, as well as the conditions (if any) under which learning
is unaffected by the social character of the
modeler.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social evaluation and early learning are topics of
fundamental theoretical importance across domains such as social psychology,
cultural anthropology, behavioral economics, evolutionary theory, and, in
particular, child development. In addition, this work has the potential of
benefiting society as a whole, by providing scientists, educators, and parents
with a better understanding of the interaction of social knowledge and early
learning, including language learning. An understanding of learning in normally-
developing children is necessary for an adequate account of what happens in
cases of abnormal development, as occurs in children with autism and Specific
Language Impairment, and may help inform therapy and treatment.