* 0921134
* High-resolution records of atmospheric circulation and past rainfall from soils based on U-series and stable isotope SIMS approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2009,07/31/2013
* Katharine Maher, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2013
* USD 355,865.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are relatively few records that
reflect large-scale changes in atmospheric circulation during the last glacial-
interglacial cycle, and very few with sufficient temporal resolution and/or
continuity to resolve the timing and sequence of changes. To understand how
these changes occurred in the past, terrestrial climate records that are
sensitive to changes in precipitation are necessary. Although there are a
substantial number of short-term high-resolution terrestrial paleoclimate
records, there are relatively few records that span the last few glacial-
interglacial cycles. These sparse records have proven insufficient to resolve
the mechanisms behind the large-scale shifts in effective moisture that occurred
during glacial-interglacial transitions. In addition, it has been challenging to
resolve the effects of temperature and changes in moisture source from changes
in the amount of precipitation using existing proxy
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project will develop high-
spatial resolution analytical approaches using secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS) to provide spatially and temporally continuous records of climate and
atmospheric circulation over the last few glacial-interglacial transitions (10
to 200 ka) using pedogenic opal. 230Th-U SIMS dating will be complimented by the
development of multi-isotope proxies in order to develop high-temporal spatial
resolution records that connect to form a regional grid, and are thus uniquely
capable of reflecting past changes in atmospheric circulation. Specifically, the
investigator will test the hypothesis that uranium isotopic and trace element
variations in dated pedogenic opal provide a robust archive of
paleoprecipitation. Changes in moisture sources will be detected using
&amp;#948;18O, and changes in weathering intensity will be assessed using
&amp;#948;30Si. The existing geochronological records from soils show variations
in initial (234U/238U) activity ratios and trace elements over the last 200 ka.
The investigator hypothesizes that initial (234U/238U) variations are recording
changes in past rainfall amounts. However, the exact mechanism for these
variations must be more closely examined before quantitative data can be
developed. Therefore prior to expanding her network of soil sites, she proposes
to test the concordance of the initial (234U/238U) values and the validity of
the U-series proxy using the modern soil system. Development and validation of
the U-series proxy would enable paleoclimate information to be extracted
directly from the geochronologic measurements of soils and could potentially be
extended to speleothem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This research will
have important implications for our understanding of the rates and mechanisms of
climate change in terrestrial environments. By working with the climate modeling
community, the data and network of sites will provide unique and much needed
calibration data that will greatly improve the ability to predict and understand
the current changes in atmospheric circulation. As the samples she plans to
analyze are modern analogues for paleosols, the approaches and understanding she
develops will also have important implications for these materials and may
enable new records to be developed at key intervals back in Earth?s history. To
make her records available, she will host a database of published U-series data
at Stanford, and work with other scientists to include existing records.
Secondly, she will work with the outreach program in the School of Earth
Sciences at Stanford. She plans to: 1) accept high school interns to work with
her in the field and in her laboratory, 2) work with the K-12 program ?Expanding
Your Horizons? to develop a module describing the climate system, how it varied
in the past, and how it has influenced the landscape of both the local
environment and greater California.&lt;br/&gt;