* 0921372
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-City Study of Contextual Influences on Group Relations and Voting Behavior in Urban Mayoral Elections
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Karen Kaufmann, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 219,479.00

This collaborative project is concerned with contextual influences on intergroup
relations and political behavior in urban settings. A multi-city survey
(accompanied by aggregate city-level data) will assess the relative importance
of political, social and economic contexts on individual-level attitude
formation and political behavior. The central area of concern pertains to the
development of group-based attitudes and their relative salience for local
voting behavior. This first of its kind data set will advance scientific
knowledge of the sources of intergroup animus, the conditions that give rise to
perceived intergroup rivalries, and the political ramifications of intergroup
conflict. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars interested in the politics of racial
and ethnic diversity typically look to cities as the most dynamic places to
study individual-level attitudes and political choices in the context of
demographic change. The extraordinary institutional, social and economic
variance across cities enables contextual research on questions pertaining to
the development of intergroup attitudes, public opinion and the instigators of
group-based voting behavior. To date, collective knowledge on this subject has
been derived from a small number of case studies or national probability samples
that do not allow for the multi-level modeling that contextual analyses require.
For example, one cannot draw robust conclusions about how local levels of racial
diversity affect group-based attitudes and behaviors without a data set that
includes substantial variance in city-level racial composition. The research on
the political implications of interracial conflict will result in an
intellectual advancement over prior research, as the project will analyze the
local political behavior of Latinos, Anglos and African Americans under varying
levels and types of group-based diversity. Additionally, the project will study
the link between individual perceptions of group-based competition with actual
voting behavior. Finally, local elections are by far the most frequently
occurring form of electoral politics in the U.S., and yet, ironically, they are
the electoral forum about which political scientists know the least. This study
will allow for more conclusive answers than are now possible about the quality
of local democracy and the role that various structural, economic and social
contexts have on voters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes several
broader impacts. The data produced from this project will have a profound impact
on the study of urban politics, group-based politics, the genesis of group-based
animosities, and American political behavior generally. Additionally, this
project will facilitate substantive and methodological training for graduate and
undergraduate students involved, especially students from underrepresented
groups and those interested in group relations and group-based politics. On one
level this study looks to explain the kinds of group-based tensions that arise
under various conditions of diversity. On another level, however, this research
will identify institutional, political and contextual factors that can
potentially minimize group-based animosities and interracial conflict.