* 0921906
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Fixed" Sentencing: The Effects On Imprisonment Rates Over Time
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Mark Leymon, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christian A. Meissner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 8,787.00

Sentencing guidelines, statutory presumptive sentencing, and determinate
sentencing (elimination of discretionary parole boards) are each important parts
of the criminal justice system. The main purpose behind a relatively fixed
matrix of sentences is to remove judicial discretion by insuring that convicted
felons receive implicit prison time depending on the crime committed. Few
studies have attempted to systematically answer the question of whether these
new "fixed" sentencing procedures or the removal of parole boards produce the
outcomes stated by their supporters. The current study assesses the effects on
shifts in incarceration rates across all 50 states from the years 1965 to 2007
to determine if the reforms have led to increases in total imprisonment or have
other unintended consequences (e.g., increasing disparities among people of
color or "widening the net" and bringing in more offenders). The analysis uses
Prais-Winston regression with panel corrected standard errors (PCSE) and fixed
effects for states with controls for crime, demographic and political variables,
prison entries, and serial autocorrelation, which supplies more robust results
than prior research. The study has implications for both theory and policy.
Substantively, the results may indicate reforms significantly increase
imprisonment. Functionally, rapid prison growth can be a logistical and
financial burden on a state and these results could help shed light onto the
specific mechanisms associated with this growth. Furthermore, the results
indicate that socio-political mechanisms are at work that "target" historically
disadvantaged groups, which may aid in the continuation of inequalities within
the criminal justice system. This is of particular concern given that many
states have suggested that racial and ethnic disparities should decrease with
the limiting of judicial discretion. If results indicate no change or an
increase in disparities, despite intentions to reduce them, then states may want
to reevaluate their sentencing procedures.