* 0921480
* Collaborative Research:  Deep Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) Field Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2010,08/31/2011
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 08/31/2011
* USD 24,968.00

Based upon a submitted Scientific Program Overview (SPO) document for the Deep
Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) field campaign, this preliminary effort
will focus on support of required coordination of potential DC3 investigators
planning this large experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If supported, DC3 will
investigate the impact of deep, mid-latitude continental convective clouds,
including their dynamical, physical, and lightning processes, on upper
tropospheric (UT) composition and chemistry. DC3 will be requesting access to
extensively instrumented aircraft platforms and ground-based observation
systems. The NSF/NCAR Gulfstream-V (GV) aircraft would be the primary platform
to study the high altitude outflow of the storms, and would be instrumented to
measure a variety of gas-phase species, radiation, and cloud/precipitation
particle characteristics. The GV would also document the downwind chemical
evolution of the convective plume. The NSF/NCAR C-130 (or possibly the NASA
DC-8) aircraft would complement the GV via in situ observations to characterize
the convective storm inflow and provide remote sensing to aid in GV flight plan
optimization and column characterization. Ground-based radar networks would
depict the volumetric precipitation and kinematic characteristics of storms and
provide guidance to the aircraft operations. The impact of lightning on outflow
composition would be constrained through detailed measurements from VHF
lightning mapping arrays. DC3 would thus surpass earlier experiments that
addressed these topics by using advanced instrumentation not previously
available. Satellite data would place the airborne and ground-based measurements
in the context of the wider geographical region and help guide sampling
strategies. At the same time, DC3 measurements would serve to augment satellite
retrievals of atmospheric constituents such as nitrogen dioxide near
storms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the planned field program would
include extensive education and outreach activities and via improved
understanding of sources of UT ozone, which is important to climate forcing and
air quality, for assessment reports and resulting policy implications. Further,
DC3 measurements would be instrumental in improving model parameterizations of
convective transport, production of nitric oxide by lightning, and wet
deposition of chemical species. Undergraduate and graduate students would
participate in DC3 in a variety of ways including airborne and ground-based
observations, design and construction of instruments, operation and improvement
of numerical models, precipitation collection and analysis, and reporting of the
results to the scientific community through presentations and publications.
Outreach and media days during the field campaign would provide a valuable means
to engage the public in atmospheric science.