* 0921021
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Late Preclassic Period Lithic Production and Exchange at Hamontun, Guatemala.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* Marilyn Masson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 14,744.00

Under the direction of Dr. Marilyn A. Masson, Jason Paling will document the
economic institutions of Maya society that underwrote the foundations of
emerging state societies in the Petén region of Guatemala during the Late
Preclassic Period (300 B.C. - 250 A.D.). His comparative analysis of systems and
strategies of stone tool production and exchange in ancient domestic contexts
will include samples from the humblest dwellings to palatial noble dwellings.
Stone tool use was essential to all facets of everyday life, including clearing
and tilling agricultural fields, firewood extraction, wood-working, house-
building, hunting, warfare, and skilled masonry and plaster-working linked to
monument construction. Economic production and consumption activities linked to
stone tools were complex; raw materials of varying quality from near and distant
quarries were imbued with different value, as were final products involving a
range of skills and craftsmanship. The study of household workshop debris and
tool assemblages will determine the accessibility of utilitarian and luxury
items and will identify links between occupational specialization and social
class. The archaeological city of Hamontún is located in northeastern Guatemala,
where the largest Maya cities were located during the Preclassic and Classic
Periods (300 B.C. - 900 A.D.). Hamontún's urban setting is ideal for the
proposed research. The household inventories of elites and commoners will be
analyzed to document the degree of involvement of elites in stone tool
production and exchange, or conversely, the degree to which commoners operated
autonomously from noble intervention. This investigation directly addresses a
problem of great importance - the economic foundations of ancient Maya
governments - about which there is no consensus and little data, especially for
the Late Preclassic Period. Archaeologists currently disagree about the degree
to which the affluence and power of the noble class was rooted in the economies
of daily life at Maya cities. It is known that they engaged in the manufacture
and exchange of fine craft items (other than stone tools), exacted tribute from
subordinate towns, and dispensed gifts at elaborate gatherings. Did
craftspersons at noble houses also make the tools needed to house, maintain, and
feed royal retinues, or were these also obtained by tribute demands placed on
urban or rural commoners? Were marketplace exchanges significant as an
alternative distributive mechanism at Preclassic Maya cities? This study
articulates with a higher theoretical goal of reconstructing ancient urban life
across social class categories. The documentation of stone tool production and
exchange systems will document key economic and sociopolitical relationships at
a time when urban life was first developing in the Maya area. These data will
facilitate cross-cultural comparisons between the Maya and the emergent
economies of other state societies in world history. This project will also
contribute to the professional development of students from the Universidad de
Valle and San Carlos, Guatemala, and the University of Albany-SUNY who will gain
valuable training in archaeological research. The construction of a website is
planned that will make the project's findings accessible to the public, while
publications will communicate the results to the scientific community.