* 0921499
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  A Light Bulb Goes On: Values, Attitudes, Social Norms, and Personal Energy Consumption
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2009,08/31/2010
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

When do people take political action? What roles do values, elite rhetoric, and
social norms play in motivating action? These questions are of obvious
importance for those interested in political behavior; however, little work,
other than research on participation, explores the impact of these various
factors. This project offers a framework that generates hypotheses about the
role of values, rhetoric, and norms in shaping political behavior. These are
then tested with an experiment that focuses on a particularly important
behavior, actions regarding the consumption of energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers two primary contributions to scholars
assessing the determinants of political behavior. First, it advances a more
comprehensive framework to explain behavior as a function of two internal
(values and attitudes) and two external (social norms and elite rhetoric)
forces. Second, it extends the scope of research on political behavior to an
important domain of actions with public consequences (i.e. private-sphere-
environmentally-relevant actions). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the hypotheses
generated by my theory, the experiment assesses variation in three sets of
dependent variables: (1) attitudes about personal energy consumption, (2)
behavioral intentions (e.g. energy conservation, capital investments in energy
efficient technologies), and (3) overt behavior (i.e. whether the participant
purchases a package of standard light bulbs or energy efficient light bulbs).
The experiment contains two manipulations: (1) an information manipulation -
participants read one of two versions of a newspaper editorial either promoting
or discouraging taking steps to reduce personal energy consumption; and, (2) a
norms manipulation- half of respondents receive a pro-behavior normative
treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enhancing our understanding of
how norms, values, and information interact to affect actual behaviors, the
study also add insight into what drives behavior in a particularly important
policy domain. Indeed, as the world deals with its ongoing energy challenges,
understanding citizens' actions is of the utmost importance.