* 0921514
* OPUS: Ecology and Evolutionary Biology of Desert Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2009,07/31/2011
* Therese Markow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 07/31/2011
* USD 258,197.00

For a century, laboratory studies of Drosophila fruit flies have been crucial to
discovering basic principles of heredity. In contrast, little has been known of
what fruit flies experience in nature; the proposed work will rectify that
problem in the case of cactus-feeding flies. Some fruit fly species are adapted
to living in very harsh desert environments where they exploit decaying cacti as
feeding and breeding sites. The investigator has studied the ecology, genetics
and behavior of four such Drosophila species for over 30 years. Her synthesis of
this work will result in a book that will provide the first overview of the
biology and genetics of these insects relative to many features of their
ecology. The synthesis is expected to point the way for future research
directions not only with desert-adapted Drosophila, but also other organisms. In
addition, an on-line database of resource availability and fly population
dynamics will be developed and made available in English and Spanish. The
database will provide a resource to a range of ecologists, evolutionary
biologists and educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organisms at the center of
this synthesis live in deserts in the United States and Mexico. The synthesis
and the bilingual website will not only allow investigators and students from
both countries to access the long-term data on these flies and their resources,
but will lead to additional international collaborative studies. In addition,
the investigator has worked in remote areas and her experiences, which will be
incorporated in the synthesis, will serve to encourage other female
investigators to pursue similar studies. &lt;br/&gt;