* 0921950
* International Travel Grant: Transatlantic Workshops to Formalize an International Coastal Atlas Network
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Dawn Wright, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/29/2012
* USD 55,940.00

In recent years significant momentum has occurred in the development of Internet
resources for decision makers, scientists and the general public who are
interested in the coast. Coastal mapping plays an important role in informing
decision makers on issues such as national sovereignty, resource management,
maritime safety and hazard assessment. A key trend has been the development of
coastal web atlases (CWAs), defined as a collection of digital maps and datasets
with supplementary tables, illustrations, and information that systematically
illustrate the coast, oftentimes with cartographic and decision support tools.
They are playing an increasingly crucial role in informing regional decision-
and policy-making across the themes of coastal governance, hazard mitigation,
climate change impacts and vulnerability mapping, marine spatial planning, and
more. While multiple benefits are derived from tailor-made atlases, the
potential exists to derive added value from the integration of disparate CWAs,
to optimize decision making at a variety of levels and across themes. And while
digital data sets have continued to grow exponentially, our ability to derive
meaning, knowledge and management decisions from all of these data in an
analytical context remains poor. In response to the need for coordinated CWA,
the International Coastal Atlas Network (ICAN) was recently established. This
Newtwork consists of 35 organizations from 10 countries, and has garnered the
interest of local and state governments, non-governmental organizations,
universities, NOAA, the European Environment Agency (EEA), and UNESCO.

Dr. Dawn Wright from Oregon State University will convene two international
workshops that bring together key experts from Europe, the United States,
eastern and southern Africa, and the Caribbean that will (1) finalize the
governance and strategic planning structure for ICAN; (2) further ICAN's mission
of establishing scientific grounding and knowledge base among the important
knowledge domains of CWA development (geography, computer science, and coastal
resource management), (3) develop advances in semantic interoperability for
CWAs, (4) exchange lessons learned in spatial data infrastructure between the US
and Europe's INSPIRE initiative, and (5) prepare collaborative submissions to
the next available NSF INTEROP and PIRE competitions.

These workshops will provide a model for how other scholars and management
agencies might develop informatics solutions to address the critical state of
our coastal zones and fisheries. The project will develop recommendations that
could potentially save thousands to millions of U.S. dollars and Euros in the
prevention or mitigation of failed coastal development projects.