* 0921012
* From Words to Inferences: The Development of Incremental Language Comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Jesse Snedeker, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

Decades of research has demonstrated that adult listeners rapidly integrate many
kinds of information to figure out the syntactic and semantic relations between
words in an utterance. The study of children's language processing, however, is
still in its infancy. This is largely because most of the methods used to study
adult comprehension involve reading or secondary tasks that are too difficult
for young children. In recent years this has changed: several researchers have
demonstrated that children's eye-movements can provide detailed information
about the moment-to-moment processes involved in spoken-language comprehension.
The present project will build on these initial findings, using the eye-gaze
paradigm to investigate syntactic and semantic processes in children from 2 to 7
years of age. The studies examine two specific questions: 1) What information do
children use to determine the syntactic structure of an utterance? Children's
interpretation of ambiguous sentences will be used to explore the roles of word
knowledge and discourse context. 2) What kinds of grammatical representations
are used during language comprehension? A priming paradigm will be used to
explore the breadth of the syntactic and semantic categories that children
employ as they figure out the roles of different nouns in a sentence. While the
development of the language comprehension system is of importance in its own
right, this work will also provide insight into children's syntactic
representations, the architecture of adult language processing, and the relation
between word learning and syntactic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will map out the development of higher-level language comprehension
processes. Strong language comprehension skills are essential to cognitive and
social development and spoken language is the primary means by which young
children are socialized and educated. Their knowledge of distant places, family
relations, and abstract entities comes about largely by listening to adults.
Literacy also builds upon children's ability to understand spoken language, as
evidenced by robust connections between preschool language comprehension and
later reading abilities. By tracing the development of these language
comprehension processes from two years of age, this research may provide insight
into why some children seem to have great difficulties in comprehension and what
can be done to facilitate the development of these skills. In addition, the
research undertaken in this project will provide educational opportunities for a
postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student and several undergraduate students.