* 0921971
* Large Firms in the World Economy:  Theory and Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Andrei Levchenko, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Niloy Bose
* 08/31/2012
* USD 266,106.00

The world economy and the world trade are dominated by extremely large firms.
The distribution of firm size is well approximated by a power law with exponent
close to -1, a phenomenon also known as Zipf's Law (Axtell, 2001). While the
literature has sought to explore how Zipf's Law can arise, much less is known
about its implications for the macroeconomy. This project has two parts. The
first part will examine, theoretically and quantitatively, the implications of
this firm size distribution for the production structure, income, welfare, and
macroeconomic volatility. The same framework will also be used to evaluate the
role of globalization and institutional reforms in welfare and macroeconomic
volatility. The second part of the project will collect data on the largest
firms in the world between 1974 and today from a unique data source that has not
previously been used in economic analysis. This research will provide, for the
first time, a firm-level view of the evolution of the global economy over the
past three decades.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Recent research in
international trade and macroeconomics has emphasized, in both theory and
empirics, the significant heterogeneity across firms, and stressed the need to
look at the individual firms' decisions and outcomes. However, theoretically and
quantitatively we have not fully come to grips with what the observed degree of
heterogeneity implies for macroeconomic outcomes, such as welfare and aggregate
fluctuations. Empirically, great progress has been made in understanding firm
behavior using datasets for individual countries. However, very little is known
about how firm size distributions compare across countries, and virtually
nothing is known about how firm size distributions evolve over time in a wide
sample of countries. This project would both improve our understanding of the
empirical patterns of firm size distributions in a large sample of countries,
and explore theoretical and quantitative implications of these patterns for the
macroeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on the impact of
individual firms on the aggregate outcomes, this project will shed light on what
kinds of firms, and what kinds of international trade, should be the most
important targets for policy. Preliminary analysis suggests, for instance, that
the few large firms, and large export categories, matter far more for welfare
than the multitude of small firms or small imports (one of the goals of this
project is to make this statement quantitatively precise). This implies, among
other things, that gains from deregulation are smaller, while gains from uniform
tariff reductions are far larger, than was previously thought. In addition, this
work provides an integrated view of the role of trade and economic institutions
in explaining differences in levels of development across countries, offering
guidance for the priorities of development policy. Finally, one of the results
of this analysis is that increased trade integration may lead to greater
macroeconomic volatility, which has implications for the social safety net and
the design of international financial architecture.