* 0921436
* Collaborative Research: Territorial Imaginaries and Arctic Sovereignty Claims
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Philip Steinberg, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2013
* USD 176,061.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111.5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern state system is founded on
an idealized distinction between land and water: land is conceived as solid,
controllable, and developable, whereas water is conceived as fundamentally
external to society. While such a territorial imaginary has never perfectly
reflected human societies' relationships to the physical world, it is
particularly inappropriate for the Arctic, where the division between land and
water is complicated by the presence of ice, which in the context of global
climate change is increasingly temporally and spatially dynamic. Thus, as actors
from outside the region further increase their presence in the Arctic and seek
to incorporate it within the state system, they are faced with a dilemma: How
can this space, which challenges the idealized distinction between land and
water, be incorporated into the state system or, conversely, how must this
system adapt in order to incorporate the complex and evolving environment of the
Arctic as well as the lifeways of its residents? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research project Drs Philip Steinberg from Florida State University, Hannes
Gerhardt from University of West Georgia and Jeremy Tasch from Towson University
ask: (1) What role do explicit and assumed imaginaries of a place's elemental
nature, its geophysical properties, and its geographic location, play within the
broader cultural imaginaries of the Arctic? (2) How do territorial imaginaries
of the Arctic intersect with state and non-state actors' proposals for
exercising (or not exercising) sovereignty in the region? (3) Do territorial
imaginaries of the Arctic point to a transformation of sovereignty in the
region, and what impact might this have on the potential for regional
cooperation? These questions will be examined through a collaborative, multi-
sited study in five Arctic nations -- Canada, Denmark, Norway, Russia, and the
United States -- in which the researchers will analyze data from a variety of
sources including extant texts such as policy documents, reports, and news
stories, as well as directed but open-ended interviews with individuals involved
in Arctic policy debates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a region whose incorporation
within the state system is generally weak and uneven, escalations of small-scale
conflicts are likely to occur as climate change leads to potential increased
economic and political opportunities in the Arctic region. In this context, this
research will improve understanding of the political challenges posed by global
environmental change in the Arctic and elsewhere and suggest new ways for
peaceful accommodation between the state system and the peoples and environments
that presently lie on its margins.