* 0921299
* DDIG: China's Heroin Treatment Complex: Addiction and a New Era of Government-citizen Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Vincanne Adams, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 5,550.00

Doctoral student Nicholas A Bartlett, under the guidance of Dr. Vincanne Adams
(University of California, San Francisco), will undertake research on cross-
cultural variation in how substance addiction is understood and treated. The
research will be carried out in China where he will focus on "community drug
treatment," a new designation for a range of state-sanctioned practices
attempting to rehabilitate heroin users. Interventions grouped under this label,
including a national methadone substitution program, psycho-social support, and
other services, often replace labor camp and compulsory detoxification as
preferred forms of state treatment. Ethnographic attention to interactions
between patients and providers in these settings allows an examination of
addiction as a Chinese social problem and marker of particular challenges of
post-reform life, a contested condition produced through the treatment system,
and a historically-situated defining characteristic for a sub-set of a
generation born around the end of the Cultural Revolution.

Research will be carried out in two cities, Beijing and a small prefecture in
the Southwest in China, where different government ministries oversee a network
of institutions charged with providing care for the country's one million
registered drug users. The author will rely on ethnographic fieldwork and
targeted qualitative interviews with treatment providers, family members,
government cadres, and individuals in recovery. He will work with a number of
local organizations, including government public health providers, anti-drug
volunteers, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to explore the
implementation of this new designation of treatment.

This study's attention to a Chinese understanding of addiction through shifting
treatment practices will contribute to social science theory about the nature of
the interaction between the state and its citizens in a rapidly shifting post-
socialist context. Funding this research also supports the education of a social
scientist.