* 0921430
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Gendered Dimensions of New Religious Streams in Java, Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/28/2011
* Robert Hefner, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,990.00

Boston University doctoral student, En-Chieh Chao, supervised by Dr. Robert
Hefner, will investigate the impact of a transnational religious movement,
Islamization, on normative gender roles in local, multi-religious contexts. The
research will be carried out in central Java, Indonesia, where she will compare
the movement's effects on women in three different types of religious
organizations: traditionalist Muslim, reformist Muslim, and Christian. The
expanding influence of normative religions has aroused interest in their
gendered effects in many parts of the world. By examining both Christian and
Muslim communities in a single society, this research will offer a new
comparative perspective.

The researcher will employ a mix-methods approach. She will collect qualitative
ethnographic information through participant-observation and intensive
interviews, and also carry out a structured survey to collect quantitative data.
The project's objectives include investigations of: (1) the gender norms
promoted by different religious streams; (2) religious interpretations and
legitimacy of gender equality; (3) the relation between gender and religious
knowledge; and (4) women's personal experiences in various observable domains:
economic, family, associational, and political.

The project is important because a comparative approach, focused on gendered
dimensions of religious change, will contribute to both social scientific
understanding of the relation between pluralism, gender, and religion, and to
understanding the effects of these changes on women's lives. Supporting this
project also contributes to graduate education.