* 0921275
* Impact of Musical Experience on the Nervous System: Development of Sound Transcription, Cognitive Function and Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,05/31/2013
* Nina Kraus, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 554,148.00

Musical experience during childhood profoundly influences how the brain
processes sound, even with just one year of training. Enhancements in musicians'
brains often relate to the very neural impairments seen in children with
language, learning and literacy disorders. Musical experience might therefore
boost impaired systems in children with such disorders. Little is known about
how musical experience brings about changes in the brain and about how these
changes relate with behaviors such as language, learning and literacy. With
support from the National Science Foundation, Nina Kraus and her laboratory will
provide initial evidence for musical training's impact on both cortical and
subcortical auditory processing in children and adults, defining the roles
different parts of the brain play in shaping cognitive and perceptual
capabilities related to language, learning and literacy. To accomplish this
work, the researchers will recruit musician and non-musician participants from 3
to 35 years of age and assess them at three age groups, with child musicians
recruited in collaboration with Chicago's Suzuki-Orff School of Music. Using
scalp electrodes, the researchers record brain responses to speech and music
sounds from both the auditory brainstem and the cortex. Electrodes are also used
to measure auditory attention in the brain while participants are asked to
listen to a spoken story and ignore competing sounds. Participants additionally
complete listening and learning tests by which researchers assess cognitive and
perceptual abilities and relate them with brain
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has the capacity to explain how brain
changes occur with musical experience in the auditory system and to define
relationships these changes have with language, literacy and attention.
Understanding of the cognitive benefits of music could influence public policy
regarding music education and music therapy. Outcomes of this project will also
expand clinicians' toolkits for addressing language, literacy and attention
disorders in addition to influencing policy-makers to incorporate music into
classrooms, particularly for schools with at-risk children demonstrating high
concentrations of language, learning and literacy disorders. The principal
investigator has established a track record of broadly disseminating findings to
the research community and the public, and expects new findings to be further
translated into practice on an international scale.