* 0921177
* Off-line Processing of Motor Skill Memories: Integrating Cognition and Biology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2009,09/30/2013
* Alvaro Pascual-Leone, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 700,967.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Long after playing a game of squash or reading this abstract, the memory of
playing and reading continues to be processed by the brain. These "off-line"
processes improve game performance and understanding of this abstract, and more
generally, enhance adaptive behavior. These off-line processes have, for at
least the last 100 years, been recognized to play a critical role in determining
subsequent recall of facts, events and skills. Yet, the mechanisms engaged to
support off-line processing are very poorly understood, and there remains
considerable debate over multiple competing models. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Edwin Robertson and colleagues at Harvard
Medical School will distinguish amongst these models by determining which brain
areas are vital to off-line memory processing over sleep and wakefulness.
According to one model, largely supported by functional imaging work, the same
brain areas support off-line processing over wakefulness and sleep (Uniform
Model). In contrast, recent behavioral studies have shown that different types
of processing occur over wakefulness and sleep (Differential Model). Finally,
there may be a mixture of these two models with some brain areas being engaged
regardless of brain state; whereas others areas may be engaged only over sleep
or wakefulness (Hybrid Model). In a set of experiments, Dr. Robertson and
colleagues will use Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), a non-invasive
technique for stimulating small regions of the brain, to establish those brain
areas that are critical to off-line processing over wakefulness and sleep. These
experiments will reconcile the contrasting perspectives offered by contemporary
models and so provide novel insights into off-line processing, which is critical
for the retention, and sometimes the enhancement of recently acquired memories.

Work from this project will provide a unified conceptual foundation that bridges
the gulf between viewing off-line memory processing as requiring time,
independent of brain state (i.e. sleep vs. wakefulness), and the alternative in
which brain state alters the mechanisms engaged to support off-line processing.
A greater understanding of off-line processing may translate into novel
therapeutic strategies to improve the recovery of motor skills lost following
brain damage such as a stroke (for example by modulating brain areas or brain
states). Funding from this award will strengthen ties across several
collaborating laboratories, providing a rich substrate for undergraduate and
graduate students' training over a wide selection of disciplines from cognitive
psychology to chronobiology.

