* 0921771
* Comparative Paleobiomechanics of Holdfasts in Soft Substrates
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2009,08/31/2013
* Roy Plotnick, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yusheng Liu
* 08/31/2013
* USD 57,894.00

Comparative Paleobiomechanics of Holdfasts in Soft
Subtrates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roy Plotnick, University of Illinois,
Chicago&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded under the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5). The root systems of terrestrial
plants not only obtain nutrients and water, but provide critical physical
support for the above ground portions of the plants. Some modern marine
organisms, including algae and invertebrates, also have anchoring systems or
holdfasts. This is especially important for organisms living on unconsolidated
sediments, such as sandy or muddy seafloors, from which they can be uprooted by
waves or current. Many fossil organisms also have structures that have been
interpreted as holdfasts. Some of these structures resemble plant roots, whereas
others resemble ship anchors or grapnels. Although the mechanics of tree roots
have been well studied, there has been very little done on the holdfast systems
of either fossil or recent marine animals on soft substrates. Previous studies
of fossil holdfasts have either been detailed verbal descriptions of their
morphology or qualitative interpretations of their function. The goal of this
project is to examine the shape and engineering design (biomechanics) of
holdfasts in these extinct forms and in living analogs, to determine if there
are underlying commonalities or multiple alternative solutions to the problem of
how ?not to go with the flow.? The proposed project has two major components.
The first of these will be the quantitative description of the morphology of the
holdfast systems of modern and fossil invertebrates. This will be based on an
examination of specimens in museum collections. The second component will be
experimental studies of alternative holdfast designs. This will include the
construction of models based on actual specimens of holdfasts, as well as models
that represent variability in key parameters believed to control their ability
to resist dislodgement. These models will be subject to measured removal forces
and their resistance to these forces will be compared. These results will allow
direct testing of hypotheses for function in holdfasts in fossil forms.