* 0921893
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relations of Care and Remembrance: A Study of Nyakyusa Children in the Time of AIDS
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2009,02/29/2012
* Thomas Weisner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/29/2012
* USD 10,193.00

Doctoral student Eleanor Carter, advised by Dr. Thomas S. Weisner (University of
California, Los Angeles), will undertake historical-ethnographic research on
kinship, family, and children's connections to caretakers and different
generations in a context of high HIV/AIDS prevalence and death. The researcher
will investigate the socio-cultural processes through which children's changed
circumstances due to caretaker illness and death are addressed and how
transformations in caretaker-child connections shape how children remember the
deceased, engage with ancestors, other kin, and peers, and envisage their life
plans.

The research will be carried out among the Nyakyusa, in a rural community in
southwestern Tanzania, a region severely affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Nyakyusa culture and lifeways were documented by researchers in the 1930s,
providing good, pre-HIV/AIDS baseline data for the current project. The
researcher will employ both quantitative and qualitative social science research
methods, including both survey and and intensive, micro-level ethnography, to
gather data on: (1) the variety of children's caretaking and kinship networks;
(2) the everyday interactions of children and their caretakers; and (3) funerals
and other ritual and commemorative practices marking life and death. Targeted
observations, video-recording, and in-depth, open-ended interviews with a
focused sample of 7 to 10-year-old children and their caretakers will be key
field methods.

The research is significant because it will provide an ethnographically grounded
portrayal of coming of age in the time of AIDS in Africa. It will also inform
policy and programming aimed at orphans and other AIDS-affected children as well
as families, households, and communities touched by high AIDS mortality. Funding
this research also supports the education of a social scientist.