* 0921756
* Collaborative Research: Learning from the Ancient Engineers of the Great Inka Road; Lima, Peru, Summer 2010
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2009,11/30/2012
* Edward Jaselskis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/2012
* USD 89,999.00

0921756/0921816&lt;br/&gt;Fiori/Jaselskis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American
Advanced Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the
Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in the summer of 2010 at the
Universidad de Piura, in Lima, Peru. This PASI, co-organized by Dr. Christine M.
Fiori of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and Dr. Edward
J. Jaselskis of Iowa State University, will be a collaborative research project
to study the work of the ancient engineers of the Great Inka Road of the Andes.
How is it that the Inka engineers succeeded in building their 25,000 road system
and other structures on the steep and unstable mountains of the Andes and the
rainforest of the Amazon? The PASI will join engineering researchers and student
participants with anthropologists, archeologists and ethnologists to review and
asses Inka construction practices. Collectively, the group will explore linkages
between hydrology, hydraulics, geotechnical, and modern day construction
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PASI will offer an opportunity for
participants to gain a fundamental understanding of how natural forces act on
structures and how to apply ancient practices to modern, sustainable engineering
practice. Furthermore, U.S. graduate students/postdocs, and junior faculty will
attend lectures and do field work with participants from several South American
Universities, thus providing an international perspective that can lead to
further collaborative efforts. Dissemination will be addressed through
submissions to various well-known engineering publications. In addition, PASI
contents will be made available through a publicly accessible online web forum
hosted at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Future
exhibits under development, associated with the research, will include a focus
on engineering construction, highlighting the profession in a new light and to a
nontraditional audience.