* 0921844
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Voting Behavior in African Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2009,08/31/2010
* Kristie Inman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2010
* USD 12,000.00

The extent and intent to which Africans use their right to vote is of paramount
importance to the success of democratization. If, as many experts argue,
political participation in Africa is a continuation of cultural and historical
patronage linkages between politicians and citizens, democracy, especially
voting, is mere window dressing. If politicians pay voters to turn out and vote
for them, or if they persuade co-ethnics to vote for them with promises of
enrichment and prosperity once elected, citizens may be free, but their country
is not a competitive democracy. This dissertation examines voting behavior,
including why citizens turnout and who they vote for, in nine Sub-Saharan
African democracies. While conventional wisdom suggests that ethnicity and
clientelism explain voting in Africa, individual-level evidence suggests that
these explanations may not predict turnout and choice in African democracies.
Voting behavior in Africa is addressed using two methodologies, structured
experiments and analysis of cross-national survey data.

The most innovative aspect of this project is the use of experimental research
techniques to understand voting behavior in Africa. This experiment uses a game
commonly employed in economic experiments, the Ultimatum Game, to examine how
individuals choose between alternatives that represent competing theories of
vote choice in Africa, including ethnicity, vote buying, corruption, and
accountability. It extends the work of Inman and Andrews (2008), which finds
that citizens are more likely to participate when they perceive their government
as corrupt. Thus, accountability plays a much greater role than traditional
theory would suggest. With results from experiments carried out in Senegal and
Ghana, it will be possible to investigate both turnout and vote choice at the
individual level, in particular, how an individual's voting behavior is
influenced by their evaluation of governmental performance, as opposed to
traditional factors such as ethnic ties. Survey results from nine African
democracies and country-level factors, such as length of democracy, will be used
to examine voting behavior, as well as to validate the experimental results. In
combination, these methodologies will provide a rich picture of voting behavior
in Africa's emerging democracies.

This work has broader implications for the study of modernization and
democratization. Democratization has been slow to take hold in most African
countries. Przeworski and Limongi (1997) find that democracy is almost never
sustained in poor, underdeveloped countries. Given that most African countries
can be characterized as poor and underdeveloped (e.g. see Easterly and Levine
1997), the weight of empirical evidence suggests that democracy will not be
sustained in Africa. Yet, some African countries have made democratic
transitions successfully, despite the predictions of the modernization theory of
democracy. While these transitions have been studied at the institutional and
elite level (e.g. Bratton and van de Walle 1997, Villalon and VonDoepp 2005),
little attention has been paid to the role that citizens play in maintaining
stable democracies. This project will evaluate the extent to which citizens make
voting decisions based on evaluations of governmental performance, which may be
directly related to the willingness of citizens to continue accepting the
authority of democratic governments. One of the basic predictions of
modernization theory is that education provides citizens the cognitive capacity
to hold their leaders accountable. To the extent that Africans hold their
leaders accountable, even without the resources and skills that modernization
theory would predict, we have a basis of comparison between voters in non-
industrialized and industrialized countries. Thus, the project has the potential
to enhance understanding of voting behavior in industrialized vs. non-
industrialized countries.