* 0921681
* Taking Tyrants to Court: Civil Litigation in The Spanish Empire
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2009,08/31/2012
* Bianca Premo, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 08/31/2012
* USD 59,845.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

During the late 1700s, colonial Mexicans and Peruvians sued each other more than
they ever before had in 300 years of Spanish control. Spanish culture is widely
described as legalistic and litigious. Yet, in Spain, there was little change in
civil suits during the 1700s. Providing the first broad-based statistical
analysis of litigation in the Spanish Empire, this project documents this
phenomenal rise in colonial lawsuits. It compares five regions - Mexico City and
Oaxaca, Mexico; Lima and Trujillo, Peru; and Castile, Spain - to reveal that
colonial women, slaves, and Indians entered the courts at a pace that
outstripped even the overall rise in civil suits, using new legal concepts to
sue husbands, masters, and native leaders. A close textual analysis of these
cases demonstrates that, in suing local "tyrants," litigants enacted new
political concepts of equality, sovereignty, and natural rights, producing a
colonial Enlightenment.

The project combines comparative social science methods for ascertaining what
caused this explosion of colonial lawsuits with methods for reading the lawsuits
derived from cultural history, literary studies, and Critical Legal Studies. It
systematically explores the options litigants faced in the larger field of the
court system: who could sue whom, where, when, and over what? It also pays
careful attention to the language used in court documents to show how
subordinate colonial groups exploited changes in Spain's legal regime and used
new notions of rights to challenge domestic and community authority figures
rather than to question the colonial state. Taking the Enlightenment as a legal
practice inspired by monarchs, this project redraws the geography of modernity
by placing the Spanish empire, and colonial litigants, at the center. By showing
law as a living historical process, it highlights the region's unique experience
in the development of modern legal regimes and the formulation of concepts of
rights.